                          BEYOND THE VEIL OF THE TEMPLE.
                   THE HIGH PRIESTLY ORIGIN OF THE APOCALYPSES1.
                                         © Margaret Barker 1998

The veil of the temple was woven from blue, purple, crimson and white thread, and embroidered with
cherubim (2 Chron.3.14); the veil in the tabernacle had been similar, (Exod.26.31; 36.35)2, It was a
valuable piece of fabric, and both Antiochus and Titus took a veil when they looted the temple (1
Mac.1.21-2; Josephus War 7.162). In the second temple it was some two hundred square metres of
fabric and when it contracted uncleanness and had to be washed, three hundred priests were needed for
the job (m.Shekalim 8.4-5). Josephus says it was a Babylonian tapestry (War 5.212), a curtain
embroidered with a panorama of the heavens (War 5.213). The veil separated the holy place from the
most holy (Exod.26.33), screening from view the ark and the cherubim or, in the temple, the ark and
the chariot throne3. We are told that only the high priest entered the holy of holies, once a year on the
Day of Atonement.

Josephus, who was himself a priest (Life 1), says that the tabernacle was a microcosm of the creation,
divided into three parts: the outer parts represented the sea and the land but ‘...the third part thereof...
to which the priests were not admitted, is, as it were, a heaven peculiar to God’ (Ant.3.181). Thus the
veil which screened the holy of holies was also the boundary between earth and heaven. Josephus was
writing at the very end of the second temple period, but texts such as Psalm 11 ‘The LORD is in his
holy temple, the LORD's throne is in heaven’, suggest that the holy of holies was thought to be heaven
at a much earlier period, and the LXX of Isaiah 6, which differs from the Hebrew, implies that the
hekhal was the earth4. The Glory of the LORD filled the house in v.1, and the seraphim sang that the
Glory filled the earth , v.3.

The biblical description of the holy of holies in the first temple is that it was overlaid with fine gold (2
Chron.3.8) and that it housed ‘the golden chariot of the cherubim that spread their wings and covered
the ark of the covenant’ (1 Chron.28.18). Later texts say that Aaron's rod and a pot of manna were
kept in the ark, and that the anointing oil was also kept in the holy of holies (Tosefta Kippurim 2.15).
That is what the writers of the second temple period chose to remember as there were none of these
things in the temple of their own time; they had all been hidden away in the time of Josiah
(b.Horayoth 12ab; b.Keritoth 5b).

In the visionary texts, however, the holy of holies is vividly described, suggesting not only that the
visionaries knew the holy of holies, but also that they had a particular interest in it. Isaiah saw the
throne in the temple with heavenly beings beside it; Enoch entered a second house within the first
house, a place of fire where there was a lofty throne surrounded by the hosts of heaven (1 En.14). The
undateable Similitudes of Enoch have the same setting: the throne of glory and the hosts of heaven.
These images were memories of the cult of the first temple, and it was the visionaries who kept the
memory alive: Enoch in the Book of Jubilees is depicted as a priest, burning the incense of the
sanctuary (Jub.4.25) and Ezekiel, who saw the chariot, was also a priest (Ezek.1.3)

Those who entered the holy of holies were entering heaven. When Solomon became king, the
Chronicler recorded that ‘he sat on the throne of the LORD and all the assembly bowed their heads and
worshipped the LORD and the king’ (1 Chron.29.20-23). Something similar was said of Moses in later
texts when much of the old royal ideology was transferred to him: Ezekiel the tragedian described how
a heavenly figure on the summit of Sinai stood up from his throne and gave it to Moses (Eusebius
Preparation of the Gospel 9.29); Philo said that Moses ‘entered into the darkness where God was and
was named god and king of the whole nation’ (Moses 1.158). For both Ezekiel and Philo, this
transformation took place on Sinai, one of the many examples of Moses sharing the royal traditions
associated with the holy of holies, but there can be no question of this being Hellenistic syncretism as
is usually suggested.5 Acquiring the titles and status of God and King must be related in some way to


Beyond the Veil of the Temple © Margaret Barker, 1998                                 Page 1 of 12
the Chronicler’s description of Solomon’s coronation, and to the psalmist’s description of the
procession into the sanctuary, when he saw his God and his King (Ps.68.24).

Other texts imply that a transformation took place in the holy of holies: those who entered heaven
became divine. Philo said that when the high priest entered the holy of holies he was not a man. We
read Leviticus 16.17 as: ‘there shall be no man in the holy of holies when he (Aaron) enters to make
atonement...’ but Philo translated it: ‘When the high priest enters the Holy of Holies he shall not be a
man’, showing, he said, that the high priest was more than human (On Dreams 2.189). In 2 Enoch
there is an account of how Enoch was taken to stand before the heavenly throne. Michael was told to
remove his earthly clothing, anoint him and give him the garments of glory; ‘I looked at myself, and I
had become like one of his glorious ones’ (2 En.22.10). This bears a strong resemblance Zechariah 3,
where Joshua the high priest stands before the LORD, is vested with new garments and given the right
to stand in the presence of the LORD. As late as the sixth century Cosmas Indicopleustes, an Egyptian
Christian, wrote a great deal about the temple and its symbolism, and we shall have cause to consider
his evidence at several points. Of Moses he said: the LORD hid him in a cloud on Sinai, took him out
of all earthly things ‘and begot him anew like a child in the womb’ (Cosmas Christian Topography
3.13), clearly the same as Psalm 2; ‘I have set my king on Zion... You are my son. Today I have
begotten you’ but using the imagery of reclothing with heavenly garments, rather than rebirth.

The best known example of such a transformation text is in the Book of Revelation. The vision begins
in the hekhal where John sees the heavenly figure and the seven lamps, originally the menorah. Then
he is invited to enter the holy of holies; a voice says: ‘Come up hither and I will show you what must
take place after this’ (Rev.4.1). He sees the throne and the Lamb approaching the throne. Once the
Lamb has taken the scroll he is worshipped by the elders in the sanctuary and then becomes identified
with the One on the throne. Throughout the remainder of the book, the One on the throne and the
Lamb are treated as one, with singular verbs. The Lamb has become divine6.

The veil was the boundary between earth and heaven. Josephus and Philo agree that the four different
colours from which it as woven represented the four elements from which the world was created:
earth, air, fire and water. The scarlet thread represented fire, the blue was the air, the purple was the
sea, that is, water, and the white linen represented the earth in which the flax had grown (War 5.212-
213). In other words, the veil represented matter. The high priest wore a vestment woven from the
same four colours and this is why the Book of Wisdom says that Aaron's robe represented the whole
world (Wisd.18.24; also Philo Laws 1.84; Flight 110). He took off this robe when he entered the holy
of holies because the robe was the visible form of one who entered the holy of holies. In the Epistle to
the Hebrews, which explores the theme of Jesus as the high priest, there is the otherwise enigmatic
line: his flesh was the veil of the temple (Heb.10.20). In other words, the veil was matter which made
visible whatever passed through it from the world beyond the veil. Those who shed the earthly
garments, on the other side of the veil, were robed in garments of glory. In other words, they became
divine.

The age of these ideas of apotheosis beyond the veil of the temple or on Sinai is a matter of some
importance for understanding the religion of Israel and the origin of Christianity. They are unlikely to
be simply the result of Hellenistic syncretism because whoever wrote Exodus 34 knew that when
Moses came down from Sinai his face was shining. He had become one of the glorious ones, because
he had been with God and his face had to be covered by a veil7.

When Philo described the apotheosis of Moses on Sinai he said that he entered the darkness where
God was; ‘…the unseen, invisible, incorporeal, and archetypal essence of all existing things and he
beheld what is hidden from the sight of mortal nature’ (Moses 1.158). This is what the Qumran texts
describe as the raz nihyeh, (4Q300, 417), what 1 Peter describes as ‘the things into which angels long
to look’ (1 Pet.1.12). Elsewhere Philo explained that this invisible world was made on the first day of
the creation



Beyond the Veil of the Temple © Margaret Barker, 1998                              Page 2 of 12
          .. a beautiful copy would never be produced apart from a beautiful pattern... so when God
          willed to create this visible world he first fully formed the intelligible (i.e. invisible) world in
          order that he might have the use of a pattern wholly God-like and incorporeal in producing
          the material world as a later creation, the very image of the earlier (Creation 16)

This description of the two creations, the invisible creation which was the pattern for the visible is
usually said to be Philo retelling the Genesis account in terms derived from Plato, but this I doubt.
Philo was from a priestly family8, and it is not impossible that he was giving the traditional
explanation of the creation stories which owed nothing to Plato.

When familiar texts and habits of reading are questioned, interesting possibilities present themselves.
What, for example, were the forms (surot) of the `elohim and the forms of glory in the Songs of the
Sabbath Sacrifice (4Q405 19)? M.Idel has suggested that these forms of glory are evidence for
reconstructing the oldest Jewish mystical traditions9, that these forms in the sanctuary were an part of
the priestly world view. Perhaps they occur also in Psalm 85, where Righteousness looks down from
heaven, and in Psalm 89 where Righteousness, Justice, Steadfast love and Faithfulness are the LORD’s
attendants. Is the language of personification any longer appropriate?

There are also the many occasions when the divine title sur might not mean Rock but some word
indicating the heavenly form. In Isaiah 44.8 for example, where ‘Is there a God besides me? There is
no Rock’, is followed immediately by an attack on idols and images. The reference here is more likely
to be to the form and its copy, than to a Rock and then an idol. More or less contemporary with this is
Deuteronomy’s emphatic denial that any form of the LORD, temunah, was seen at Horeb: ‘You heard
the sound of words but saw no form’ (Deut.4.12), an indication of how this understanding of form
might have been lost. Other examples of sur are: Deut.32.4,15,18,31 where the context is fatherhood,
‘the rock that begot you’ or comparison with other gods ‘they scoffed at the Rock… and stirred him to
jealousy with strange gods’; Ps.73.26, where the context is a sanctuary vision of judgement on the
wicked and the psalmist expresses confidence in the Rock in heaven; also Pss 28.1; 89.26; 95.1 and
Hab.1.12; in none of which is ‘rock’ represented in the LXX.

There are also the expressions characteristic of the visionary texts: what did Ezekiel mean when he
said he had seen the likeness, demut, of the living creatures, the ‘likeness’ of the throne, the ‘likeness’
of a man? Or the Chronicler when he wrote of the plan, tabnit, for the temple which was revealed to
David (1 Chron.28.19). A plan, tabnit, for the tabernacle was revealed to Moses on Sinai,
(Exod.25.9,40). and the LORD comforted Zion by reminding her that the city was engraved on his
hands, its walls were ever before him (Isa.49.16).

And what is meant by mashal? It can be understood as a parable or as a proverb. The ‘Parables’ of
Enoch, however, are visions. When he sees the stars and their movements and then asks the angel:
‘What are these?’ and the angel replies: ‘The LORD has shown you their parable, they are the holy who
dwell on the earth’(1 En.43.4). He is taught about the correspondence between earth and heaven. Job
38.33 has a similar meaning. Jesus’ parables give the other side of the picture; he teaches what the
Kingdom of heaven is like by using everyday stories and images.

These are all facets of the forms and their copies: the language of the visionaries, the undoubtedly
ancient belief in a heavenly archetype of the temple, and the parable/proverb. In another context, for
example the writings of Philo, this would be identified with some confidence as the influence of
Plato’s forms and their copies, but the age of the material in the Old Testament excludes that
possibility. Since Philo was of a priestly family, perhaps his treatment of the creation stories, the
creation of the invisible world beyond the veil of the temple and then the visible world as its copy, is
not an example of the Platonising of Hellenistic Judaism but rather a glimpse of the ancient priestly
world view even at the end of the second temple period.




Beyond the Veil of the Temple © Margaret Barker, 1998                                  Page 3 of 12
The holy of holies was also beyond time. To enter was to enter eternity. Philo says that the veil
‘separated the changeable parts of the world… from the heavenly region which is without transient
events and is unchanging (Questions on Exodus 2.91). The best known example of a timeless
experience is the vision of Jesus in the wilderness when he was taken to a high place and saw ‘all the
kingdoms of the world in a moment of time’ (Luke 4.5). In the Apocalypse of Abraham the patriarch
was taken up to heaven where he saw the stars far below him (Ap.Abr.20.3). The Eternal One then
said to him: ‘Look now beneath your feet at the firmament and understand the creation that was
depicted of old on this expanse...’ (Ap.Abr.21.1). Abraham sees the firmament as a screen on which
the history of his people is revealed to him. The detail which links this experience of the firmament to
the holy of holies is to be found in 3 Enoch, an undateable text which describes how R.Ishmael the
high priest ascended to heaven. Now Rabbi Ishmael lived after the temple had been destroyed and
cannot have been a high priest, and the versions of 3 Enoch which we have were compiled long after
that. Nevertheless, the association of ascent, high priesthood and the sanctuary experience persisted,
and thus we find here in 3 Enoch the explanation of the vision described in the Apocalypse of
Abraham. The firmament on which Abraham saw the history of his people was the veil.

In 3 Enoch, R Ishmael ascended to heaven and met Metatron, the great angel who in his earthly life
had been Enoch, and who became his guide:
             Metatron said to me: Come, I will show you the veil of the All Present One, which is
             spread before the Holy One, blessed be He, and on which are printed all the generations of
             the world and all their deeds, whether done or yet to be done, until the last generation. I
             went with him and he pointed them out to me with his fingers, like after teaching his son (3
             En.45) 10
The visionary saw history depicted on the veil, on the other side, so to speak, of matter and time. This
probably explains the experience of Habakkuk, centuries earlier, who stood on the tower, a common
designation for the holy of holies11, and saw there ‘a vision of the future, it awaits its time, it hastens to
the end, ... it will surely come it, will not delay’ (Hab.2.2-3). He recorded what he saw on tablets.

Enoch has the fullest account of history seen in the holy of holies. Three angels who had emerged
from heaven took Enoch up to a tower raised high above the earth and there he saw all history
revealed before him, from the fall of the angels to the last judgement (1 En 87.3). When history was
revealed to Moses, however, it was on Sinai, according to the account in Jubilees. He was told: Write
down for yourself all the matters which I shall make known to you to on this mountain: what was in
the beginning and what will be at the end and what will happen in all the divisions of the days... until I
shall descend and dwell with them in all the ages of eternity (Jub.1.26). According to this account,
Moses did not see a vision;; the story was dictated to him by the angel of the presence and he learned
of history only up to his own time. 2 Baruch, on the other hand, says that Moses on Sinai received a
vision rather than instruction and that it included knowledge about the future. He showed him.. ‘the
end of time...the beginning of the day of judgement... worlds that have not yet come’ (2 Bar.59.4-10
c.f. 2 Esdr.14.4). Something similar was said of Jesus by the early Christian writers Ignatius of
Antioch, Clement of Alexandria and Origen: that he was the high priest who had passed through the
curtain and revealed the secrets of the past, the present and the future12.

History seen in the sanctuary, whether this was described as a tower or as Sinai, was history seen
outside the limitations of space and time and this explains why histories in the apocalyptic writings
are surveys not only of the past but also of the future as everything was depicted on the veil.

Those who passed through the veil also passed into the first day of creation as the building of the
tabernacle was said to correspond to the days of creation. Again, the evidence for this belief is
relatively late, but given the cultural context of the first temple, it is not unlikely. Solomon's kingdom
was surrounded by cultures which linked the story of creation to the erection of temples13, and there
are canonical texts which could be explained in this way. Various attempts have been made to relate
the commands given to Moses and the account of the seven days in Genesis 1. One was that the
gathering of the waters on the third day corresponded to making the bronze sea, and making the great


Beyond the Veil of the Temple © Margaret Barker, 1998                                  Page 4 of 12
lights on the fourth day corresponded to making the menorah. The birds of the fifth day corresponded
to the cherubim with their wings and the man on the sixth day was the high priest14. It is more
satisfactory to keep the traditional order for creating the tabernacle: tent, veil, table, lamp, and link
this to the first four days of creation. The earth and seeds of the third day would then be represented
by the table where bread was offered and the great lights of the fourth day by the menorah15.

There is no disagreement, however, over the correspondence between the first and second days of
creation and the first two stages of making the tabernacle. The LORD told Moses to begin erecting the
tabernacle on the first day of the first month (Exod.40.2). In the beginning, God created the heavens
and the earth and on the first day Moses set up the outer covering, the basic structure of the tabernacle
(Exod.40.17-19). On the second day, God made the firmament and called it heaven and on the second
day Moses set up the veil and screened the ark (Exod.40.20-21). This implies that those who passed
beyond the veil and entered the sanctuary entered the first day of creation, a curious idea, but one for
which there is much evidence, and one that explains how the firmament separating heaven and earth
was also the temple veil on which history was depicted in the Apocalypse of Abraham: ‘Look now
beneath your feet at the firmament and understand the creation ... and the creatures that are in it and
the age prepared after it...’ (Ap.Abr.21.1-2)

The tabernacle and all its furnishings were also believed to be a copy of what Moses had seen on
Sinai: ‘See that you make them after the pattern which is being shown you on the mountain’
(Exod.25.9,40). The Chronicler said that the temple was built according to a heavenly revelation
received by David (1 Chron.28.19), another example of the similarity between Moses traditions and
those of the royal cult. The verses in Exodus do not actually say that Moses saw a heavenly
tabernacle which was to be the pattern, tabnit, for the tabernacle he had to build, but some later texts
do assume this. Solomon in the Book of Wisdom says he was commanded to build a temple, ‘a copy
of the holy tent which was prepared from the beginning’ (Wisdom 9.8), and 2 Baruch lists what Moses
saw on Sinai and includes the pattern of Zion and the sanctuary (2 Bar.59.4). Given the importance of
the subject matter, there are surprisingly few references to the heavenly sanctuary that Moses saw on
Sinai16.

The other two aspects of the tradition, that the temple was a microcosm of the creation and that its
construction corresponded to the days of creation suggest that what Moses saw on Sinai was not a
heavenly tabernacle but rather, a vision of the creation which the tabernacle was to replicate. This
would account for Philo's observation that the tabernacle ‘was a copy of the world, the universal
temple which existed before the holy temple existed’ (Questions on Exodus 2.85), and for the curious
line in the Letter to the Hebrews, that the temple on earth ‘is a shadow and copy of heavenly things’
(Heb.8.5). A heavenly temple is not mentioned in this verse even though some translations insert the
word temple at this point, e.g. R.S.V17.

The idea that Moses on Sinai had a vision of the creation finds its clearest expression in the writings of
Cosmas, the sixth century Egyptian Christian. He explained that the earth was rectangular and
constructed like a huge tent because Moses had been commanded to build the tabernacle as a copy of
the whole creation which he had been shown on Sinai. This is what he wrote:
          When Moses had come down from the mountain he was ordered by God to make the
          tabernacle, which was a representation of what he had seen on the mountain, namely, an
          impress of the whole world.
The creation Moses had seen was divided into two parts:
            Since therefore it had been shown him how God made the heaven and the earth, and how
            on the second day he made the firmament in the middle between them, and thus made the
            one place into two places, so Moses, in like manner, in accordance with the pattern which
            he had seen, made the tabernacle and placed the veil in the middle and by this division
            made the one tabernacle into two, the inner and the outer (Cosmas 2.35)




Beyond the Veil of the Temple © Margaret Barker, 1998                               Page 5 of 12
The Book of Jubilees has a similar tradition; that Moses on Sinai learned about the creation from the
Angel of the Presence. Jubilees does not link Moses’ vision to the tabernacle and so cannot have been
Cosmas’ only source, even supposing that he knew it at all18. The sequence in Jubilees is the same as
in Genesis 1, except that Jubilees gives far more detail about Day One, the secrets of the holy of
holies. There are seven works on Day One: heaven, earth, the waters, the abyss, darkness and light-
all of which can be deduced from Genesis- and then the ministering angels, who are not mentioned in
Genesis19. These angels of Day One are the spirits of the weather: wind, clouds, snow, hail frost,
thunder and lightning, cold and heat; they are the spirits of the seasons and also ‘all of the spirits of his
creatures which are in heaven and on earth’ (Jub.2.2). The angels who witness these works of the first
day ‘praise and bless the LORD’20. A similar account occurs in the Song of the Three Children; before
inviting the earth and everything created after the second day to praise the LORD and exalt him for
ever, there is a long list of the works of the Day One: the heavens, the angels, the waters above the
heavens, the powers, the stars, the rain, dew, winds, fire, heat, summer and winter, ice and cold, frost
and snow, lightnings and clouds, the phenomena whose angels praise the LORD on Day One
according to Jubilees. The angels of day One were a sensitive issue. Later Jewish tradition gave the
seven works of Day One as heaven and earth, darkness and light, waters and the abyss, and then the
winds, whereas Jubilees has the angels.

It has long been accepted21 that Genesis 1 is a reworking of older material and is related to other
accounts of creation known in the Ancient Near East. One of the main elements to have been removed
is any account of the birth of the gods, even though Genesis 2.1-4 retains traces of the older account:
‘Thus the heavens and the earth were finished and all the host of them… These are the generations of
the heavens and the earth.’ In Job 38.722, however, we still read of the sons of God who shouted for
joy on the first day of creation when the foundations of the earth were laid, and sons of God implies
that they were begotten, not created. The rest of Job 38 describes the works of Day One: the boundary
for the waters, the gates of deep darkness, the storehouses of snow and hail, wind, rain and ice, the
pattern of the stars. And the point of all this is to ask Job: ‘Where were you when all this was done?’ a
strange question for the LORD to ask Job unless there was a known tradition of someone who
witnessed the work of creation and thus became wise23. There is a similar pattern in Job 26: wisdom
and knowledge are part of the issue, and Job speaks of God stretching out the north over the void,
tohu, binding up the waters, rebuking the pillars of heaven and ‘covering his throne’, v.9, usually
emended to ‘covering the moon’.24 ‘Covering the throne’ is not usually associated with the process of
creation, unless the reference is to the veil which screened the sanctuary and did in fact cover the
throne. Wisdom, as the serpent in Eden had said, made humans divine, exactly what happened to
those who entered the sanctuary and, by implication, witnessed the creation.

Enoch, the high priest figure who entered the holy of holies, did know about these things; in 2 Enoch
he is taken to stand before the throne in heaven, anointed and transformed into an angel. Then he is
shown the great secrets of the creation. The account is confused, but closely related to the account in
Genesis even though some of the details seem to be drawn from Egyptian mythology. Enoch is
enthroned next to Gabriel and shown how the LORD created the world, beginning with heaven, earth
and sea, the movement of the stars, the seasons, the winds and the angels (2 En.23). He sees Day One.
Enthronement is an important and recurring feature of these texts and another indication of their
origin25. It is significant that the sanctuary hymn in Revelation 4.11 is about enthronement and
creation:
         Worthy art thou our LORD and God
         to receive glory and honour and power,
         for thou didst create all things
         and by thy will they existed and were created.

In the Parables, Enoch stands in the holy of holies before the throne and learns about the hidden
things, ‘the secrets of the heavens’ (1 En.41.1), the works of Day One: the holy ones, the lightning and
thunder, the winds clouds and dew, ‘the cloud that hovers over the earth from the beginning of the



Beyond the Veil of the Temple © Margaret Barker, 1998                                 Page 6 of 12
world’, the various stars in their orbits with their names. Josephus says that the Essenes undertook to
preserve the books of the sect and the names of the angels (War 2 142)26.

The fullest account of this material is in 1 Enoch 60 where the angel shows Enoch the hidden things:
‘What is first and last in heaven in the height, and beneath the earth in the depth, and at the ends of
the heaven and at the foundation of the heaven.’ He then sees the winds, the moon and stars, thunders
and lightnings, the angels of hail and frost, dew, mist and clouds. Later he sees the great oath which
establishes the creation and binds all its elements into their appointed places (1 En.69.16-25). The
very earliest Enoch material describes how he sees the works of Day One; on his first heavenly
journey, Enoch learns about the stars, thunder and lightning, the place of great darkness, the mouth of
the deep, the winds, the cornerstone of the earth and the firmament of heaven, the paths of the angels
and the firmament of heaven at the end of the earth (1 En.18). In the Apocalypse of Weeks, another
early text embedded in 1 Enoch, there is an expansion after the description of the seventh week. At
the end of the seventh week, the chosen righteous ones were to receive sevenfold i.e. heavenly
knowledge about all the creation: they would behold the works of heaven, understand the things of
heaven, ascend to see the end of the heaven and know the length and breadth of the earth and its
measurements, they would know the length and height of heaven, its foundations, the stars and where
they rest. (1 En.93.11-14). It is interesting the R.H.Charles in his edition of 1 Enoch says that these
verses are ‘completely out of place in their present context.’27.

What Job had not seen, Enoch saw in the holy of holies. There is not just one isolated example of
such a vision of creation; it is a recurring theme throughout the entire compendium of texts. And what
Enoch saw in the holy of holies, Moses, as we should expect, has seen on Sinai. According to 2
Baruch, Moses saw: ‘the measures of fire, the depths of the abyss, the weight of the winds, the number
of the raindrops, ... the height of the air, the greatness of Paradise, ... the mouth of hell... the multitude
of angels which cannot be counted... the splendour of lightnings, the power of the thunders, the orders
of the archangels and the treasuries of the light...’ (2 Bar.59.1-12)28. When Ezra asks about the LORD's
future plans for his people, he is assured that the One who planned all things would also see them to
their end. Everything had been decided ‘before the winds blew and the thunder sounded and the
lightning shone, before the foundations of paradise were laid and the angels were gathered together,
before the heights of the air were lifted up and the measures of the firmaments were named, before the
present years were reckoned’ (2 Esdr.6.1-6). Ezra is told that everything was planned in the holy of
holies, before time.

The speaker in Proverbs 8 also saw the works of Day One. The speaker was begotten29 before the
mountains, the hills and the earth, and was with the Creator when he established the heavens and the
fountains of the deep and when he set limits to the waters and marked out the foundations of the earth.
This chapter emphasises that the speaker was witness to the works of Day One. The one who was
newly born witnessed the creation, exactly what Cosmas, many centuries later, said of Moses.

           Then having taken him up into the mountain, he hid him in a cloud and took him out of all
          earthly things... and he gave him a new birth as if he were a child in the womb... and
          revealed to him all that he had done in making the world in six days, showing him in six
          other days the making of the world, performing in his presence the work of each day....
          (Cosmas 3.13)30

Later mystics describe a similar experience. Jacob Boehme, for example, a seventeenth century
German mystic, described a similar experience of learning everything in an instant, and of being a
child:
‘Thus now I have written, not from the instruction of knowledge received from men, nor from the
learning or reading of books, but I have written out of my own book which was opened in me, being
the noble similitude of God, the book of the noble and precious image was bestowed on me to read,
and therein I have studied as a child in the house of its mother, which beholdeth what the father doth
and in his childlike way doth imitate the father.


Beyond the Veil of the Temple © Margaret Barker, 1998                                  Page 7 of 12
…the gate was opened to me in that one quarter of an hour. I saw and knew more than if I had been
many years together at university... and I knew not how it happened to me... for I saw and knew the
Being of all Beings...the descent and original of this world and of all creatures through divine
wisdom...31

Philo describes the works of Day One as the invisible and incorporeal world. ‘First the maker made
an incorporeal heaven and an invisible earth and the essential form of air and void’ (Creation 29).
That was Day One in Genesis. After a lengthy discussion, Philo describes the second day: ‘The
incorporeal cosmos was finished... and the world apprehended by the senses was ready to be born after
the pattern of the incorporeal. And first of its parts the Creator proceeded to make the heaven which...
he called the firmament’ (Creation 36). In other words, everything made on or after the second day
was part of the visible world but the works of Day One were beyond matter, beyond the veil.
Elsewhere, Philo confirms this by saying that Moses entered this ‘unseen, invisible, incorporeal and
archetypal essence of existing things and saw what was hidden from mortal sight’ when he entered
God's presence to be made God and King (Moses 1.158). On the third day, says Philo, the creator
began ‘to put the earth in order’ (Creation 40)

Beyond the veil of the temple was the holy of holies with the heavenly throne, the invisible world and
Day One of creation. The LXX translator of Genesis knew this and so chose to render the enigmatic
tohu wabohu (Gen.1.2) by ‘unseen’ and ‘unsorted’, reminiscent of Plato's description of the unseen
world of ideas, and this has been suggested as a possible influence on the translators32. But Plato's
account of creation, especially in the Timaeus, is itself of uncertain origin and the question of who
influenced whom must remain open.33

Knowledge of these secrets gave power over the creation and this is probably why there are several
texts which forbid access to certain matters. There is a line in the Gospel of Philip, now thought to be
a first or second generation Christian text: ‘The veil at first concealed how God controlled the
creation.’ In the Aboth de Rabbi Nathan we find (A39): ‘Because of sin it was not given to man to
know the likeness (demut) on high; for were it not for this (sin) all the keys would be given to him and
he would known how the heavens and the earth were created...’34

Best known must be the prohibitions in the Mishnah restricting the reading of both the story of
creation and Ezekiel's description of the chariot, on the grounds that one should not think about ‘what
is above, what is below, what was before time and what will be hereafter’ (m.Hag. 2.1)35. What the
Creation and the Chariot have in common is that they both belong to the world beyond the veil, the
timeless place which also revealed the past and the future. Some centuries earlier than the Mishnah is
the warning in Ben Sira: ‘Seek not what is too difficult for you, nor investigate what is beyond your
power. Reflect upon what has been assigned to you, for you do not need what is hidden’ (Ben Sira
3.21-22). We are not told what the hidden things were. Earlier still, and most significant of all, is the
prohibition in Deuteronomy: ‘The secret things belong to the LORD our God: but the things that are
revealed belong to us and to our children’ (Deut.29.29). Secrets are said to exist.36 It is interesting
that such knowledge is still forbidden; the Pope, addressing a group of cosmologists in Rome in 1981,
reminded them that science itself could not answer the question of the origin of the universe. 37

Proverbs 30 must refer to the world beyond the veil of the temple; it links sonship, ascent to heaven,
knowledge of the Holy Ones and the works of Day One:
Who has ascended to heaven and come down?
Who has gathered the wind in his fists?
Who has wrapped up the waters in a garment?
Who has established all the ends of the earth? (Prov.30.4)38.
To which Deuteronomy replies: ‘(This commandment) is not in heaven, that you should say: Who will
go up for us to heaven, and bring it to us, that we may hear it and do it?’ (Deut.30.11). Job's
arguments were shown to be ‘words without knowledge’ (Job 38.2) because he had not witnessed the
works of Day One.


Beyond the Veil of the Temple © Margaret Barker, 1998                               Page 8 of 12
Most of the detailed evidence for this tradition of the world beyond the veil has been drawn from
relatively late texts, but the warnings against secret knowledge suggest that it was a matter of
controversy from the beginning of the second temple period. No one text from the later period gives a
complete picture, indicating the fragmentation of an earlier corpus rather than the conglomeration of
strands which had formerly been separate and even alien39.

Early evidence for what I am proposing is to be found in Isaiah 40. This chapter seems to be a
conjunction of all the elements of the hidden tradition which can only be reconstructed otherwise from
a variety of later sources. The chapter is set in the holy of holies; the prophet hears the voices calling
as did Isaiah 40. The LORD sits ‘above the circle of the earth’ and ‘stretches out the heavens like a
curtain’; there is a glimpse of history as ‘princes and rulers are brought to nothing’. The LORD
‘measures the waters and marks off the heavens with a span...’ the weighing and measuring terms
which characterise the creation accounts of the sanctuary tradition about Day One. There is reference
to enlightenment, knowledge and understanding: ‘Who taught him knowledge and showed him the
way of understanding?’ There is the challenge: ‘To whom will you liken God?’ a reference to the
belief that temple was a copy of what had been seen, followed by derision of the idol which the
workman casts ‘an image that will not move.’ The prophet is told to look at the host of heaven whom
the LORD has created and named, a reference to the sensitive issue of the sons of God on Day One.
There is the question: ‘Why do you say: My way is hidden from the LORD?’ And finally, the prophet
is reminded of what he knows because he has been present in the sanctuary to see the works of
creation: ‘Have you not known, have you not heard? Has it not been told you from the beginning?
Have you not understood from the foundations of the earth? (Isa.40.21). It is significant that the
Targum understands this as a revelation of the process of creation: ‘Have you not known? Have you
not heard? Has not the work of the orders of creation been announced to you from the beginning?…
(T.Isa.40.21). This is how that passage in Isaiah was understood at the end of the second temple
period.

If this reconstruction of the world beyond the veil is correct, it illuminates several issues. First, the
mixture of subjects in the apocalyptic texts can be explained: throne visions, lists of the secrets of
creation and surveys of history which deal not only with the past but also with the future are the
knowledge given to those who passed beyond the veil of the temple, the raz nihyeh of the Qumran
texts. Second, it suggests that the material in the apocalypses originated with the high priests since
they were the ones who passed through the veil into the holy of holies. It gives a context for
understanding the known priestly writings of the Hebrew scriptures with their concern for
measurements and dates, and their conception of history as an unfolding plan41. Third, it establishes
that this tradition was controversial as early as the exile and invites a closer look at what happened to
the temple cult in the seventh century, the process so often described as ‘Josiah’s reform’. It explains,
for example, why the description of the temple in 1 Kings mentions neither the chariot throne nor the
veil and why the essential features of the world beyond the temple veil - the cherubim, the anointing
oil - were later said to have disappeared from the temple not as a result of the Babylonians but in the
time of Josiah

If we adopt the widely accepted exilic dating of Isaiah 40, the sanctuary traditions which I have been
reconstructing have implications which reach beyond Old Testament study. The early apologists,
both Jewish and Christian, maintained that Plato learned from Moses, that he was Moses speaking
Attic Greek. The most notable of these was Eusebius of Caesarea, who, in his work The Preparation
of the Gospel, argued the case in great detail and listed all those who had held such views before him.
Eusebius and the other apologists were probably correct.

My reconstruction suggests that the priests of the first temple knew an invisible, heavenly world on
which the tabernacle or temple had been modelled; that they spoke of forms: the form of a man and the
form of a throne; that they described the heavens as an embroidered curtain; that they knew the
distinction between time, outside the veil, and eternity within it. They knew that time was the moving


Beyond the Veil of the Temple © Margaret Barker, 1998                               Page 9 of 12
image of eternity. They knew of angels, the sons of God begotten on Day One, as Job suggests. They
concerned themselves with the mathematics of the creation, the weights and the measures. They
believed that the creation was bonded together by a great oath or covenant. They believed that the
stars were divine beings, angels, and they described a creator whose work was completed not by
motion but by Sabbath rest. What I have reconstructed as the secret tradition of the world beyond the
temple veil would, in any other context be identified as Plato's Timaeus 42, written in the middle of
the fourth century BCE

It is nearly forty years since Käsemann suggested that Apocalyptic, far from being something on the
periphery of New Testament study was in fact ‘the mother of all Christian theology’43, the legitimate
development of ideas in the Old Testament. On the basis of my reconstructions, I suggest that the
sanctuary traditions which survive in the apocalypses were not the development of ideas in the
canonical OT, but their antecedents. The apocalyptic texts were not the original product of a
Hellenising, oppressed minority group late in the second temple period, but the repository of Israel’s
oldest traditions, what I have called The Older Testament44.
1
  This paper was my Presidential address to the Society for Old Testament Study in Cambridge January 1998, first published
in the Scottish Journal of Theology 51.1 1998.
2
  The hanging at the entrance to the holy of holies is paroket (LXX and Philo katapetasma) distinguished from the hanging at
the entrance to the tabernacle masak (LXX epispastron, Philo kalumma).
3
  There was a debate after the temple had been destroyed as to whether there had been a veil in the first temple, as m.Yoma
describes the high priest walking between the curtains to reach the ark: ‘To what are we referring here? If it be to the first
sanctuary, was there then a curtain? Again, if the second, was there then an ark?’
4
  LXX Isa.6.1 reads: ‘…the house was filled with his glory’, anticipating the angelic song, v.3, ‘the whole earth is full of his
glory. By implication, the house is the earth.
5
  W.A.Meeks ‘Moses as God and King’, in Religions in Antiquity. Essays in Memory of E.R.Goodenough. Ed.J.Neusner
Leiden 1970 p.371 ‘…an elaborate cluster of traditions of Moses’ heavenly enthronement at the time of the Sinai
theophany… closely connected with Scripture but at the same time thoroughly syncretistic.’ See also n.39.
6
  The singular nature of the two is seen clearly at Rev.22.3-4; the MSS at 6.17 are ambiguous, but the singular identity is
implicit at 7.9-10; 20.6; 21.22; 22.1.
7
  In later texts, only the Prince of the Divine Presence passes within the veil, b.Yoma 77a, c.f. Clement of Alexandria
Excerpts from Theodotus 38: ‘(The fiery place of the throne) has a veil in order that things may not be destroyed by the sight
of it. Only the archangel enters in, and to typify this, the high priest every year enters the holy of holies’; and 3 En.22B.6:
‘The glorious king covers his face, otherwise the heaven or Arabot would burst open in the middle, because of the glorious
brilliance, beautiful brightness, lovely splendour, and radiant praises of the appearance of the Holy One, Blessed by He.’
The Targum to Job 26.9 is similar.
See also ‘The Measures of God’s Glory in Ancient Midrash’ in Messiah and Christos. Studies in the Jewish Origins of
Christianity presented to David Flussner Ed. I.Gruenwald, S.Shaked, G.Stroumsa Tübingen 1992 pp.53-74 esp.pp.55-60
where he discusses the veil as the cover for ‘the measure of God’s glory’ which he suggests is a reference to some esoteric
knowledge.
8
  According to Jerome On Illustrious Men 11.
9
   Fishbane, see n.7 above, pp 64-66, discussing the work of M.Idel that the surot in 4Q 405 19 are early evidence for
mysticism, and his own suggestion that sur and demut referred to the man on the throne.
10
   See also the Ascension of Isaiah 10-11 where Isaiah in heaven sees the whole history of the incarnation; and b.Sanhedrin
38b ‘the Holy One… showed Adam every generation.’
11
   1 En.89.73 describes the sanctuary of the second temple as a tower before which impure bread was offered. The
Assumption of Moses 2.4 reads: ‘The court of his tabernacle and the tower of his sanctuary…’ An interpretation of Isa.5 in
the early 2nd century CE, attributed to R.Yosi reads; ‘He built a tower in the midst of his vineyard… this is his sanctuary
Tosefta Sukkah 3.15. This passed into Christian usage e.g. Hermas Parables 3.2.4; 9.3.1. The Son of God is LORD of the
tower Parables 9.7.1.
12
   Ignatius of Antioch, Philippians 9: ‘To Jesus alone as our high priest were the secret things of God committed; Clement of
Alexandria, Miscellanies 6.7: ‘…the knowledge of things present, past and future revealed by the son of God; ibid.7.17:
‘…the true tradition came from the LORD by drawing aside the curtain…’; Origen Celsus 3.37: ‘Jesus beheld these weighty
secrets and made them known to a few’. Also my ‘The Secret Tradition’ in JHC 2.1 (1995) pp.31-67.
13
   For a summary and bibliography of these traditions in Canaan, Mesopotamia and later Jewish sources, see M.Weinfeld
‘Sabbath, Temple and Enthronement of the LORD. The problem of the Sitz in Leben of Genesis 1.1-23’ ‘Mélanges bibliques
et orientaux en l’honneur de M. Henri Cazelles, ed. A.Caquot and M.Delcor Neukirchen-Vluyn 1981, pp.501-512;
J.D.Levenson Creation and the Persistence of Evil. The Jewish Drama of Divine Omnipotence Harper SanFransisco 1988
pp.78-79; N Wyatt ‘Les Mythes des Dioscures et Ideologie Royale dans les Littératures d’Ougarit et d’Israel, RB 1996
pp.481-516.
14
   Midrash Tanhuma 11.2. See also J.Blenkinsopp ‘The Structure of P’ CBQ 38 (1976) pp.275-292. Levenson op.cit. n.13
pp.78-99. P.J. Kearney ‘Creation and Liturgy. The P redaction of Ex.25-40’ in ZAW 89 (1977) pp.375-387, who worked


Beyond the Veil of the Temple © Margaret Barker, 1998                                                 Page 10 of 12
out one possible scheme of correspondences between the seven days of creation and the construction of the tabernacle, based
on the LORD’s speeches to Moses in Exod.25-31. F.H.Gorman ‘Priestly Rituals of Founding: Time Space and Status’ in
History and Interpretation ed. M.P.Graham, Sheffield Academic Press 1993 pp.47-64 recognises that the summary in
Exod.40.16-38 is the clearest link between creation and tabernacle, but does not work out how each day corresponds to each
part of the tabernacle.
15
   None of the material cited in nn.14,15 makes the link between the traditional order for the construction of the tabernacle
and the order of the days of creation.
16
   M.E.Stone ‘Lists of the Revealed Things in the Apocalyptic Literature’ in Magnalia Dei; the Mighty Acts of God. In
Memory of G.E.Wright ed. Cross, Lemke and Miller, New York 1976 pp.414-452: ‘This interest in the measures of Zion
seems curiously unstressed in the apocryphal and Rabbinic literatures,’ p.415. Ezekiel did see the temple in his vision
Ezek.40-48.
17
   Blenkinsopp op.cit.n.15 shows how P relates the creation of the world, the construction of the sanctuary and the division of
the land, p.278. We should not forget that Gen.1 is attributed to Moses insofar as he was the ‘author’ of the Pentateuch.
18
   R.Devreesse Essai sur Theodore de Mopsueste, Studi e Testi 141 Vatican City 1948 p.26n. finds similar ideas in
Theodore’s work on Exodus, written early in the fifth century.
19
   R.H.Charles The Book of Jubilees London A&C Black 1902, p.11. The angels were variously said to have been created,
not begotten, on the second day or the fifth. On the basis of Ps.104, R.Johannan taught that they were created on the second
day because the LORD formed the firmament in v.3 and the angels in v.4. R.Hanina said on the fifth day because they were
winged creatures. Gen.R 1.3: ‘Whether we accept the view of either… all agree that none were created on the first day, lest
you should say Michael stretched out in the south and Gabriel in the north, while the Holy One, Blessed by he, measured it
in the middle [quoting Isa.44.24] Who was associated with me in the creation of the world?’ Targum Ps.J. Gen.1.26: ‘And
the LORD said to the angels who ministered before him, who had been created on the second day of the creation, let us make
man.’ If the secret knowledge of the sanctuary included the birth of the angels i.e. the gods of Day One (and also of the
king?), this suggests that the material antedates the reforming monotheism of the Deuteronomists. See my book The Great
Angel London SPCK 1992. This is consistent with my proposal for the meaning of sur in the passages connected with divine
fatherhood, namely, that they were deliberately obscured and removed.
20
   See also 1QH 6 (formerly 1), 1QH 17 (formerly 13), for similar themes and the raz nihyeh of 4Q 417.
21
   Since H.Gunkel Schöpfung und Chaos in Urzeit und Endzeit Göttingen 1895
22
   Wyatt op.cit.n.13 shows that Ps.8.4 also describes the birth of the sons of God.
23
   B.Lang Eugen Drewermann interprète de la Bible Paris Cerf 1994 p.167, developed in ‘Lady Wisdom. A Polytheistic and
Psychological Interpretation of a Biblical Goddess’ in A Feminist Companion to the Bible ed. A.Brenner and C.Fontaine
Sheffield Academic Press 1997 suggests that the wise man was initiated by studying the myth of creation and then being
reborn as a divine child in the presence of Wisdom who showed him the creation. Also Wyatt op.cit.n.13 on Job 15.7-8 and
Ps.110.
24
   MT and LXX have here ‘face of the throne, but an emendation to ‘face of the moon is usually proposed, by reading keseh
rather than kisseh.
25
   Wyatt op.cit.n.13; also Weinfeld op.cit.n.13 p.507.
26
   The names of the angels were a part of the secret knowledge. The names, as recovered from the Aramaic, ‘were for the
most part derived from astronomical, meteorological and geographical terms’, J.T.Milik The Books of Enoch Aramaic
Fragmennts of Qumran Cave 4 Oxford 1976 p.29. In other words, their names reflected their functions as the angels of Day
One: Fire of El, Thunder of El, Comet of El, Lightning of El, Rain of El, Cloud of El etc.
27
   R.H.Charles the Book of Enoch Oxford 1912, p.231: ‘The verses are completely out of place in the present context’, citing
several eminent scholars who had drawn the same conclusion. They had not made the link between the sevenfold
knowledge, the resurrected ones and the secrets of creation. For a better understanding see Stone op.cit.n.16 pp.424-425.
28
   There are similar traditions about Adam; ‘The LORD showed him the pattern of Zion before he sinned’ 2 Bar.4.3. Jer.4.23-
28 implies a similar experience.
29
   LXX and Targums have ‘created’ for Hebrew qnh. Evidence for qnh meaning create rather than acquire see C Westermann
Genesis 1-11 A Commentary tr. J.J.Scullion London 1984 p.290. For the contrary view see R.N.Whybray Proverbs London
1994 pp.129-130. More likely than ‘created’ is ‘begotten’, c.f. ‘brought forth’ Prov.8.24,25. She was established, v.23, c.f.
Ps.2.6, where the king is ‘established’ on the holy hill, but another possibility is that nskty here should be read as ‘I was
hidden’ from skk, see W.McKane Proverbs London 1970. Wisdom brought forth and hidden i.e. behind the veil, is possible
in the context.
Deutero-Isaiah changed the older divine title ‘Begetter of Heaven and Earth’ as in Gen.14.9, and substituted ‘Maker or
Creator of Heaven and Earth’, see N.Habel ‘Yahweh, Maker of heaven and Earth. A Study in Tradition Criticism’ JBL 91
(1972) pp.321-337.
In my book The Great Angel London 1992 I suggested that Deutero-Isaiah and the exilic reformers fused the older deities El
and Yahweh, thus establishing monotheism, and at the same time they suppressed the older mythology of the sons of God.
‘(Deutero-Isaiah) removed the idea that the Creator God was the Procreator, the Father of gods and men… The idea of a
procreator God with sons seems to have fallen out of favour with those who equated Yahweh with El…’ p.19. This is further
evidence that the sons of God of Day One were part of the tradition of the first temple and suggests the reason for their
disappearance.
30
   The figure present at the creation became the Torah in later tradition. Thus six things preceded the creation of the (visible)
world: the Torah, the throne of Glory, and the plans for the patriarchs, Israel, the temple and the Name of the Messiah Gen.R
1.4.


Beyond the Veil of the Temple © Margaret Barker, 1998                                                 Page 11 of 12
31
   ‘Letter to an Enquirer’ in R.Waterfield Jacob Boehme Essential Readings Wellingborough Aquarian Press 1989 pp.65-66.
32
   For recent discussion of possible influences on translators see J.Dines ‘Imaging Creation: the Septuagint Tradition of
Genesis 1.2’ in Heythrop Journal 36.4 (1995) pp.439-350.
33
   It is frequently observed by commentators that Plato introduces wholly new ideas of creation with a purpose and without
the jealous gods of the Prometheus myth, e.g. F.C.Cornford Plato’s Cosmology London 1937 pp.31-33. For the first time the
world is described as the creation of a father, maker or craftsman and the stars are held to be divine, D.Lee Plato, Timaeus
and Critias London Penguin 1977 pp.7-8.
34
   Fishbane op.cit.n.6 discusses Sifre Deut. 355 when Israel asked Moses to tell them about the glory on high, requesting
esoteric knowledge that had not been revealed to them. Moses said: ‘You may know about the glory on high from the lower
heavens’ and there follows a parable about the great king hidden behind a jewelled curtain.
The mystics instant acquisition of knowledge is well known, see n.30 and text above.
35
   Neusner translates the corresponding passage in Tosefta Hagigah: ‘above, below, within, beyond’.
36
   See also 2 Esdr.14.6, 40-48, that there are 24 public books of Scripture, but 70 others only for the wise, which held the
secrets of understanding, wisdom and knowledge. Also my article ‘The Secret Tradition’ op.cit.n.12
37
   Acta Apostolicae Sedis 73 (1981) 669-670
38
   Wyatt op.cit.n.13 shows how this passage was part of the royal wisdom tradition. He reconstructs the impossible vv.2-3
on the basis of the LXX to be: I surpass all men and possess the intelligence of Adam, for God has taught me Wisdom and I
know the knowledge of the holy ones. The one who ascends to heaven must be the king who becomes the co-creator,
gathering the winds and the waters, and he also becomes divine.
39
   I disagree with Meeks op.cit.n.3.p.369: ‘We must reckon with the possibility, therefore, that the legends [about Moses] are
composites of the strands which at some earlier stage served disparate functions.’ The legends had indeed served another
purpose, but had been transferred as a whole from the royal tradition.
40
   Deutero-Isaiah heard voices but, unlike Isaiah, he saw no form as he was influenced by the Deuteronomists c.f.Deut 4.12.
41
   Blenkinsopp op.cit.n.14 esp. pp 275,291: ‘…beneath (P’s) surface one can still make out the contours of an encompassing
mythic pattern. It is also possible to interpret the ritualism of P as embodying a concern for man’s concrete existence in
relation to the cosmos… his entire existence on the temporal and spatial axis’ (my emphases).
42
   The passages in Timaeus are: the creation is good, 29; the invisible world, 28; the forms, 29, 38, 52; time and eternity 37;
angels created first but the story of their origin is not known, 41; the mathematics of creation 53,69; the bond of creation,
31,378; angels as stars 38; resting as the culmination of creation 30.
43
   Die Anfänge christlicher Theologie ZTK 57 (1960) pp 162-185.
44
   My book The Older Testament. The Survival of Themes from the Ancient Royal Cult in Sectarian Judaism and Early
Christianity. London 1987.




Beyond the Veil of the Temple © Margaret Barker, 1998                                               Page 12 of 12
