                                             SCRIPTURE CENTRAL
                                                                https://scripturecentral.org/

Type: Book Chapter



What Did King Josiah Reform?
Author(s): Margaret Barker
Source: Glimpses of Lehi's Jerusalem
Editor(s): John W. Welch, David Rolph Seely and Jo Ann H. Seely
Published: Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon
            Studies, Brigham Young University, 2004
Page(s): 523–542




       The Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies (FARMS) existed as a California
       non-profit corporation from 1979 until about 2006, when it was allowed to go into involuntary
       liquidation, at which time copyrights held by FARMS and its authors and/or editors reverted
       or may have reverted back to their original author and/or editors. This chapter is archived by
       permission of editors John W. Welch, David Rolph Seely and Jo Ann H. Seely.
                            Chapter 17




    What        Did King Josiah                Reform ?


                         Margaret Barker




    King Josiah changed the religion of Israel in 623 b .c .
According to the Old Testament account in 2 Kings 23, he
removed all manner of idolatrous items from the temple and
purified his kingdom of Canaanite practices. Temple vessels
made for Baal, Asherah, and the host of heaven were removed,
idolatrous priests were deposed, the Asherah itself was taken
from the temple and burned, and much more besides. An
old law book had been discovered in the temple, and this had
prompted the king to bring the religion of his kingdom into
line with the requirements of that book (2 Kings 22:8-13;
2 Chronicles 34:14-20)? There could be only one temple, it
stated, and so all other places of sacrificial worship had to be
destroyed (Deuteronomy 12:1-5). The law book is easily recog-
nizable as Deuteronomy, and so King Josiah’s purge is usually
known as the Deuteronomic reform of the temple.
    In 598 b .c ., twenty-five years after the work of Josiah, Jeru-
salem was attacked by the Babylonians under King Nebuchad-
nezzar (2 Kings 24:10-16; 25:1-9); eleven years after the first
524 • Margaret Barker


attack, they returned to destroy the city and the temple (586 b .c .).
Refugees fled south to Egypt, and we read in the book of Jeremiah
how they would not accept the prophet’s interpretation of the disas-
ter (Jeremiah 44:16-19). Jeremiah insisted that Jerusalem had fallen
because of the sins of her people, but the refugees said it had fallen
because of Josiah. The king is not mentioned by name, but there can
be no doubt what the refugees had in mind.2 Until very recently,
they said, they and their ancestors in Judah and Jerusalem had
worshipped differently and had prospered, but when they changed
their manner of worship, disaster had followed.
    They had worshipped the Queen of Heaven by offering in-
cense, libations, and special loaves to represent her.3 Now the
Queen of Heaven is not mentioned in the account of Josiah’s
purge, but the major item removed from the temple was the
Asherah, which was dragged out and burned. Later Jewish texts4
described the Asherah as a stylized tree, and Deuteronomy had
forbidden any such tree or any pillar to be placed beside an altar
for the Lord (Deuteronomy 16:21). It was these spiritual heirs of
Josiah who returned from Babylon to rebuild the temple, and
their influence can be found in many of the texts we now read as
the Old Testament.5 These texts do not tell the whole story.
    The refugees who fled to Egypt were not the only ones who
thought that Josiah’s purge had been a disaster. By surveying
the extrabiblical texts that still survive, we can begin to piece
together what Josiah destroyed. Many of those texts imply that
Josiah’s purge was a disaster.
    In 1897 a text that described a group of covenanters in the
land of Damascus was discovered in an old Cairo synagogue.
Fragments of the same text were later found among the Dead
Sea Scrolls, showing that the text had been known in the time
of Jesus. This Damascus Document,6 as it is called, describes
the Babylonian destruction of Jerusalem as punishment for the
                              What Did King Josiah Reform? • 525


unfaithfulness of the people—Jeremiah would have agreed with
that, but it also says that the whole Second Temple era that fol-
lowed was the age of wrath. Far from restoring the true religion
of Jerusalem, the people who returned from Babylon to rebuild
the temple were led by false teachers who had not been chosen
by God. Israel had gone astray in the hidden things; they had lost
the truth. They did not observe the true calendar or the correct
forms of worship, and they had corrupt priests. The Damascus
Covenant group believed that they were the guardians of the
true priestly traditions and that their reward would be to return
to the glory of Adam and to be resurrected. They had kept a re-
cord of their genealogies and of what they had done.7
     The book of Enoch known as 1 Enoch8 gives a similar ac-
count.9 Preserved within the fifth section of this text is an an-
cient and cryptic account of the history of Israel. Each period is
described as a “week” and so the text is known as the Apocalypse
of Weeks. In the sixth week, all those who lived in the temple
forsook wisdom and lost their vision, and then the temple was
burned. Those who returned in the seventh week to rebuild the
temple were an apostate generation whose deeds were evil.10
Elsewhere Enoch records that those who built this second
temple made impure and polluted offerings. The people who
preserved the Enoch texts looked forward to the Lord destroy-
ing that impure temple and building a new and greater temple
in its place.11 They also claimed that the words of scripture had
been altered by godless people.12
     On one of his heavenly journeys, Enoch saw the fragrant tree
of life that would one day be planted again in the temple and its
fruit given to the righteous. He also saw dismembered branches
from the tree, flourishing in a blessed place.13 In another vision,
Enoch saw the fragrant tree as a fiery form, the place where the
Lord came when he was in paradise.14 Yet another text describes
526 • Margaret Barker


the fragrant tree as shining like the sun, and with fruits like
clusters of white grapes.15 Now the book of Proverbs describes
wisdom as the tree of life (Proverbs 3:13, 18) and those who are
devoted to her as happy, a word play that sounds like the name
Asherah.16 In this way, by piecing together fragments of tradi-
tion and folk memory, we can glimpse what Josiah must have
removed from the temple. The Asherah must have been the styl-
ized tree of life, the symbol of wisdom.17 When Moses was told
to make the seven-branched lamp for the tabernacle, the menorah,
he was told to make it like an almond tree (Exodus 25:31-39), and
so it was probably the original menorah that Josiah removed
and destroyed.18
    The work of Josiah was not forgotten. Even mainstream
Jewish texts from well into the Christian era record that great
changes took place at that time and that the second temple
was inferior to the first. The great commentary on the book
of Numbers, known as the Numbers Rabbah,19 said that in the
time of the Messiah, five things would be restored that had
been in the first temple but not in the second: the fire, the ark,
the menorah, the spirit, and the cherubim.20 In other words,
the true temple that the Messiah would restore was the first
temple, the one Josiah had purged. The mystery here is the
menorah: there had been a menorah in the second temple, but
it cannot have been the true menorah if this was deemed to
be missing from the second temple. The Babylonian Talmud
records that Josiah had hidden away the ark, the holy anoint-
ing oil, the jar of manna, and Aaron’s rod.21 Most of these
items—the ark, the cherubim, the oil, the manna, and Aaron’s
rod—had been kept in the holy of holies to which only the
high priests had access. In other words, Josiah’s changes con-
cerned the high priests and were thus changes at the very heart
of the temple.
                             What Did King Josiah Reform? • 527


     Josiah had not been the first king who attempted to change
the religion of Israel and Judah. King Hezekiah, in whose time
Isaiah was a prophet in Jerusalem, removed hilltop places of
worship, destroyed sacred pillars, and broke down the Asherah
(2 Kings 18:4). When the Assyrian envoys came to demoralize
the people of Jerusalem, they said that their Lord would no
longer protect the city because the king had destroyed his
places of worship (Isaiah 36:7). Hezekiah was not seen by his
contemporaries as a reformer. Hezekiah’s predecessor, King
Ahaz, had followed the older religion: he had burned incense
at the hilltop shrines and under sacred trees and had even sac-
rificed his son (2 Chronicles 28:3-4; 2 Kings 16:3). Isaiah had
no word of condemnation for Ahaz on these matters; he only
rebuked him for his lack of faith in the Lord when Jerusalem
was threatened by enemies. Isaiah, it would seem, favored the
older ways. He spoke of the great tree that had been felled but
preserved the holy seed in its stump (Isaiah 6:13),22 and he
compared the Servant of the Lord to a branch of the menorah,
damaged but still able to give light (Isaiah 42:3).23
    Almost everything that Josiah swept away can be matched
in the religion of the patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
They had built shrines all over the land, wherever the Lord had
appeared to them, and they had offered sacrifices under great
trees (Genesis 12:6-7) and set up pillars to mark holy places
(Genesis 28:18). In the Old Testament as we know it, the pa-
triarchs before the time of Moses and the kings after him fol-
lowed the religion that Deuteronomy condemned and Josiah
purged. The custom of child sacrifice, which Josiah abolished,
had been required in the oldest of the Hebrew law codes
(Exodus 22:29), and only the later modifications permitted a
substitute offering of five silver shekels or a Levite for temple
service (Exodus 13:15; Numbers 3:40-48).
528 • Margaret Barker


    This change is reflected in the way the story of Abraham and
Isaac is told in our Old Testament. Abraham had thought that
the sacrifice of his son was necessary, but the Lord told him that
a substitute should be offered (Genesis 22:12-13). Another ver-
sion of this story survived for centuries—namely, that Isaac had
actually been sacrificed and then resurrected.24 Echoes of this
version of the story seem to appear in both Jewish and Christian
sources—in the Targum Pseudo-Jonathan and in the early Chris-
tian writings of Barnabas and Clement of Rome25—and it is
probably implied in the New Testament in the Letter to the
Hebrews (Hebrews 11:17-19; also James 2:21). The sacrifice of
the Son lies at the heart of Christianity, and the emphasis of the
Letter to the Hebrews is that in the case of Jesus, no substitute
was offered (Hebrews 9:12). This shows that memories of the
older religion and its stories survived for centuries, even though
they do not appear in the biblical texts.
    Abraham too had paid his tithe to Melchizedek, the priest-
king of Jerusalem (Genesis 14:18-20), and so the Melchizedek
priesthood must have been part of the older religion.26 A frag-
mented text about Melchizedek was found among the Dead
Sea Scrolls (11Q13).27 He was a divine figure, the Messiah, ex-
pected to return at just the time when Jesus began his ministry
and to make the final great atonement.28 A damaged portion
of the text seems to mention teachers who have been kept hid-
den and secret.29 Nothing of the Melchizedek tradition sur-
vives in the biblical texts, apart from the Genesis account and
one text in Psalm 110, and so we have to ask: Who preserved
these Melchizedek traditions?
    One way to reconstruct the religion of Jerusalem before
Josiah’s changes is to note how many of the practices forbid-
den by Deuteronomy are permitted elsewhere in the Old Testa-
ment. Deuteronomy, for example, denies that any vision of
                               What Did King Josiah Reform? • 529


God was seen when the Law was given: “You saw no form; only
a voice was heard” (Deuteronomy 4:12), and yet the account in
Exodus says that Moses went up the mountain with the leaders
and elders of Israel “and they saw the God of Israel” (Exodus
24:IO).30 Isaiah had seen the Lord “high and lifted up and his
train filled the temple” (Isaiah 6:1). The vision of God must
have been a part of the older faith; there are several accounts
of the Lord being in or emerging from his holy place to bring
judgment (Deuteronomy 32:43; Habakkuk 2:20; Zephaniah
1:7),31 and also prayers for the Lord to “shine” upon his people
(Numbers 6:25).
   Deuteronomy condemns regard for the host of heaven (Deut-
eronomy 4:19), the angels who were represented by the stars,
even though an ancient title for the Lord was the Lord of Hosts.
The heavenly host of angels must have been part of the older
faith.32
    Deuteronomy also taught that the Law was to be the wis-
dom of the chosen people, that the Law would make them wise
(Deuteronomy 4:6). The book of Proverbs says that it is Wisdom
herself who makes her disciples wise (Proverbs 9:1-6). Wisdom
must have been part of the older faith.33
    All these three—visions of the Lord, the host of heaven, and
wisdom—feature in the accounts of Josiah’s purge: Enoch says
that the priests in the temple lost their vision because they aban-
doned wisdom, and the account in 2 Kings 23 describes how
certain houses in the temple that had belonged to “cult prosti-
tutes” were destroyed. Exactly the same Hebrew letters can be
read as “holy ones,” angels.34 What Josiah probably destroyed
were the places for the angels, just as he destroyed the Asherah,
which was the symbol of Wisdom, the Queen of Heaven. Isaiah
saw the Lord among the angels, and he said he had seen the Lord
of Hosts in the temple (Isaiah 6:1-5). Except for one mention in
530 • Margaret Barker


the archaic poetry in Deuteronomy 32:8, which scholars do not
believe was original to the book, Deuteronomy in the Masoretic
tradition does not mention angels.
    Another way to reconstruct the older faith is to compare
certain Old Testament texts with the parallel accounts else-
where. To take just one example, let us compare the account of
the creation in Genesis 1 with other accounts in ancient texts.
According to Genesis 1:3, on day one God said, “Let there be
light” and then separated light from darkness. Now in the pat-
tern of temple symbolism, the six days of creation corresponded
to the six stages by which Moses erected the tabernacle: thus
the first day corresponded to the holy of holies, the second day
to the veil of the tabernacle, the third day to the table for the
shewbread, and so forth. Whatever we read about day one will
have been a secret of the holy of holies, accessible only to the
high priests.35 In Genesis we are told nothing except that God
created light and separated it from darkness. However, the book
of Jubilees36 (another text found among the Dead Sea Scrolls
and preserved by the ancient church in Ethiopia) gives a fuller
account of day one, and thus of the holy of holies. On day one
the Lord created the angel spirits who serve before him, and the
ranks of the angels are listed.37 A similar list appears in the Song
of the Three Young Men in the fiery furnace, which is found in
the Greek version of Daniel 3, but not in the Hebrew. The young
men call on all creation to praise the Lord, beginning with a
detailed account of the angels described in Jubilees as the works
of day one. It is not until almost halfway through their song
that they call on the works of the visible creation to offer praise.
The readers of the book of Jubilees and the readers of the Greek
Daniel knew that the angels had been the work of day one—but
we do not learn this from Genesis. It comes as no surprise,
though, that the angels were located in the holy of holies, which
                               What Did King Josiah Reform? • 531


is where Isaiah saw the heavenly host. Presumably, knowledge of
the angels had been a part of what Josiah sought to eliminate. As
mentioned earlier, Deuteronomy does not mention angels.
    Deuteronomy does, however, warn against the secret things,
presumably the knowledge of the holy of holies. “The secret things
belong to the Lord our God” (Deuteronomy 29:29). Deuteronomy
does not deny that such secret things exist, but all that was neces-
sary was to obey the Law and keep the revealed commandments.38
The affairs of the holy of holies were the exclusive preserve of the
high priests. They alone had charge of the affairs of the altar and
the holy of holies (Numbers 18:3), and they alone were permitted
to look at the tabernacle furnishings (Numbers 4).39
     The great angels had been known as the sons of God. It is
ironical that, in the first of the two great poems appended to
the book of Deuteronomy, we are given the clearest picture of
these sons of God. “When the Most High gave to the nations
their inheritance, he fixed the bounds of the peoples according
to the number of the sons of God” (Deuteronomy 32:8). There
was one guardian angel for each nation.40 The poem goes on to
say that Jacob was allotted to the Lord—in other words, that
the Lord, the God of Israel, was the Son of God Most High. The
older religion had not been monotheism in the way that that
word is usually understood today. The Lord, the Son of God,
had been the angel of Israel, or, as Isaiah said, the Holy One of
Israel, since a holy one is an angel. The Lord as the Son of God
Most High became a sensitive matter, and so there were two ver-
sions of this text in Hebrew. The Masoretic text on which most
English translations are based does not have “sons of God” at
this point but “sons of Israel,” giving, “He fixed the bounds of
the peoples according to the number of the sons of Israel.” The
Old Greek and the Hebrew texts found among the Dead Sea
Scrolls, however, have “sons of God,” showing that God Most
532 • Margaret Barker


High apportioned the nations among his sons and that the Lord,
the God of Israel, was the Son of God Most High.41 The early
Christians read the Old Testament in this way; whenever the
Lord appeared, for example, to Abraham, they recognized that
it was an appearance of the second person of the Trinity, the
Messiah, the Son of God.42
    Once we know that the sons of God were an important
part of the first temple religion, other Old Testament texts
begin to appear in their original setting. The holy of holies
was the place of the angels, and so the rituals of the holy of
holies must have been associated with the world of the an-
gels.43 According to the books of Chronicles, there was in
the holy of holies a golden throne in the form of a chariot of
cherubim (1 Chronicles 28:18). It was concealed behind the
veil of the temple, mentioned in 2 Chronicles 3:14. The ac-
count in 1 Kings, influenced by the Deuteronomists, mentions
neither the chariot throne nor the veil, so these must have been
important items in the older religion. You will recall that the
cherubim had been in the first temple but not the second and
were to be restored in the time of the Messiah.44 Chronicles
also reveals that when Solomon was made king, he sat on this
chariot throne, described as the throne of the Lord, and when
he was enthroned, the people worshipped him (1 Chronicles
29:20-23). “The people worshipped the Lord, the king” is the
literal translation of 1 Chronicles 29:20. The king “was” the
Lord.45 He was enthroned in the holy of holies, and he was
the Lord. One of his titles, according to Isaiah, was Immanuel,
“God with us.” A human being had entered the holy of holies
and become an angel. Isaiah records the song of the angels in
the holy of holies as the new angel is born as a son of God:
“Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the gov-
ernment shall be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be
                              What Did King Josiah Reform? • 533


called Wonderful Counsellor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father,
Prince of Peace” (Isaiah 9:6).46
   The most complete picture of the first temple religion has
been preserved in the Enoch texts.47 Ancient leaders such as
Noah and Moses assumed angelic status while they still lived
on earth.48 Enoch was himself a high priest figure who entered
the holy of holies and was transformed into an angel when
he stood before the throne and was anointed and clothed by
Michael. “He anointed me and he clothed me, and the appear-
ance of that oil is greater than the greatest light, and it is like
sweet dew and its fragrance is myrrh, and it is like the rays of
the glittering sun. And I looked at myself and I had become
like one of the glorious ones.”49 You will recall that the anoint-
ing oil had disappeared in the time of Josiah50 and that there is
almost nothing about Enoch in the Hebrew Bible even though
he was a major figure among the Dead Sea Scrolls.
    All the Enochic visions of the holy of holies must have
been memories of the ancient rituals: the high priest taking
petitions into the presence of God, the high priest looking out
from the holy of holies and seeing all history spread before him
so that he knew the future, the blood of the Righteous One be-
ing offered before the judgment could begin. This latter must
have been a memory of the ancient rite of atonement, when the
blood of the royal high priest was offered in the holy of holies,
presumably using an animal substitute.51 Daniel’s vision of the
Man ascending with clouds to the Ancient of Days says, liter-
ally, “He was offered before him,” and then he was given do-
minion (Daniel 7). Atonement is missing from Deuteronomy;
the festival calendar in Deuteronomy 16 describes Passover,
Pentecost, and Tabernacles—but no Day of Atonement.52 The
final form of the Pentateuch, compiled under the influence of
Josiah’s party, denies that atonement is even possible. After
534 • Margaret Barker


Israel had sinned and made the golden calf, Moses went back
up the mountain to offer himself as an atonement for their sin.
The Lord said to Moses, “Whoever has sinned against me, him
will I blot out of my book” (Exodus 32:33). Why had Moses
thought that his self-sacrifice could have been an atonement
for sin? Presumably there had once been a time when such
things were thought possible.
    The older faith did not disappear. The people who preserved
the Enoch traditions kept the older faith, the community of the
Damascus Covenant seems to have kept the older faith, those
who wrote the Qumran Melchizedek text knew the date at
which the older faith would be restored, and it emerged as the
framework of early Christianity.53 Jesus was proclaimed in the
Letter to the Hebrews as Melchizedek (Hebrews 7:14-17, 22),54
and John, in his vision recorded in the book of Revelation, saw
the ark restored to the temple (Revelation 11:19).55
    Remnants of the older faith survived in many places, pre-
served by the descendants of those who fled from Josiah’s purge.
There were the mysterious sons of Rechab whose story was told
in the History of the Rechabites.56 Beneath the layers of fantasy
and folk tale in this widely known ancient text, we glimpse a
group who described themselves as angels and who had fled
from Jerusalem after the time of Josiah. Angels had released
them from prison, and they had escaped to the desert and
crossed the great sea to a paradise land of fruit trees, honey, and
abundant water. Angels continued to inform them about events
in their former world, and so they knew about the life of Jesus.
Zosimus, who visited the Rechabites, brought back stone tablets
with an account of them. Now Rechab is an interesting name; it
can also mean a chariot, and so the angel sons of Rechab might
have been the devotees of the chariot throne in the temple who
                               What Did King Josiah Reform? • 535


fled from Jerusalem after Josiah’s purge and settled somewhere
across a great sea.
    Aramaic papyri found at Yeb in the south of Egypt, the
Elephantine Papyri,57 describe a group who worshipped Yahu,
another form of the Hebrew name of the Lord, but they also
had divine names with feminine forms. None of the names was
Egyptian, so they were not the result of local syncretism. They
had built themselves a temple and had a priesthood—so they did
not accept that there could be only one temple—and they corre-
sponded with the high priest in Jerusalem. Originally they had
made no blood sacrifices, just offerings of wine, incense, and cere-
als, like the refugees who fled to Egypt with Jeremiah. Isaiah had
prophesied that there would be an altar for the Lord in the midst
of the land of Egypt (Isaiah 19:19) and five cities speaking the lan-
guage of Canaan and worshipping the Lord of Hosts.
     To the south of Yeb (Elephantine) in Ethiopia are the Qe-
mant, another people who have preserved the older faith.58 They
observe the Sabbath and the Old Testament food laws, and they
worship one God who can appear in human form, whom they
name Adara, not unlike the Hebrew word for “glorious one.”
They acknowledge seven great angels and expect the day of judg-
ment. They know of Abraham and of Adam. They set up stone
pillars and anoint them, and their holy men pray to Adara by sa-
cred trees. Some of them have been taken up to heaven and were
never seen again. There is also the tradition that the ark was
taken to Ethiopia before the destruction of the first temple.59
The Christian monks in the Lake Tana monasteries still tell of
the time before their people became Christian and how they
kept the ark for many centuries until it was taken to Axum.
    In western China, bordering Tibet, are the Chiang Min, a
people whose way of life was recorded at the beginning of the last
century by a Christian missionary. Their religion was identified as
536 • Margaret Barker


that of the Old Testament before Josiah’s purge. That missionary’s
son is Professor Thomas Torrance, the distinguished theologian
at the University of Edinburgh, Scotland. He wrote thus: “I my-
self am convinced of [my father’s] main thesis.... The religious
observances of the Chiang seem to derive from a period in Israel’s
history... before the centralization of the cult in Jerusalem had
been carried out, when high place worship was still prevalent.”60
The Chiang Min worship on a high place, with an altar of un-
hewn stones, a sacred tree behind the altar, and a white stone set
between them. God, whom they called Abba Malak, came to his
people through the sacred tree. They had remembered that Abba
meant father, but had lost the meaning of Malak, which is clearly
the Hebrew for angel. They had a sacred rod in the form of a snake
twisting round a pole, and they called their faith “the White
Religion.”61
   The religion of Abraham was long remembered as distinct
from that of the Jews, who also had teachings of Moses. The
Qur’an asked: “Do you claim that Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac,
Jacob and the tribes were all Jews or Christians?”62 This “reli-
gion of Abraham” must have been the older faith, before Josiah
and the Deuteronomists made Moses the more important fig-
ure. The earliest account of the life of Muhammad was written
by Ibn Ishaq in the middle of the eighth century a .d ., and so
only about one hundred years after the time of Muhammad.
Before the prophet appeared, he wrote, four good men set out to
seek the religion of their father Abraham, which they believed
their people had corrupted. They accepted neither Judaism nor
Christianity but sought the Hanifiya, who had kept the faith of
Abraham. One of them went as far as Syria, where a Christian
monk told him there was nobody left who kept the faith of
Abraham, but that a prophet would soon appear.
                              What Did King Josiah Reform? • 537


    On the southwest coast of India are the so-called black
Jews, a group that claims to have traveled to India after the
destruction of the temple.63 There seem to have been trading
links between Palestine and southern India in the time of the
first temple, and early Christian writings say that the apostles
Thomas and Bartholomew went to India as missionaries.64
Pantaenus, who became the head of the Christian academy in
Alexandria in the late second century a .d ., had in his younger
days traveled as a missionary to India. There he found that
Bartholomew had left them the Gospel of Matthew in Hebrew,
showing that Bartholomew had preached to a Jewish commu-
nity in India.65
    Perhaps the most compelling evidence for large numbers of
people leaving Jerusalem after Josiah’s purge is to be found in
the Jerusalem Talmud, which is a compendium of Jewish teach-
ing and traditions compiled around a .d . 400. It describes how
a large number of young priests sided with Nebuchadnezzar
against Jerusalem and then went to Arabia, where they were de-
nied hospitality by the sons of Ishmael. This is presented in the
Talmud66 as the fulfillment of the prophecy in Isaiah 21:13-15
that those who had been in the forest of Lebanon—that is, the
temple complex known as the house of the forest of Lebanon
(1 Kings 7:2)—had gone to what Isaiah called “the thickets of
Arabia.” Jeremiah records that King Zedekiah was more afraid
of the people who had deserted to the Babylonians than he was
of the Babylonians themselves (Jeremiah 38:19). The priests who
supported the Babylonians against Jerusalem must have been
those who could not accept what had been done to the temple by
Josiah. What they took with them to Arabia must have been the
faith of the first temple, the religion Josiah had sought to purge.
538 • Margaret Barker


    We can never know for certain what it was that Josiah
purged or why he did it. No original versions of the actual
texts or records survive from that period, but even the stories
as they have come down to us in various sources show that
this was a time of major upheaval that was not forgotten. A
thousand years after the events themselves, even mainstream
Jewish texts remembered that the temple had been drastically
changed, that large numbers of people had left the land, and
that the true temple would only be restored in the time of the
Messiah.


                              Notes
Margaret Barker presented this forum address at Brigham Young
University on 6 May 2003. We have added footnotes to some of the
sources where Margaret Barker discusses its issues in greater depth.
The English translations of the ancient texts in this presentation are
by the author.
   1. Chronicles reports the timing of the book’s discovery dif-
ferently, six years into the reform. See Margaret Barker, The Great
Angel: A Study of Israel’s Second God (London: SPCK, 1992), 12; also
Margaret Barker, The Older Testament: The Survival of Themes from
the Ancient Royal Cult in Sectarian Judaism and Early Christianity
(London: SPCK, 1987), 142-43.
   2. See Margaret Barker, The Great High Priest: The Temple Roots
of Christian Liturgy (London: Clark, 2003), 234-36.
   3. Barker, Great High Priest, 246-47.
   4. Mishnah 'Abodah Zarah 3.
   5. Barker, Great Angel, 12-14; Barker, Older Testament, 142-48.
   6. For the original Cairo Geniza text, see Magen Broshi, ed., The
Damascus Document Reconsidered (Jerusalem: The Israel Exploration
Society and The Shrine of the Book, 1992). For an English translation
                                  What Did King Josiah Reform? • 539


of the Cairo and Qumran texts, see Geza Vermes, The Complete Dead
Sea Scrolls in English (New York: Penguin, 1997), 125-56.
   7. Barker, Great High Priest, 79, 82.
   8. A convenient English translation of the Enoch texts can be
found in James Charlesworth, ed., The Old Testament Pseudepigra-
pha (New York: Doubleday, 1983), 1:5-315.
   9. See Barker, Older Testament, 8-80; and Margaret Barker, The
Lost Prophet: The Book of Enoch and Its Influence on Christianity
(London: SPCK, 1988).
  10.   1 Enoch 93; Barker, Older Testament, 59-61.
  11.   1 Enoch 90:29.
  12.   1 Enoch 98, 104.
  13.   1 Enoch 24-26.
  14.   2 Enoch 8.
  15. On the Origin of the World, Coptic Gnostic Library 11,5.110;
Barker, Great High Priest, 244.
  16. Daniel C. Peterson, “Nephi and His Asherah: A Note on
1 Nephi 11:8-23,” in Mormons, Scripture, and the Ancient World:
Studies in Honor of John L. Sorenson, ed. Davis Bitton (Provo, Utah:
FARMS, 1998), 212.
  17. Barker, Great High Priest, 244.
  18. Margaret Barker, Revelation of Jesus Christ: Which God Gave
to Him to Show to His Servants What Must Soon Take Place (Revela-
tion 1.1) (Edinburgh: Clark, 2000), 204-6.
  19. An English translation can be found in Judah J. Slotki, Midrash
Rabbah, ed. H. Freedman and Maurice Simon (London: Soncino,
1939), vols. 5 and 6.
  20. Numbers Rabbah 15:10.
  21. Horayot 12a, in Martin S. Jaffee, trans., The Talmud of Baby-
lonia: An American Translation XXVI. Tractate Horayot (Atlanta:
Scholars Press, 1987), 184-91.
  22. Barker, Great High Priest, 239-43.
  23. Ibid., 244.
540 • Margaret Barker


 24. For further discussion of these accounts, see Hugh Nibley, Abra-
ham in Egypt, 2nd ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and FARMS,
2000), 328-44, 372-75.
  25. Barnabas 7; 1 Clement 10 and 31.
 26. Barker, Older Testament, 257.
 27. A translation of 11Q13 can be found in Vermes, Complete
Dead Sea Scrolls, 500-502.
 28. Barker, Great High Priest, 37-39. Also, Barker, Revelation of
Jesus Christ, 4-7.
   29. Florentino Garcia Martinez, Eibert J. C. Tigchelaar, and Adam
S. Van der Woude, eds., Qumran Cave 11. II, 11Q2-18, 11Q20-31, vol.
23, Discoveries in the Judaean Desert (Oxford: Clarendon, 1998).
   30. Margaret Barker, On Earth as It Is in Heaven: Temple Symbol- ■
ism in the New Testament (Edinburgh: Clark, 1995), 4-5.
  31. Assumption of Moses 10.
  32. Barker, Great Angel, 13-15; Barker, Older Testament, 127.
  33. Barker, Great Angel, 13-15; Barker, Older Testament, 81-99,
147; see also Barker, Great High Priest, 229-61.
  34. Barker, Great High Priest, 149.
  35. Ibid., 135.
  36. A translation of Jubilees can be found in Charlesworth, Old
Testament Pseudepigrapha, 2:35-142.
  37. Jubilees 2:2.
 38. Barker, Great High Priest, 224-25.
 39. For details of the holy of holies, see Barker, Great High Priest,
146-87.
 40. Barker, Great Angel, 5-6.
  41. Ibid.
  42.   Ibid., 190-95.
  43.   Barker, Great High Priest, 108-9.
  44.   Numbers Rabbah 15:10.
  45.   Margaret Barker, Gate of Heaven: The History and Symbolism
of the Temple in Jerusalem (London: SPCK, 1991), 134-35; Barker,
Great Angel, 8-9; Barker, Revelation of Jesus Christ, 36-37.
                                What Did King Josiah Reform? • 541


  46. Barker, Great High Priest, 242.
  47. Barker, Older Testament, 12-15, 69; Barker, Lost Prophet,
105-6.
 48. 1 Enoch 89:1, 36.
  49. 2 Enoch 22:9-10.
  50. Barker, Great High Priest, 78.
  51. Ibid., 51-55.
  52. Ibid., 106.
  53. Ibid., 34-41.
 54. Margaret Barker, The Risen Lord: The Jesus of History as the
Christ of Faith (Edinburgh: Clark, 1996), 67.
  55. Ibid., 52.
  56. A translation of the History of the Rechabites can be found in
Charlesworth, Old Testament Pseudepigrapha, 2:443-61. For fur-
ther information, see Jeffrey Thompson and John W. Welch, “The
Rechabites: A Model Group in Lehi’s World,” in this volume, pages
611-24.
  57. See Bezalel Porten and Ada Yardeni, Textbook of Aramaic
Documents from Ancient Egypt (Jerusalem: Hebrew University, De-
partment of the History of the Jewish People, 1986).
  58. Frederick C. Gamst, The Qemant: A Pagan-Hebraic Peasantry
of Ethiopia (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1969).
  59. E. A. Wallis Budge, The Queen of Sheba and Her Only Son Men-
yelek: Being the History of the Departure of God and His Ark of the Cov-
enant from Jerusalem to Ethiopia ... (Kebra Nagast) (London: Medici
Society, 1922), 99-102. Also a full account is found in Graham Han-
cock, The Sign and the Seal: The Quest for the Lost Ark of the Covenant
(New York: Crown, 1992).
  60. Thomas F. Torrance, China's First Missionaries: Ancient “Israel-
ites,” 2nd ed. (Chicago: Shaw, 1988), vii.
  61. Ibid., 53,117, 121.
  62. Qur’an 2:140.
  63. Nathan Katz, Who Are the Jews of India? (Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 2000).
542 • Margaret Barker


  64. For example, see “Bartholomew, Saint,” and “Thomas, Saint,”
in Catholic Encyclopedia, 2:314 and 14:658.
  65. Eusebius, History of the Church 5.10.
  66. Jerusalem Talmud Tacanit 4.5g.
