 Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants:
     Remarkable Witnesses
        of Enoch’s Ministry

                      Jeffrey M. Bradshaw



T   he Latter-day Saint story of Enoch has been called the “most
    remarkable religious document published in the nineteenth
century.”1 This is true for at least three reasons.
   1. First, the account is highly original. For example, according
      to a preliminary linguistic analysis by Stanford Carmack,
      the language of the account is by and large “independent
      of Genesis language,”2 with an initial authorship diagnostic
      strongly indicating that the text is not “pseudobiblical or
      biblical or Joseph Smith’s own pattern.”3
   2. Second, it is audacious in its claims. The account was
      produced early in Joseph Smith’s ministry—in fact, in the
      same year as the publication of the Book of Mormon—as
      part of a divine commission to “retranslate” the Bible.4
      Like Doctrine and Covenants 76, it seems to contain many
      significant items that were removed “from the Bible, or lost
      before it was compiled.”5 Note that this statement allows for
      three options for the Enoch account in Moses 6–7: (1) it was
      removed from one of the books we now have in the Bible at
      some point in history; (2) it was written at some point but
      was later lost and was never connected with any of the books
      of the Bible; or (3) it was never written down until it was
      revealed to Joseph Smith.
   3. Third, it was produced at record speed. Judging by the
      rapidity by which similar passages were translated, the
      account of Enoch found today in Moses 6–7 would appear
      to have occupied only a few days of the Prophet’s attention.6
      In view of the sizable revelations received on Enoch and
1042       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

         other topics around that time, Kerry Muhlestein considers
         it “one of the greatest periods of revelation the Church has
         experienced, a true overflowing surge.”7


       How Have Different Scholars Approached the Task of
         Explaining the Book of Moses Enoch Account?
There are a variety of different explanations for how such a novel,
expansive, and coherent work purporting to be a true account of
ancient historical figures could have been produced by a relatively
unschooled translator in such a short amount of time. In the present
study, our primary interest is in comparing Moses 6–7 with the Book
of Giants (BG), an ancient source unknown in 1830, in support of
arguments that the Prophet translated through a process that was
dependent on divine revelation. Alternatively, some comparative
studies seek to identify instances when Joseph Smith might have
relied on texts known to him (whether from ancient or modern
sources) as aids in the translation of Latter-day Saint scripture.8
     Though it is not impossible that Joseph Smith drew inspiration
“out of the best books” (Doctrine and Covenants 88:118; 109:7,
14) in his Bible translation, I have outlined in detail elsewhere the
challenges that scholars face in their efforts to argue that nineteenth-
century influences, augmented by the imagination of Joseph Smith,
were primarily responsible for the Enoch narrative in the Book of
Moses.9 For example, the evidence that the narrative of Moses 6–7
is derived largely from the Bible10 or scholarly Bible commentaries11
is scant and unconvincing at present. Evidence that Sidney Rigdon
contributed significantly to Moses 7 is not persuasive and the first
half of the acccount, Moses 6, was translated before he came on
the scene.12
     Most significantly, it would have been impossible for Joseph
Smith in 1830 to have been aware of the most important resemblances
to ancient Enoch literature in his translation. Other than the limited
and typically loose parallels found in 1 Enoch (which was unlikely to
have been available to Joseph Smith), the texts that would have been
required for a modern author to derive significant parts of Moses
6–7 had neither been discovered by Western scholars nor translated
into English.13 Additionally, even if relevant Enoch traditions from
Masonry or the hermetic tradition had been available to Joseph
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants              1043

Smith by 1830, it stretches the imagination to assume that they would
have provided the Prophet with the suite of specific and sometimes
peculiar details that are shared by Moses 6–7 and pseudepigrapha
like 2 Enoch and 3 Enoch—and especially the Book of Giants.

    Toward a Principled Examination of Literary Affinities
                    in the Book of Moses
In evaluating the efforts to attribute the three large revelatory
chapters of the Book of Moses to extant textual sources, Colby
Townsend rightly concluded that “a systematic and detailed
analysis of other literary influences on Moses 1 or the major
additions in Moses 6–8 has not yet been completed.”14 While not
sharing Townsend’s optimism that the Book of Moses narratives
of the heavenly ascent of Moses (Moses 1) and of the ministry of
Enoch (Moses 6–7) can be explained primarily through direct
“literary influences” on Joseph Smith in the nineteenth century, I
think there is great potential in performing “a systematic and detailed
analysis” of literary affinities with ancient works the Prophet could
not have known. For instance, an initial approach undertaken in
this spirit that provides a favorable comparison of Moses 1 with
the Apocalypse of Abraham, a work of Jewish pseudepigrapha not
available to Joseph Smith, appears elsewhere in this conference
proceedings.15 In the present paper, I take an analogous approach
to the Enoch chapters in Moses 6–7—recognizing, of course, that
much additional work remains to be done.
     Naturally, our expectations with respect to finding ancient
threads in the Book of Moses must be qualified. Although Joseph
Smith’s revisions and additions to the Bible sometimes contain
stunning echoes of ancient sources, he understood that the primary
intent of modern revelation is to give divine guidance to readers
in our day, not to provide precise matches to texts from other
times. Thus, it is not my claim that every word of these modern
productions is necessarily rooted in ancient manuscripts. However,
to believers it would be no surprise if long, revealed passages such
as, most conspicuously, Moses 1, 6–7, were to provide evidence of
having been drawn in significant measure from a common well of
ancient textual or oral traditions.16
1044      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

           Rationale and Outline of the Present Study
The Book of Giants (BG), a fragmentary work discovered in
Qumran in 1948, is one example of several ancient texts about
Enoch unknown to Joseph Smith that exhibit remarkable affinities
to the Enoch figure depicted in Latter-day Saint scripture. In
section 1, I provide a brief overview of Hugh Nibley’s pioneering
work comparing BG to Moses 6–7. I will also summarize a few of
the subsequent discoveries by Latter-day Saint scholars who have
built on Nibley’s pioneering research. These new discoveries by
Latter-day Saint scholars were made possible by the increasing
interest of Enoch scholars worldwide who have recognized BG
as an important, and in many ways unique, window into ancient
Enoch traditions.
     Section 2 describes BG in more detail, showing why it has
proven to be such a significant text for Enoch scholars and probing
what has been called “conspicuous Mesopotamian influence” in
its origins. Section 3 will provide specific background about BG
that is necessary to understanding the rest of the study, dispelling
common misconceptions about BG as a whole.
     In the remaining sections, I will provide preliminary results
of a deeper analysis that goes beyond the long-standing discovery
of a pair of similar names in BG and the Book of Moses and the
tantalizing but minimally explored listings of textual resemblances
between the two texts that have been published previously. With
respect to the similar names, section 4 will show why the BG
names Enoch and Mahaway, cognates with the only two personal
names mentioned in Moses 6–7, stand out from the other names
mentioned in BG in ways that make them the foremost candidates
for historical plausibility in an ancient Enochic setting.
     From there, I will look at other similarities and differences
between the texts. In section 5, I will compare the storylines of
the Book of Moses Enoch account, BG, and other Enoch texts.
The primary finding is that the broad storylines of Moses 6–7 and
BG are remarkably similar. In addition, however, the editor(s) of
BG seem to have wanted to add dramatic color to its narrative by
inserting entertaining episodes about two giant “twins” into the
account. Supporting the argument that these literary incidents
are BG-specific additions is the fact that these characters and
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants             1045

their stories are not only missing from the Book of Moses but also
are found nowhere else in the ancient Enoch literature. Even more
significant and surprising than these additions is the discovery that
BG almost entirely leaves out the stories of sacred events that are
found in Moses 6–7, despite the fact that each of these sacred events
are touched on in one fashion of another in other ancient Enoch texts.
     Section 6, a detailed analysis of thematic resemblances of BG
to Moses 6–7, was inspired in part by an analogous study by the
well-known Enoch scholar Loren T. Stuckenbruck.17 This analysis
revealed that the eighteen thematic elements common to BG and
the Book of Moses provide support for plausible arguments for a
common well of ancient traditions that significantly influenced
both texts. These common thematic resemblances are not only
notable in their frequency and density but sometimes also in their
specificity. Of great significance is that the common elements in BG
and the Book of Moses nearly always are ordered in corresponding
sequence. In the conclusion of this chapter, I will argue that
the results of this study substantiate the claim that the specific
resemblances of BG to Moses 6–7—resemblances that are rare or
absent elsewhere in Jewish tradition—are more numerous and
significant than resemblances to any other single ancient Enoch
text—or, for that matter, to all extant ancient Enoch texts combined.

        1. Previous Discoveries and Subsequent Findings

Hugh Nibley’s pioneering work comparing BG to Moses 6–7
In 1976–77, Hugh Nibley dashed off one long, heavily footnoted
article after another each month for a series about ancient Enoch
manuscripts and Moses 6–7 that was running in the Church’s
Ensign magazine. As he was finishing the last article in the series,
he received—“just in time”18—an anxiously awaited volume
describing fragments of Aramaic books of Enoch that were found
among the Dead Sea Scrolls.19 Among other texts, the book, edited
by non–Latter-day Saint scholars J. T. Milik and Matthew Black,
contained the first English translation of BG.20 So impatient was
Nibley to study it that it it seems he may have borrowed a copy from
the University of Utah while he waited for his own copy to arrive .21
1046        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




 Figure 1. a. Title page of the last article in the Ensign’s “A Strange Thing in the
  Land” series;22 b. Title page of Milik and Black’s book that included the first
                    English translation of the Book of Giants.23
    As he worked quickly to meet his publication deadline, Nibley
found many significant resemblances between BG and the Book
of Moses. His best-known discovery is that of a remarkable match
between a name in the Book of Moses and in BG. In the Book of
Moses, the name appears as Mahijah or Mahujah and in English
translations of BG it is usually given as Mahaway or Mahawai. Nibley
found not only that the ancient form of these names were likely
to have matched well but also that the roles of the corresponding
characters were analogous.
    In 2020, Matthew L. Bowen, Ryan Dahle, and I extended Nibley’s
early analysis.24 Our study confirmed and added new details and
evidence to Nibley’s earlier findings while also addressing issues
raised by Colby Townsend.25 In brief, Townsend argued that the
names were not as similar as Nibley had originally concluded. He
reasoned that “Nibley relied too heavily on his English transcription
of both names—MHWY—and failed to recognize that the H [in
the Book of Moses version of the name and the H in the BG version
of the name represented] two distinct letters” in their presumed
Semitic originals.26 However, in our later study we adduced
relevant scholarship showing that despite a significant difference
in one consonant in seemingly related texts (“Ḥ” [Bible] vs. “H”
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                      1047




  Figure 2. The passage shown comes from Milik and Black’s translation of BG,
4Q530, fragment 2, column ii, lines 20–23. It tells of an incident when the wicked
   ʾOhyah, Hahyah, and their fellows send Mahawai to ask Enoch about their
 frightful dreams of pending destruction. This copy of the book is located in the
Hugh Nibley Ancient Studies Room of the BYU Harold B. Lee Library. Note that
      Nibley circled the Aramaic version of the name Mahawai in pencil.27
[BG]), there is currently no compelling reason why the BG name
Mahaway (MHWY) could not have been related at some earlier
point in its history both to the King James Bible name elements
in Genesis 4:18, Mehuja-/Mehija- (MḤWY-/MḤYY-), and also to
the only other names besides Enoch found in the Book of Moses:
Mahujah (the English H corresponds equally well to MHWY or
MḤWY) and Mahijah (MHYY or MḤYY).
Interest in Nibley’s discovery by non–Latter-day Saint scholars
Professor Matthew Black,28 a collaborator on Milik’s English
translation of BG, was also impressed with the similarity of the BG
and Book of Moses names. Like Nibley, he seems to have seen this
finding as evidence that Joseph Smith’s Enoch text was ancient—
even though he didn’t believe that Joseph Smith translated it
through a process that relied on divine revelation. Instead, upon
meeting Latter-day Saint graduate student Gordon C. Thomasson
(who was familiar with Nibley’s Enoch research), Black initially
suggested that a copy of a text that drew on the some of the same
Enoch traditions as BG must have made its way to Joseph Smith
sometime before the translation of the Book of Moses.29 Nibley said
that during Professor Black’s visit to Brigham Young University
(BYU) soon afterward, Black reiterated his view that Joseph Smith
must have relied on an ancient source in his translation.30
1048      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




           Figure 3. a. Matthew Black (1908–94), date unknown;31
                 b. Gordon C. Thomasson (1942–) in 1975.32

    More recently, Salvatore Cirillo, drawing on the similar
conclusions of Stuckenbruck, stated that he considered the
names of the gibborim, notably including Mahaway, as “the most
conspicuously independent content” in BG, being “unparalleled in
other Jewish literature.”33 Agreeing with the significance of Nibley’s
finding, Cirillo concluded that “the name Mahawai in BG and the
names Mahujah and Mahijah in the Book of Moses represent the
strongest similarity between the Latter-day Saint revelations on
Enoch and the pseudepigraphal books of Enoch (specifically BG).”34
However, in contrast to Matthew Black’s hypothesis that Joseph
Smith must have been given an ancient record from an esoteric
group in Europe, Cirillo did not make any attempt to explain how
a manuscript that was unknown to modern scholars until the mid-
twentieth century could have influenced the account of Enoch in
the Book of Moses, written in 1830.
    After Nibley’s initial look at BG and the Book of Moses, Nibley
moved on to other subjects. Though Nibley continued to refer to
his earlier Enoch findings in his later life, he did not engage to any
significant extent with the burgeoning literature on Enoch that was
published in the decades that followed.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                1049

Building on the foundation of Nibley’s research
Since Nibley’s passing, the growth of new scholarship on ancient
Enoch texts has continued unabated. Building on the important
context provided by Jared Ludlow’s survey of the full corpus of
ancient Enoch texts and their implications for the Book of Moses
Enoch chapters,35 the present chapter will focus specifically on BG.
In addition to presenting recent research that confirms and deepens
our understanding of passages originally discussed by Nibley, this
paper will summarize new discoveries and analyses that further
demonstrate the potential of BG as a fruitful source of study for
students of Latter-day Saint scripture. Elsewhere I have published
more extensive discussions of how ancient texts, including but
not limited to BG, seem to confirm and complement the both the
basic outline and specific details of the Enoch story in the Book of
Moses.36
    The present study, though still preliminary in some ways, aims
to provide the most complete and in-depth comparative analysis
of the Book of Moses to a single ancient Enoch text that has been
undertaken to date:
    •   While Hugh Nibley’s pioneering research compared the
        names and roles of one character in Moses 6–7 and BG, the
        present study examines the names and roles of nearly all of
        the prominent figures in the two books.
    •   Whereas previous studies have touched on a few parallels in
        the overall storyline in the Book of Moses Enoch account
        that are found elsewhere in the ancient Enoch literature,
        the hope here is to reach a better understanding of the
        similarities and differences in the story elements across the
        entire storyline. Of particular interest are new arguments
        in support of the idea that Mahijah/Mahujah in the Book
        of Moses, like Mahaway in BG, encountered Enoch on two
        separate occasions.
    •   At a more detailed level, while earlier work has identified
        instances of close thematic resemblances or, in some cases,
        almost identical occurrences of rare terms and phrases, the
        aim here is not merely to identify such instances but also to
        explore in further detail each currently proposed candidate.
1050      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

    •   Finally, for each thematic resemblance, this study will
        attempt to determine whether: 1. the theme is widespread in
        Second Temple Jewish traditions and the Bible; 2. generally
        confined to the ancient Enoch literature, or 3. specific to
        Moses 6–7 and BG. This result will tell us something about
        the evidential strength of resemblances by characterizing
        the degree to which the themes are widespread or rare
        outside the ancient Enoch literature.

One of the most significant examples of new discoveries relating
to the Book of Moses Enoch story is the collection of BG elements
that relate to the report in Moses 6–7 that Zion, the righteous
city of Enoch, was “received . . . up into [God’s] own bosom”
(Moses 7:69). Though scholars have been aware for some time of
suggestions in a Mandaean Enoch fragment37 and in late midrash38
that a group of Enoch’s followers were taken up to heaven with him,
until recently no ancient evidence had surfaced for the idea that
Enoch’s followers had been led to establish a place of gathering—
an earthly Zion—beforehand. Recently, however, it was noticed
that a fragment of a Manichaean version of BG describes how the
righteous who had been converted by Enoch’s preaching were
separated from the wicked and gathered to divinely prepared cities
in westward lying mountains.39 This event recalls the statement of
Moses 7:17 about the gathering of Enoch’s Zion, when his people
“were blessed upon the mountains, and upon the high places, and
did flourish.” Moreover, elements of the Manichaean Cosmology
Painting (MCP), a visual representation that Enoch scholars have
concluded contains depictions relevant to many events of BG,
suggest that the inhabitants of those cities were ultimately taken up
to dwell in in the presence of Deity.40 This motif recalls the Book
of Moses statement that the inhabitants of Zion were “received . . .
up into [God’s] own bosom” (Moses 7:69). Further discussion of
this and other ancient affinities between BG and Moses 6–7 will be
discussed later, in sections 3–6 of this chapter.
    Before entering into further discussion of resemblances of BG
to Moses 6–7, additional discussion on the background on BG will
be provided below.
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                       1051




 Figure 4. a. Photograph of a fragment of a Qumran BG manuscript in Aramaic
showing detail of 4Q530 (4QGiantsb ar), fragment 7b, column ii.41 As an example
    of the difficulty in transcribing the fragments, the end of line 7 is outlined,
  showing where Milik and Black’s original transliteration LM ḤWY resulted in
 their failure to recognize the name Mahaway in their English translation of the
   phrase.42 By way of contrast, Émile Puech’s newer transliteration, LMHWY,
     allowed Cook to translate the Aramaic characters as “to Mahaway”;43 b.
   Photograph of a Manichaean BG text fragment in Sogdian, showing detail of
So20220/II/R/ and So20220/I/V/ [K20].44 Fragments of the Manichaean BG have
                          survived in six different languages.


                 2. Introduction to the Book of Giants
What is the Book of Giants?
The Book of Giants (BG) is a collection of fragments from an Enochic
book discovered among the Dead Sea Scrolls (DSS) at Qumran in
1948, supplemented by “extant fragments of the Manichaean Book
of Giants published by W. B. Henning45 (and [later] by Werner
Sundermann [and others]46) and in a Jewish writing designated the
Midrash of Shemḥazai and ‘Aza‘el.”47 Significantly, it is not found as
one of the books within the better-known Ethiopic compilation of 1
Enoch48 and, as a whole, resembles little else in the Enoch tradition.
Before the discovery of the more extensive set of fragments of BG
at Qumran, scholars had been made aware of its existence through
related material in Talmudic and medieval Jewish literature, in
1052        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

descriptions of the Manichaean canon,49 in citations by hostile
heresiologists, and in a small but significant collection of third- and
fourth-century Manichaean fragments. For a variety of reasons, BG
has proven to be of tremendous importance to Enoch scholarship.

Should BG be considered part of a “rewritten Bible”?
In brief, the answer is no. The consensus of modern Enoch scholars
is that it is overly simplistic to conclude that texts such as BG were
merely sectarian rewrites of Bible stories.
     For one thing, it should be remembered that, as André Lemaire
observes, “accepted texts” such as the books of the Bible as we
think of them today simply did not exist at the time the Dead Sea
Scrolls were copied.50 For this and other reasons, current biblical
scholarship is increasingly giving way to methods that require,
as John Reeves and Annette Yoshiko Reed describe, “a shift away
from the older scholarly obsession with ‘origins’ whereby the study
of scriptures often focused on the recovery of hypothetical sources
behind them.”51 Instead, those who copied the Dead Sea Scrolls drew
on “a rich reservoir or revered tales, ancestral folklore, and tribal
traditions about the pre-Deluge era” that was much more extensive
and ancient than the later edited, abridged, and harmonized books
available in the Bible and collections of pseudepigrapha that have
survived to the present day.52 An adequate study of relationships
among these texts should be focused more on “interdiscursivity”53
rather than mere “intertextuality” (in the more simplistic sense
that the latter term is sometimes used today).
     Trying to make sense of the connections between the Aramaic
BG, the Manichaean BG, and certain passages in medieval Jewish
midrash, John C. Reeves argues that it is54
       plausible to assume that these stories are . . . textual expressions
       of an early exegetical tradition circulating in learned groups
       during the Second Temple era. One version appeared in
       Aramaic at Qumran and was presumably the version later
       studied and adapted by Mani. Another version of the same
       tradition recurs in Hebrew in the Middle Ages. Still other
       versions (if not one of the two aforementioned ones) apparently
       influenced Islamic exegetes of the Qur’anic passage regarding
       the sins of Harut and Marut.55
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants           1053

Can BG be explained as a kind of “rewritten 1 Enoch”?
The skepticism of scholars such as Reeves, Reed, and Lemaire about
characterizing works such as BG as part of a “rewritten Bible”
further extends to doubts about the idea of BG being a “rewritten
1 Enoch,” in addition to the considerations raised above, it should
be remembered that BG was “very popular at Qumran,” seemingly
more popular than 1 Enoch itself.56 Besides being the most popular
Enoch book at Qumran, BG is arguably also the oldest extant
Enoch manuscript found anywhere.57 Thus, according to Enoch
scholar George Nickelsburg, BG helps us to “reconstruct the
literary shapes of the early stages of the Enochic tradition.”58 For
these and additional reasons, BG is a document that should “be
taken seriously in its own right,”59 rather than seen merely as an
intriguingly anomalous yet on-the-whole insignificant afterclap of
1 Enoch.
     In summary, caution should also be exercised in assuming any
direct dependence at all of BG on 1 Enoch. Indeed, André Lemaire
concludes that it is a bad idea to begin with to try and assimilate
BG to 1 Enoch because “these two literary traditions are different
and have had a different literary posterity.”60 The fact that BG
(discovered in 1948 and the source of many of the most significant
resemblances to Moses 6–7) owes relatively little to the Bible and
1 Enoch (the sources most often cited by those who think Joseph
Smith was inspired by sources and ideas available to him in the
nineteenth century) also lends support to the argument that the
Enoch account in the Book of Moses is not simply a rewritten or
expanded version of the Bible or 1 Enoch.

BG’s reliance on independent Mesopotamian traditions
Having concluded that BG is not primarily dependent on the Bible
and 1 Enoch, some scholars have argued that Daniel, 1 Enoch,
and BG independently draw on some “common tradition(s)” that
are older than any of the three texts.61 In at least some cases, BG
seems to have preserved such traditions “in an earlier form”62 than
the other two. Intriguingly, Joseph Angel has concluded from his
review of the evidence that BG “preserves only the remains of a
complex allegory, whose original referents cannot be recovered.”63
1054      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

     Both the antiquity and unique nature of certain elements of BG
traditions can be better understood by looking “for the original of
BG in an eastern diaspora”64—that is, ancient Mesopotamia. This
conclusion is reinforced by more general observations of Dead
Sea Scrolls scholars such as Ida Frölich that, “like the majority of
Aramaic texts found in Qumran, the Enochic collection indicates
a conspicuous Mesopotamian influence.”65 Seth L. Sanders has
written at length about how physical transmission of ideas from
scribal cultures from Babylon to Judea took place historically, with
the common use of Aramaic as the key modality of exchange.66
     More specifically, the Mesopotamian names in BG, not found
elsewhere in the pre-Christian Enoch traditions, include Gilgamesh,
the hero of the ancient epic by that name. The Gilgamesh epic is
reputed by some to be the second oldest religious text currently
known, rooted in Sumerian precursors that are dated to about
2100 BCE.67 Going beyond previous analyses, Matthew Goff has
provided a reconstruction of the plot of BG, arguing that the text
“creatively appropriates” not only names but also narrative “motifs”
from the Gilgamesh epic.68 That the scribes were very capable of
such appropriation is consistent with arguments that they belonged
to a sophisticated class of individuals. For example, Daniel A.
Machiela has concluded that the Aramaic texts at Qumran
“represent the literary achievement of a highly learned, well-trained
Jewish scribal group (loosely conceived), which wrote in an adept,
literary Aramaic marked by a few notable dialectical features.”69 Of
interest is the fact that in these Aramaic texts the God of Israel “is
always called by more generic titles like God, Most High, or Lord
of Eternity, and is never referred to by the Tetragrammaton.”70 “As
opposed to the sectarian Hebrew texts at Qumran, the Aramaic
cluster was intended for a wide Israelite audience, in diverse
geographic locations.”71
     In short, the seeming origins for some of the Enoch traditions
in BG in ancient Mesopotamia, the antiquity and popularity of BG
at Qumran, and its divergences from 1 Enoch—the only substantive
ancient Enoch text published in English by 1830—make it a
comparative text of singular importance for those interested in the
possibility of ancient threads in the Enoch chapters of the Book
of Moses.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants             1055

   Now, some additional context about BG that will be helpful in
appreciating the detailed comparative analysis that will follow.

                3. Some Things to Know about BG

There are no “giants” in the Book of Giants
A first thing to know is that there are no “giants” in the Book of
Giants. The word translated as “giants” is gibborim, better translated
as “mighty heroes” or “warriors.”72 As Frölich makes clear, “there
is no sign that these beings had a mixed—human and animal—
nature. The name gibborim [often mistakenly translated as “giants”
in modern translations] refers to their state (armed, mighty men),
not their stature which is described as gigantic in a single passage
[in the ancient Enoch literature].73 The term . . . does not involve
the idea of a superhuman or gigantic stature. It was the Greek
translation that introduced a term (gigantes)74 involving the notion
of superhuman stature.”75
    This is important to understand because BG, like the Book of
Moses, is mainly concerned with Enoch’s dealings with wicked
people, the all-too-human gibborim. Both BG and the Book of
Moses differ in this respect from 1 Enoch’s Book of the Watchers,
which relates Enoch’s dealings with wicked superhumans, fallen
angels with a fantastical physical form.
    At some point, the terms gibborim and nephilim (the latter term
originally used to refer to what seems to have been a remnant of
a race of “giants”) were also equated in some contexts, leading to
further confusion.76 Consistent with this distinction between two
different groups, the Book of Moses Enoch account specifically
differentiates “giants” (nephilim?) from Enoch’s principal
adversaries (gibborim?).77 However, unlike BG (which sees the
gibborim as the offspring of fallen angels called the Watchers78), the
Book of Moses (like the writings of some prominent early Christian
exegetes79) depicts Enoch’s adversaries as mere mortals. And rather
than interpreting the “sons of God” mentioned in Genesis 6:4
as inhabitants of the divine realm, as is commonly done in the
pseudepigraphic literature, the Book of Moses portrays them as the
covenant posterity of Adam who have had that title bestowed on
them by virtue of having received the fulness of the priesthood.80
1056        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




 Figure 5. Fragmentary lion-hunting scene from Uruk, ca. 3200 BCE, on display
at the Iraq Museum in Baghdad, Iraq. The scene shows “a bearded figure wearing
 a diadem that appears twice; one at the top killing a lion with a spear and once
                  below killing lions with bow and arrow.”81
Stories of gibborim were critiques of Mesopotamian culture
A second thing to know is that BG contains a critique of
Mesopotamian civilization, a parody of the near neighbors of the
Israelites in the east. While Mesopotamian legends relate stories
that tell of the mighty deeds of their great sages and cultural heroes,
BG describes the gibborim as arrogant warriors obsessed with
their hunting prowess and with human bloodshed.82 According
to Ronald Hendel, the primeval history in Genesis propounds a
negative view of “the human propensity toward evil and violence,”
specifically conveying “a cultural critique of Mesopotamia, whose
kings were the dominant powers over Israel and Judah at the time
of the crystallization of the traditions and texts in Genesis 1–11”:
       According to the Hebrew Bible, history comes out of
       Mesopotamia, but it was a dubious and shameful history. . . .
       The ancient past in these stories offers implicit commentary on
       Mesopotamian civilization and empire in the present, colored
       by transgression, hubris, and a desire to rebel.83
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants               1057

If we examine what seem to be Jewish caricatures and parodies as
critiques of Mesopotamian culture in BG within a broader context
than those specifically provided by the Gilgamesh epic, possibilities
for a bigger picture begin to come into better focus.84 For example,
previous in-depth studies of recurring appearances and echoes of
various peoples that were called gibborim in the biblical era allow
us to understand the general social and geographic settings of
Enoch’s prediluvial mission in BG and the Book of Moses in more
specificity.85 For the present, abbreviated discussion and analysis of
the Hebrew word gibbor itself provides a starting point to prime our
intuitions. “Etymologically, with its doubled middle consonant,”
writes Gregory Mobley, “gibbor is an intensive form of geber, ‘man.’
In this regard, as masculinity squared, gibbor roughly compares to
the English compound ‘he-man.’”86 And in what manly qualities
was a gibbor expected to excel? Brian R. Doak summarizes a
relevant aspect of his sociolinguistic analysis of the culture of the
gibborim in biblical times as follows:
     As human-like embodiments of that which is wild and
     untamed, the biblical [gibbor] takes on the role of “wild man,”
     “freak,” and “elite adversary” for heroic displays of fighting
     prowess.87

The biblical reference to Nimrod as the first gibbor88 immediately
brings to mind the earlier evocation of the “gibborim of old” in
Genesis 6:4, and it is noteworthy that the Bible provides here a
prototype of all gibborim in the figure of Nimrod. Though the text
does not make it obvious that Nimrod is a “giant,” some lines of
interpretation suggest that Nimrod was thought to be something
greater than an ordinary human.89 In his biblical role, Nimrod is
presented to us as a proud archetype of Mesopotamian civilization
that is later described and satirized in capsule fashion within
the Genesis 11 story of the Tower of Babel.90 From a geographic
perspective, it does not seem to be a coincidence that the “land of
righteousness” (Moses 6:41) of Adam, Seth, and Enoch is meant
to be situated in the west, while both the land of Nimrod (which
roughly equates to the land of Shinar, where the Tower of Babel
was built) and the land of the wicked gibborim are said to be located
1058        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

eastward.91 This picture is consistent with the symbolic geography
of BG and Moses 6–7 that is discussed later in the chapter.
    The echoes of Nimrod’s hubris in Jewish traditions about the
gibborim extend to the gibborim’s similar refusal to accept God as
their master. Nimrod, like the opponents of Enoch and Noah, is
presented as the spiritual progenitor of those who sought to make
a name for themselves92 by building the Tower of Babel. In the
gibborim culture portrayed in Genesis, as in the culture of “heroes”
throughout much of secular history,
       flesh is elevated above spirit, and the “name” of humanity is
       elevated above the “name” of God. In contrast to these heroes
       [stand Noah and Enoch], who [are] unique because [they have]
       found favor in the eyes of God.93 [They do] not achieve a “name”
       through strength and power, but through [their] relationship
       with God.94

While these broad, tentative conclusions about the possible
shared Mesopotamian background, geography, and attitudes
about the gibborim culture of BG, Genesis 6 and 11, and Moses
6–7 are necessarily conjectural, we will soon see that they are not
inconsistent with the descriptions of the cast of selected characters
in BG and the Book of Moses that we will now describe in more
detail below.

         4. Comparison of Selected Names and Characters
                  in BG and the Book of Moses
One of the unique features of BG is that, “in contrast to other known
contemporary Jewish apocalyptic literature, [it] actually provides
names for some of the [gibborim].”95 Table 1 presents some of the
most prominent members of the cast of characters in BG, grouped
into rough categories that highlight their co-occurrences in other
ancient pre-Christian texts/traditions and in the Book of Moses.
Grouping the names in this fashion helps us gain insight into the
rationale for why they may have been included in BG. In brief, I will
argue that the redactor(s) of BG employed a strategy resembling
the Victorian bridal custom of “something old, something new,
something borrowed, something blue”96 as they selected or invented
named characters to enrich the version of the story they inherited.
             Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                  1059

The result is a broad panoply of names—some more and some less
historically plausible—that served to advance their literary aims.
By process of elimination, a closer examination of these names
will throw light on the question of which of them provide the most
promising evidence of historically plausible elements within BG
and Moses 6–7. I discuss these names and characters by category
below. A more extensive discussion of a few of the prominent names
in BG and the Book of Moses has been published elsewhere.97

Table 1. Prominent names in Book of Giants and co-occurrences in other texts

 Name                1 Enoch    Mesopotamian        Genesis        Moses 6–7

 ’Ohyah

 Hahyah

 Shemiḥazah          X

 Baraq’el            X

 Gilgamesh                      X

 Ḥobabish                       Ḥumbaba98

 Enoch               X          Enmeduranki?        X              X

 Mahaway                                                           Mahijah/
                                maḫḫû?              Mehujael?
                                                                   Mahujah?


’Ohyah and Hahyah
Meaning of the names. Enoch scholars have suggested that ʾOhyah
(ʾWHYH) and Hahyah (HHYH) were intended as plays on the
Hebrew verb “to be” (HYH) or, perhaps, on the Tetragrammaton,
the Hebrew name of the Lord (YHWH).99 The specific proposal
that the names ʾOhyah and Hahyah were inserted in BG as
wordplay is consistent with a long history of analogous patterns
across many different cultures and traditions.100 In these traditions,
the two names relevant to the ones used in BG have always been
presented as a pair101—indeed, very often as a pair of twins with
rhyming names. When described as a single unit, as they so often
are, they are variously labeled as “demonic twins,” “angels twain,”
“two youths,” and so forth.102
1060        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




     Figure 6. Painting of the Uygur Manichaean-Buddhist mural of the three-
trunked “Jewel Tree” from Bezeklik Thousand Buddha Caves, Cave no. 25 (no. 38
  in the modern Chinese numbering system), Flaming Mountains, China, ninth–
    tenth century.103 For many years, scholars mistakenly interpreted the tree as
portraying an element of the dream of the gibborim in the Book of Giants, where
 the flourishing tree with three trunks was seen as representing the idea that only
                 Noah and his three sons would escape the Flood.104

     Roles of the characters in BG. In BG, we are given a more
complete portrait of ʾOhyah and Hahyah than for most of the other
named characters in the text. Besides the probable origin of their
names, their similar roles are distinctive within the account. For
example, ʾOhyah and Hahyah are depicted as deceitful,105 ineffectual
quarrelers,106 dreamers,107 and worriers108—doppelgängers afflicted
with nagging doppelträumes. Despite being a member of the group
that commissioned Mahaway to inquire of Enoch, ʾOhyah rejects
the answer Mahaway brings back out of hand.109 In their appointed
role, ʾOhyah and Hahyah seem almost to be sketched with the pen
of a skilled caricaturist who has introduced a measure of comic
relief that both pervades the larger narrative and persists in the
very details of their Tweedledum- and Tweedledee-like names.
Like Hergé’s Dupond and Dupont, part of the silliness of the two
brothers is in the paradoxical fact that their “most singular quality
is what is common to them,”110 a feature that is most obvious in the
tellings of their two complementary dreams.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants              1061

     Co-occurrences in other texts. In contrast to other BG characters,
no mention is made of ʾOhyah and Hahyah in other ancient
literature of the pre-Christian era, suggesting the likelihood that
they are ad hoc inventions of the BG author(s). Moreover, while
story characters equivalent to ʾOhyah and Hahyah appear in
derivative medieval Jewish111 and Islamic112 accounts of the two
dreamers, characters with names relating to Mahaway, Gilgamesh,
or Ḥumbaba go conspicuously unmentioned in these late accounts.
This fact highlights the virtual inseparability of ʾOhyah and
Hahyah, as well as their literary independence from Mahaway,
Gilgamesh, and Ḥumbaba.
     Summary conjecture. These two late-appearing names do not
appear to stem from ancient Enoch traditions, but rather seem to
have been invented and inserted in the story for literary purposes.

Shemiḥazah and Baraq’el
Meaning of the names. Michael Langlois suggests that Shemiḥazah’s
name was associated with a name of God (perhaps adding support
for Stuckenbruck’s proposal of a theophoric -yāh termination in
the names of Shemiḥazah’s sons ʾOhyah and Hahyah113). Langlois
interprets the name as “Shem sees” (i.e., “the Name sees),”114 in
which “the Name” refers to God. According to George Nickelsburg,
the name “may be an ironic anticipation of the motif of God’s seeing
the sins committed on earth. . . . In the very name that the angelic
chieftain bears is the recognition that his sin will be found out.”115
Thus Shemiḥazah’s name, like that of his two sons, appears to be an
object of wordplay.116
    Baraq’el means “lightning of God,”117 referring to his role in 1
Enoch in teaching the mysteries of the signs of lightning flashes.118
    Roles of the characters in BG. Both characters play minor
roles in extant fragments of BG, and very little is said about them.
Shemiḥazah is portrayed as a leader of Enoch’s adversaries: Enoch’s
missive to the gibborim is addressed specifically to “Shemiḥazah
and all [his] co[mpanions].”119 As mentioned above, he is the father
of ʾOhyah and Hahyah.120 Baraq’el, on the other hand, is described
as the father of Mahaway.121
    Co-occurrences in other texts. In contrast to the small role given
them in BG, these two characters are well represented in 1 Enoch.
1062      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




 Figure 7. Daniel Chester (1850–1931): The Sons of God Saw the Daughters of
                    Men That They Were Fair, ca. 1923.122
There Baraq’el is said to be one of the twenty fallen Watchers, who
are there listed by name.123 Specifically, Baraq’el is said to be the
ninth chief,124 serving under the leader of the fallen Watchers,
Shemiḥazah. Shemiḥazah and Baraq’el are said to have descended
on Mount Hermon, where they “swore together and bound one
another with a curse”125 after they determined that they would
“choose . . . wives from the daughters of men.”126 Elsewhere in
1 Enoch, we learn the secrets that each of the heads of the Watchers
revealed to humankind,127 and we read of their responsibilities in
the governing of the seven heavens.128
    Summary conjecture. In contrast to the singular appearance
of ʾOhyah and Hahyah, Shemiḥazah and Baraq’el are prominent
in other early Enoch literature. Though these and other fallen
Watchers play a relatively minor role in BG, their presence seems
to give a tip of the hat to older, common Enoch traditions that
seem to lie behind both BG and 1 Enoch. They seem best conceived
as representative literary types rather than unique historical
characters.

Gilgamesh and Ḥobabish
Meaning of the names. Gilgamesh was the name of a legendary king
of Uruk in the land of Sumer. He “appears in the list of Sumerian
kings” and would have “flourished about 2750 BC.”129 The Epic
of Gilgamesh has been aptly characterized as “fictional royal
biography.”130 In the epic, Gilgamesh is described a gigantic figure
who is two-thirds divine and one-third human.131
           Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                      1063




  Figure 8. a. Indus Valley civilization “Gilgamesh” seal showing a “Master of
  Animals” motif—a figure between two tigers (2500–1500 BCE);132 b. Head of
                     Ḥumbaba, second millennium BCE.133
     Scholars have concluded that the name Ḥobabish is not of
Hebrew origin. Rather, its first two syllables (Ḥobab) are related to
the name of a second character from the Gilgamesh epic, Ḥumbaba.
In the epic, Ḥumbaba is a gigantic monster with the face of a lion, a
foe of humankind who guards the Cedar Forest. Wordplay on the
name of Ḥobabish in BG suggests that he roared or howled with a
“sound that is fitting for an animal.”134
     Roles of the characters in BG. Scholarly consensus about a
difficult passage in BG suggests that it is Gilgamesh who complains
about his ignominious defeat at the hands of “all flesh,”135 which
suggests (for readers of the Book of Moses, at least) the victory of
Enoch and his people against their adversaries.136 Gilgamesh also
responds to ʾOhyah’s mention of the latter’s frightening dream.137
Later ʾOhyah mentions Gilgamesh when he recounts to others what
the latter had said.138
     Only one or possibly two fragments of BG refer to Ḥobabish.
In the first, the context suggests a negative reaction from Ḥobabish
when he hears what ʾOhyah said about his conversation with
Gilgamesh.139 If the second mention of Ḥobabish is properly
restored from the fragment in which it seems to appear, it seems he
was also involved in a plan to murder some of his fellows.140
     Co-occurrences in other texts. As mentioned above, both figures
are prominent in the Epic of Gilgamesh. Significantly, BG is the
only early Enoch text to refer to them. Although both names have
Mesopotamian roots and narrative motifs from the famous story
1064       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

are apparent in BG, 141 “it is less evident whether on this basis one
can maintain that the Book of Giants is familiar with the Gilgamesh
Epic itself.”142
    Summary conjecture. Stuckenbruck, following Reeves, suggests
that “the author(s) of the Book of Giants have . . . integrated the
names of such ‘pagan actors’ from the Epic [of Gilgamesh] into the
storyline in order to communicate ‘a bold polemical thrust against
the revered traditions of a rival culture.’”143 Matthew Goff differs
from Stuckenbruck and Reeves, arguing that “the core goal of
the composition is to portray the ante-diluvian giants as evil and
recount their exploits and punishment, not to polemicize against
the Gilgamesh epic, or [anyone or anything else]. The text creatively
appropriates motifs from the epic and makes Gilgamesh a character
in his own right.”144 In either case, the inclusion of the names
Gilgamesh and Ḥobabish would seem to advance the redactor(s)’
interests by reinforcing the reader’s association of the tale with the
perceived hubris of the Mesopotamian hero culture.

Enoch and Mahaway
Meaning of the names. Our discussion of Enoch (Enmeduranki?)
and Mahaway (maḫḫû? Mehujael? Mahijah?) will necessarily
be more extensive than that of the previous sets of names. For
an in-depth discussion of the BG name Mahaway and possible
relationships to Mehujael in Genesis 6:4 and Mahijah/Mahujah in
the Book of Moses, the reader is referred to a previously published
article by the author, Matthew L. Bowen, and Ryan Dahle.145 If,
as argued eloquently by David Calabro, the names Mahijah and
Mahujah were translated from a Greek source text for the Book of
Moses written by early Christians, they “could have been rendered
from their original Semitic forms, . . . just as the translators of the
King James Bible used the forms “Abraham” and “Bethlehem”
in the New Testament instead of the Greek forms “Abraam” and
“Bethleem.”146
    Elsewhere Bowen has written about the meaning of the name
Enoch:
       Significantly, Enoch (Henoch or Hanoch, Heb. ḥănôk) sounds
       identical to the Hebrew passive participle of the verbal root
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                   1065




             Figure 9. Enoch ascends to heaven. British Library,
                      MS Cotton Claudius B fol. 11v.147

     ḥnk, “train up” [or] “dedicate.”148 Thus, for a Hebrew speaker, the
     name ḥănôk/Enoch would evoke “trained up” or “initiated”—
     bringing to mind not only the general role of a teacher, but
     also the idea of someone who was familiar with the temple
     and could train and initiate others as a hierophant. Before it
     became the name of the post-Mosaic Feast of Dedication, the
     Hebrew noun ḥănukkâ had reference to the “consecration” or
     “dedication” of the temple altar (Numbers 7:10–11, 84, 88),
     including the sacred dedication of the altar for Solomon’s
     temple.149 Strengthening the connection of Enoch’s name to the
     temple, we note that in Egyptian, the ḥnk verbal root denotes to
     “present s[ome]one” with something, to “offer s[ome]thing” or,
     without a direct object, to “make an offering.”150 The Egyptian
     nouns ḥnk and ḥnkt denote “offerings.”151 In other words, it is a
     cultic term with reference to cultic offerings.152

It should also be mentioned that an Enoch-like figure is described
in a tablet found at Nineveh, which can be dated before 1100 BCE.153
It tells of how Enmeduranki of Sippar, the seventh king of Sumer
(before ca. 2900 BCE) was received by the gods Šamaš and Adad.
According to Andrei Orlov, Enoch
1066        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

       is depicted in several roles that reveal striking similarities
       to Enmeduranki. Just like his Mesopotamian counterpart,
       the patriarch is skilled in the art of divination, being able to
       receive and interpret mantic dreams. He is depicted as an
       elevated figure who is initiated into the heavenly secrets by
       celestial beings, including the angels and God himself.154 He
       then brings this celestial knowledge back to earth and, similar
       to the king Enmeduranki, shares it with the people and with
       his son.155

The conjecture of a linkage between Enoch and traditions about
Enmeduranki suggests the possibility of considerably more ancient
roots for Enoch accounts than currently found in Jewish texts or
hinted at in in the Gilgamesh epic.
     In summary, whatever else one believes, it seems certain that
Enoch was not invented out of whole cloth at Qumran.
     With respect to the name Mahaway, I begin by observing that
the vowels in the English transliteration of the Book of Giants
name MHWY are largely a matter of conjecture at present, since
no vowels appear in the Aramaic text. Compounding the difficulty
for nonspecialists in recognizing similarities and differences in the
spellings of ancient names is the fact that translators differ in their
English transliteration. For example, the English letters j, y, and i are
variously used to represent the Semitic letter yod. Thus, in English
translations of the Book of Giants, we see several variants of the
same name: Mahaway156 (the most commonly used), Mahawai,157
Mahway,158 and Mahuy159—or Mahuj, with the y transliterated with
a j, as is frequently done with other names containing a yod in the
King James Bible.
     In discussing Mahaway, we should also consider the seemingly
related names Mahijah/Mahujah from the Book of Moses and
Mehujael in Genesis 6:4. Regarding Mahijah and Mahujah, we have
English versions of the names containing vowels, but it is impossible
to tell from the English text alone whether the second consonant in
the names would have been written anciently as the equivalent of
an H (as in the Book of Giants) or an Ḥ (as in Genesis 4:18). In other
words, if we assume an ancient equivalent of the English name
Mahijah, it could have been written either as MHYY or MḤYY.
Likewise, Mahujah could have been written as MHWY or MḤWY.
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                     1067




Figure 10. Fragment of the Qumran Book of Giants (4Q203) that was understood
   by Milik and Black to contain the first part of the personal name Mahaway
  (outlined by a rectangle in the upper left of the photograph).160 BYU professor
    Hugh Nibley was the first to argue that Mahaway (MHWY) is related to
  Mahijah (MHYY or MḤYY)161 and Mahujah (MHWY or MḤWY)162 in the
                                 Book of Moses.163
    With respect to the similar name Mehujael, twice mentioned in
Genesis 4:18, the Hebrew text spells the archaic name differently in
each instance. In other words, though the name is spelled the same
way both times in English (Mehujael), in Hebrew it is spelled once
as Mehujael (MḤWY-EL) and once as Mehijael (MḤYY-EL).164
Notably, on one hand, the Book of Moses names resemble the two
Hebrew versions of the name in Genesis 4:18 in that both a “u” and
an “i” variant of the name exist. However, on the other hand, the
Book of Moses names are both similar to the Book of Giants name
in that they omit the “-EL” ending found in Genesis 4:18.
    With regard to the meaning of Mahaway, Stuckenbruck has
simply repeated the previous suggestion of Milik and Nickelsburg
about ʾOhyah and Hahyah with a slight variation, concluding
that, in the case of Mahaway (MHWY), “perhaps some derivation
from the Aramaic verb ‘to be’ (HWY) in conjunction with a mem
prefix is not impossible.”165 The laconic nature of his conclusion,
including both a “perhaps” and a “not impossible,” is noteworthy.
Differing from his predecessors, Stuckenbruck cited the possibility
of wordplay on the Tetragrammaton only in connection with
1068      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

ʾOhyah and Hahyah, not Mahujah.166 The lack of evidence for
wordplay leaves the reader bereft of a rationale for why the author
of the Book of Giants would have invented the name Mahaway
from scratch rather than adopting an already-known name from
earlier traditions, as he did in the case of other characters such
as Gilgamesh.
     Why else might Stuckenbruck have been reluctant to commit
himself to a derivation? Overwhelmingly, names in the ancient
Near East and in ancient Israel follow rules of name formation.
Though it is true that the name MHWY might putatively match a
participial Aphel form of the Aramaic HWY (meaning “to create
or cause to be”), there is a paucity of attested Aphel forms in the
relevant literature. Thus, Stuckenbruck is even more diffident
than Milik and Nickelsburg, suggesting that “the meaning of the
name Mahaway . . . is impossible to decipher with any confidence,”
speculatively offering only that “perhaps . . . the name includes a
derivation from the Aramaic verb ‘to be’ [HWY] in conjunction
with a mem prefix.”167 Evidently, Stuckenbruck is not willing on the
basis of available evidence to commit to a nominal or a (participial)
verbal form.
     As with the BG name Mahaway, the etymology of the biblical
name Mehujael remains uncertain. As Richard Hess observes, “It
is generally agreed that Mehujael is composed of two elements, the
second of which is ʾl,’ ‘god;’ [sic] but the first element is generally
disputed.”168
     In attempting to shed further light on the meaning of
Mehujael, it can be said with certainty that the name Mehujael
is older, perhaps much older, than the biblical text of Genesis
as we have it today. If one limits an investigation of Mehujael to
possible West Semitic etymologies, “West Semitic mḥʾ, ‘to smite,’
and a participial form of ḥyh, ‘to live’” are the most viable options
for the disputed first element.169 However, limiting our search to
West Semitic etymologies is an unreasonable requirement, since
the ultimate origin of Mehujael and Mahaway seems at least as
likely to be East Semitic as West Semitic. For example, although
Ronald Hendel narrowly considers only Hebrew onomastics for the
name Mehujael,170 Nahum Sarna171 and Richard Hess,172 following
Umberto Cassuto,173 suggest that the name might be explained
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants              1069

on the basis of the Akkadian maḫḫû, denoting “a certain class of
priests and seers.”174
    Further strengthening Cassuto’s argument for the derivation
of the name is the agreement he finds in the word behind Mehujael
(maḫḫû), the name of Mehujael’s son Methusael (a name that is
“analogous not only in form but also in meaning”175), and the name
of Mehujael’s grandson Lamech, which Cassuto sees as likely to
have come from the Mesopotamian word lumakku, also signifying
a certain class of priests.176 Significantly, Hess reports that while
the root lmk is unknown in West Semitic, it is found both in third
millennium BCE personal names and in names from Mari in Old
Babylon in the early second millennium BCE.177
    That the name Mahijah is the only name preserved in Moses
6–7 besides Enoch the prophet is evidence of Mahijah’s importance
to the story. Similarly, Loren Stuckenbruck underlines the
importance of Mahaway to both the Qumran and Manichaean
versions of the Book of Giants. He observes a notable pattern of
preservation in Chinese Manichaean fragments of the Book
of Giants, which includes names of other individuals besides
Mahawai that are, for one reason or another, significantly altered.
Especially given the potential for “instances in which onomastic
changes [i.e., changes in characters’ names] may have been due
to the change of the language media,” Stuckenbruck is impressed
with the “straightforward correspondence between the name(s)
Mahawai in the Manichaean texts and Mahaway in the Aramaic
[Book of Giants], in which the character, acting in a mediary role,
encounters Enoch ‘the scribe.’”178
    In summary, Enoch and Mahaway seem to differ from the other
names that have been considered previously not only because there
is no known literary motivation for their appearance in BG but
also because both names have a plausible ancient Mesopotamian
prehistory.
    Roles of the characters in BG. Regarding the figure of Enoch in
BG, scholars have observed that in the Aramaic BG, as in 1 Enoch,
the prophet is portrayed exclusively as a remote figure “dwelling . . .
with the angels”179 at “the ends of the earth, on which the heaven
rests, and the gates of heaven open.”180 He seems to communicate
exclusively through Mahaway, the messenger of the gibborim. And,
1070      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

once Enoch’s presence has been “veiled” after his heavenly ascent,181
even Mahaway is not in a position to see him in his transfigured
state; they communicate only by voice.182 Enoch, as befits one whose
traditional role in heaven is scribal, writes missives of revelation
and judgment that Mahaway brings back to the gibborim. But, asks
Wilkens,183 if it were true that Enoch could never communicate
directly with the gibborim, what do we make of BG fragments that
indicate he taught at least some of the gibborim directly?184 This
seeming inconsistency poses no problem for the Book of Moses,
which includes an account of Enoch’s preaching mission to the
gibborim before his heavenly ascent, as I will discuss in more detail
below. For the present, I will simply suggest that Enoch’s role in
both BG and the Book of Moses in reproving and preaching to the
gibborim is undertaken at first from earth and then from heaven.
     As to the role of Mahaway, note that his primary role seems
to be that of a serious-minded, message-bringing mediator.185 He
seems to enjoy a unique relationship with Enoch, which seems to be
one of the reasons why he is chosen by his peers as an envoy. More
will be said about this below.
     Co-occurrences in other texts. As seen in table 1, Enoch figures
prominently not only in 1 Enoch, Genesis, and the Book of Moses
but also in Mesopotamian texts, if one takes Enmeduranki
traditions as being relevant.
     With respect to the BG name Mahaway, there is currently
no compelling reason why the Book of Giants name Mahaway
(MHWY) could not have been related at some point in its history
to the King James Bible name elements Mehuja- and Mehija-
(MḤWY- and MḤYY-) and to the Book of Moses names Mahujah
(MHWY/MḤWY) and Mahijah (MHYY/MḤYY). The rationale
for this conclusion is more fully explained elsewhere.186
     Provisional conclusion. As a literary figure, Mahaway is unique
among all the characters of BG discussed above. Unlike ʾOhyah and
Hahyah, there has been no strong argument to date for his name
having been introduced into BG for the purpose of wordplay. In
contrast to Shemiḥazah and Baraq’el, the appearance of Mahaway in
the story could not have been motivated by a desire to link BG with
currently known early Enoch traditions. Differing from Gilgamesh
and Ḥobabish, the name is absent from the Gilgamesh epic and
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants             1071

thus could not have been intended to provide Mesopotamian flavor
to BG through well-pedigreed associations with that literature.
All this helps us understand why the only two names mentioned
both in the Book of Moses Enoch account (Enoch and Mahijah/
Mahujah) and in BG (Enoch and Mahaway) stand out so distinctly
from the other names.
     Does the lack of a literary motive for the inclusion of Mahaway
in BG make the alternative that the name was introduced, like
Enoch, as part of a more ancient Enoch tradition more likely?
When such a conjecture is added to the fact of Enoch’s possible
connection to Enmeduranki and plausible origins of Mahaway as
a name with ancient East Semitic roots, it becomes easier to lend
credence to the suggestion that, of all the names mentioned in BG,
Enoch and Mahaway may be the two most likely to share some basis
in historical—rather than merely literary—traditions about Enoch.
Of course, the ultimate basis for the acceptance of scripture lies in
faith and divinely provided testimony, and the argument for the
historicity of the scriptural characters can never be proven beyond
the shadow of a doubt by an appeal to textual or archaeological
evidence. However, evidential support for the antiquity of relevant
names for Enoch and Mahaway/Mahijah/Mahujah in a milieu that
is compatible with the scriptural setting and is otherwise consistent
with ancient narrative motifs that parallel the scripture account
creates additional space for rational belief in the material existence
of ancient individuals that once stood behind both names.
     In short, of all the prominent names in BG, Enoch and Mahijah/
Mahaway, the only two names that appear in the Enoch story of the
Book of Moses, also seem to be the most historically plausible.
     Continuing with this line of argument, I will now show how
storyline similarities and thematic resemblances to Moses 6–7 in
BG draw on allusions to Mesopotamian culture and the distinctive
name and role of Mahaway that I have already described to provide
a somewhat faint but surprisingly coherent picture of shared
narrative elements that seems to lie behind both Moses 6–7 and
BG.
1072          Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

            5. Comparing the Storyline of Moses 6–7 to BG
                      and Other Enoch Texts
Table 2. Similarities and differences in major storyline elements among BG,
Moses 6–7, and other ancient Enoch literature

                                                                         Other
 Simplified                                          Book of   Book of
                   Major Storyline Elements                              Enoch
 Outline                                             Moses     Giants
                                                                         Texts

 Introductory
 Events

                   History of the Sons of God/         X         X            X
                   Watchers and Their Progeny

                   Call of Enoch                       X                      X

                   Violence and Secret Oaths/          X         X            X
                   Mysteries
                   Dreams and Antics of ’Ohyah and               X
                   Hahyah

 First Visit to
 Enoch
                   Mahijah/Mahaway Encounters          X         X
                   Enoch
                   Enoch’s Call to Repentance          X         X
                   Messianic Teachings of Enoch        X                      X
                   Dreams and Quarreling of ’Ohyah               X
                   and Hahyah; Mahaway Sent to
                   Enoch
 Second Visit to
 Enoch
                   Mahujah/Mahaway and Enoch in        X         X
                   a Sacred Place
                   Enoch Clothed in Glory              X                      X
 Parting of the
 Ways
                   Wicked Defeated in Battle           X         X
                   Repentant Gathered                  X         X
 Concluding
 Events
                   Enoch’s Grand Vision                X                      X
                   Enoch’s People Are Taken Up to      X         X            X
                   Heaven
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                  1073

     The table above summarizes the results of an investigation to
understand which of the major storyline elements of the Book of
Moses are included in BG and other ancient Enoch literature. Of
course, elements absent in surviving Qumran and Manichaean
fragments of BG may be present in nonextant fragments. For
example, most scholars have concluded that BG originally contained
an account of a first visit of Mahaway to Enoch, which would seem
to correspond to the first visit of Mahijah to Enoch in the Book of
Moses, even though a BG account of Mahaway’s first visit does not
occur explicitly in the text. More on that subject in a later section
below.
     In the table, three types of storyline elements are distinguished:
(1) those that are part of what we are calling the “narrative core,”
shown in normal typeface; (2) those that contain material relating
to sacred teachings, heavenly encounters, or rituals, the kinds of
events that David Calabro has highlighted in his paper in this
volume,187 shown in bold; and (3) those that are unique to BG,
appearing neither in Moses 6–7 nor anywhere else in the ancient
Enoch literature, shown in italics.

Unexpected patterns in the table
The table exhibits some unexpected patterns:
    •   At least one fragment of every narrative storyline element of
        the Book of Moses is also present within BG (normal typeface).
        Notwithstanding significant differences in specifics, the
        basic storylines of both texts can be seen as sharing a
        similar focus and outcome. The BG account seems to begin
        with a brief reference to the Watchers that corresponds
        structurally to the genealogy of the righteous descendants
        of Adam who are called “sons of God” at the beginning of
        the Book of Moses Enoch account. But following this short
        introductory intrusion of the Watchers mythology into
        the BG story, there quickly follows—in sharp contrast to
        the Book of the Watchers in 1 Enoch—what Stuckenbruck
        calls a “most significant . . . shift of the spotlight from the
        disobedient angels”188 to the gibborim, who remain the focus
        in the remainder of the BG account.189 And as to the most
        significant outcome of the texts, the common concern of
        both BG and the Book of Moses Enoch account is ultimately
1074     Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

       the fate of the gibborim—proud self-styled human heroes—
       who either, on one hand, choose to reject Enoch’s message
       and are subsequently humbled by an ignominious defeat in
       battle or, on the other hand, choose to repent and eventually
       gather to a divinely prepared place from which they
       ultimately ascend to the divine presence.
   •   The sacred storyline elements in the Book of Moses are left
       out of BG, even though they are always present in some form
       elsewhere in the ancient Enoch literature (shown in boldface).
       The surviving fragments of BG, while preserving the same
       basic narrative core found in the Book of Moses, omit the
       most sacred and esoteric details of the account, including
       Enoch’s call; messianic prophecies in the preaching of
       Enoch; Enoch’s being clothed in glory; and the sweeping
       contents of his grand apocalyptic vision. The fact that
       variations on all these themes are prominent elsewhere in the
       ancient Enoch literature makes their virtual absence in BG
       a surprise, though there are precedents for the preparation
       and selective distribution of two versions of some Jewish and
       early Christian texts—one version for initiates that contains
       hierophantic teachings and the other for novices that leaves
       out such information.190 A brief discussion of each of these
       sacred story elements is given below and are discussed in
       greater length elsewhere.191
   •   Enoch’s call. In reading the account of Enoch’s call, its
       Johannine imagery in Moses 6:26–27 comes to mind.
       However, we are told by Samuel Zinner, that this seemingly
       New Testament imagery originally “arose in an Enochic
       matrix,”192 in other words, within literary traditions
       concerning the prophet Enoch. No less surprising in its
       relevance to the ancient Enoch literature is the unexpected
       co-occurrence of references to Enoch as a “lad” when he
       receives his prophetic commission in Moses 6:31 when seen
       in light of the prominence of “lad” as a title for the prophet in
       2 Enoch, 3 Enoch, and the Mandaean Ginza.193 Additionally,
       the opening of Enoch’s eyes so he could see things “not visible
       to the natural eye” (Moses 6:36) is mentioned in 1 Enoch194
       and 2 Enoch.195 Perhaps most remarkably, the fulfillment of
       the promise made to Enoch at his call that he would be able
       to “turn [waters] out of their course” (Moses 6:30), although
       appearing nowhere else in scripture, is described in the
       Ginza Enoch account.196
      Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                  1075

•   Messianic titles and prophecies in the preaching of Enoch.
    The striking equivalents of each of the titles mentioned
    in Moses 6:57—”Only Begotten,” “Son of Man,” “Jesus
    Christ,” and “Righteous Judge”—are described in the pre-
    Christian Book of Similitudes in 1 Enoch197 and related
    Jewish traditions. Elsewhere in S. Kent Brown and I
    describe these and other relevant affinities in the Second
    Temple Tradition to Moses 6–7.198 In this context, it may
    be noteworthy that some aspects of the knowledge about
    the last days and the “Righteous One” revealed to Enoch
    in the Similitudes are explicitly mentioned as being among
    the “hidden things” not to be shared publicly or, in some
    cases, not be to be committed to writing at all.199 (Were any
    of the other sacred storyline elements “missing” in BG also
    similarly considered?)
•   Enoch’s being clothed in glory. The pseudepigraphic books
    of 2 and 3 Enoch purport to describe the process by which
    Enoch was “clothed upon with glory” (Moses 7:3) in more
    detail. As a prelude to Enoch’s introduction to the secrets
    of creation, both accounts describe a “two-step initiatory
    procedure” whereby “the patriarch was first initiated by
    angel(s) and after this by the Lord” Himself.200 In 2 Enoch,
    God commanded his angels to “extract Enoch from (his)
    earthly clothing. And anoint him with my delightful oil,
    and put him into the clothes of my glory.”201 Third Enoch
    tells us that after Enoch was changed, he resembled God
    so exactly that he was mistaken for Him.202 As this process
    culminates, Enoch, both in ancient sources and modern
    scripture, receives “a right to [God’s] throne.”203 As in other
    instances of sacred episodes, BG does not explicitly detail
    these events.
•   Enoch’s grand apocalyptic vision. Compare Enoch’s grand
    vision in Moses 7 with the tour of heaven and vision of the
    future that are among the principal themes of 1 Enoch, 2
    Enoch, and 3 Enoch.204 In contrast to BG, which seems to
    conflate Enoch’s temporary heavenly ascent during the visit
    of Mahaway with the event of his definitive translation to
    heaven, accounts in other Enoch texts make it clear that
    these were two separate events. In other words, while BG
    seems to end Enoch’s direct earthly ministry at the time
    of his initial ascent, other Enoch texts, consistent with the
    Book of Moses, have him continuing his earthly ministry
1076      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

        afterward until the moment that he and his people rise
        together to the divine presence.
    •   The BG-unique themes notably include the dreams, antics,
        and quarreling of ’Ohyah and Hahyah (shown in italics).
        Earlier I argued that, of all the prominent names in BG,
        these two names are the ones that most look like they were
        invented out of whole cloth in BG.

    Describing these patterns differently, one could summarize
by saying that if you look at the vertical column for BG across all
the storyline elements, you will notice that every entry is either in
regular typeface or italics—none are in bold. In other words, BG
contains something relating to every narrative core story element
found in the Book of Moses while containing none of its sacred
storyline elements, even though hints of each of the “missing”
sacred elements are found in one form or anther elsewhere in the
ancient Enoch literature. Indeed, the resemblances between Moses
6–7 and BG in the narrative core story elements are so striking
that one is tempted to speculate that BG and the Book of Moses
were rooted in some of the same ancient Enoch traditions but that
somewhere along the line, the sacred stories now found only in the
Book of Moses were either removed from the tradition inherited
by the BG redactor(s) or, alternatively, were left out when BG was
composed.

Other items of note
The synoptic outline makes obvious the primary bipartite
division of the story of Enoch in the Book of Moses into an earth-
focused mission followed by a heaven-focused commission. More
specifically, while Moses 6 is primarily concerned with Enoch’s
initial divine call to preach repentance and salvation to the wicked
on earth, the major preoccupation of Moses 7 is Enoch’s subsequent
heavenly commission as a new member of the divine council205
and the preparation of his people to meet God face-to-face (see
Moses 7:69). Analogous doubling of other themes in BG has been
highlighted previously by Stuckenbruck.206
     Finally, it should be observed that the overall tone of the BG
account differs from that of Moses 6–7. Moses 6–7, though at times
exploiting elements of humor and irony in its account, is generally
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants             1077

sober in tone, is firmly rooted in the material world of humankind,
and is illuminated by the apocalyptic visions of the prophet Enoch.
BG, on the other hand, seems to be much more of a polemical
parody on Mesopotamian gibborim culture, is occasionally tainted
with the mythical elements of the Watchers, and , while missing
the detail of the sacred accounts of Enoch’s call, teachings, and
visions, adds the harrowing dreams of the inept, anxiety-ridden,
and ultimately tragicomical characters ’Ohyah and Hahyah.

         6. Detailed Analysis of Thematic Resemblances
                      of BG to Moses 6–7
Elsewhere in the present volume, an extended discussion of
approaches to address the potential pitfalls in comparative analysis
has been provided.207 The detailed analysis in the present chapter
draws inspiration from Enoch scholar Loren Stuckenbruck’s study
of possible influences of 1 Enoch on the New Testament book of
Revelation.208 In that study, he concluded from a discussion of a set
of resemblances in both works “that the writer of [the later text] was
either directly acquainted (through literary or oral transmission)
with several of the major sections of [the earlier text] or at least
had access to traditions that were influenced by these writings.”209
Significantly, he argued for the likelihood of his conclusion, even
when realizing that “at no point [could] it be demonstrated that the
[later text] quotes from any passage in [the earlier text].”210
     The primary question that motivated Stuckenbruck’s study is
reasonably similar to our own, except that in our case we know that
Joseph Smith could not have been acquainted with BG (since it was
lost to modern scholarship until 1948), so any persuasive evidence
of a literary association between the two texts would have to be
interpreted as a demonstration that BG and the Book of Moses were
independently influenced by similar ancient Enoch traditions that
informed and antedated both of them.
     In Stuckenbruck’s comparison and analysis, he provided a
table for each potential resemblance. In each table there were three
columns: one column describing the topic of interest common to
the resemblance and the other two columns containing the seeming
parallels as found in each of the two texts. Since the parallel texts
were in different languages, their rendering was given in English.
1078      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

The table for each resemblance was followed by a brief discussion
describing and analyzing the similarities and differences in the
selected texts.211
     In this section, I will do something similar for eighteen
thematic resemblances of BG to Moses 6–7. By the term “thematic
resemblances,” I mean instances in which reasonably similar topics
of discussion occur in both texts, even when some elements and
perspectives differ. The criterion of thematic similarity rather than
identical vocabulary is appropriate because, like Stuckenbruck,
I will be comparing two English translations. All but two of the
seventeen thematic resemblances are supported by multiple sources
within BG textual and visual depictions.
     In the results section of the study that follows the presentation
and analysis of each resemblance, we will not only consider the
number of resemblances, their density, the degree of correlation
in their order of appearance within the presumed BG storyline
sequence (according to the current storyline sequencing conjectures
of Stuckenbruck), and the range of their extent through nearly the
entire storyline, but also, like Stuckenbruck, their specificity as
another proxy measure of the strength of association between BG
and the Latter-day Saint Enoch account. Thematic resemblances to
Moses 6–7 that are exclusive to BG and the Book of Moses will
be deemed stronger than ones that appear in other ancient Enoch
literature, and resemblances for themes that are rare or absent
outside the ancient Enoch literature will be seen as stronger than
ones that also occur elsewhere within Second Temple texts and the
Bible.

Description of the table of thematic resemblances
Eigtheen thematic resemblances are summarized in the table
below. The resemblances have been sequenced with reference to
the chapter-and-verse order in the Book of Moses in which they
appear.212 Specific citations of passages in Moses 6–7 and BG follow
in the second and third columns.
     Understanding the fourth and last column in the table requires
additional explanation. By way of background, remember that a
full grasp of the BG narrative is made difficult by the fact that the
extant manuscripts are short and fragmentary. As a service to BG
           Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                 1079

scholars, Stuckenbruck investigated the question of sequencing
for the Qumran BG fragments in 1997.213 In 2016, he updated his
findings.214 In the 2016 version of Stuckenbruck’s helpful, though
necessarily tentative and speculative outline of the BG account,
he assigned letters of the alphabet A–V to indicate his current
conjectures about the relative sequencing of extant BG fragments.
For BG themes with resemblances to passages in Moses 6–7, I have
added letters in the fourth column of the table corresponding
to his sequencing attempt. Because some events in BG have no
correspondence with the Book of Moses, some of the letters are
missing. And, likewise, because Stuckenbruck did not attempt to
classify every theme and fragment from Qumran and Manichaean
sources for BG within his sequencing scheme, not every entry in
the last column has a corresponding letter associated with it.
    The arrangement of the table below allows us to compare the
relative sequencing of BG themes, according to Stuckenbruck’s
tentative investigations, to the fully known sequencing of themes
in the corresponding Book of Moses account. I will compare Moses
6–7 to Stuckenbruck’s themes and sequencing proposal in greater
detail below.

Additional context for evaluating the thematic resemblances
Before discussing the table below in more detail, some addi-
tional for the comparisons should be taken into consideration:
•   Fragmentary nature of BG. As previously mentioned, the extant text
    of BG is literally in tatters. We have no idea what significant elements
    of the story may have been omitted due to damage or loss of ancient
    manuscript witnesses.
•   Double phenomena. According to Stuckenbruck, several indications
    in the text “allow us to infer that BG was structured around a series
    of double phenomena (dream visions, tablets, journeys) linked to
    the [gibborim], among whom are brothers ’Ohyah and Hahyah,
    and Mahaway, who travels to Enoch the second time in order
    to secure an interpretation for these dreams.”215 This interesting
    feature of the narrative sometimes makes it difficult to be certain,
    when doubled events are mentioned, whether the manuscripts
    are referring to the first or second instance of similar happenings.
1080         Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

Table 3. Thematic resemblances of BG to Moses 6–7

Thematic              Book of                                                Narrative
                                       Book of Giants
Resemblances          Moses                                                  Outline

A. The Begetting      6:22             •   4Q531, frg. 1, l. 1–3                 A
of the Sons of God/   (See also        •   Henning, text A, frg. i, 100
Watchers, the         7:15; 8:13–14;   •   Sundermann 20 (M 8280),
Giants, and the       Genesis 6:4)         Verso/I/, 1–4
Gibborim

B. Murders            6:28             •   1Q23, frgs. 9 + 14 + 15, l. 2–5       B
                      (See also        •   4Q203 frg. 3, l. 2–4
                      6:15)            •   Henning, text A, frg. j

C. Oath-Inspired      6:29             •   1Q23, frg. 17, l. 1–3                 B
Violence              (See also        •   Henning, text A, frg. i
                      6:28; 6:15)      •   1Q23, frgs. 9 + 14 + 15, l. 2
                                       •   Henning, text A, frg. j
D. A “Wild Man”       6:38             •   (Compare 4Q531 22, 3–8)           (Compare
                                                                                K)

E. Mahijah/           6:40             •   4Q530, frg. 7 II, l. 6–7              H
Mahaway’s First                        •   4Q530, frgs. 2 col. II + 6 + 7
Journey to Meet                            col. I + 8–11 + 12(?), l. 22–23
Enoch

F. Enoch/Mahaway      6:46–47          •   4Q203 frg. 7b II, l. 1–3              I
Reads Record of                        •   4Q203 frg. 8, l. 1–4
Deeds                                  •   Sundermann 1984, frg. L, 1r,
                                           II.1–10
G. Trembling and      6:47             •   4Q203 frg. 4, l. 6                    I
Weeping                                •   Henning, text E

H. Call to            6:52             •   4Q203 frg. 8, l. 14–15            (Compare
Repentance                             •   4Q530 frg. 13, l. 1                  O)
                                       •   MCP, Kósa 2016, fig. 2c
                                           (kneeling “demons,” arguably
                                           repentant gibborim)
                                       •   Henning, text E

I. Sexual             6:55             •   4Q203, frg. 8, l. 6–9             (Compare
Defilement                                                                      O)

J. Mahujah/           7:2              •   4Q530 frg. 7 II, l. 3–5               S
Mahaway’s Second,     (Compare         •   MCP, Gulácsi 2015 (kneeling
Heavenly Journey      7:2, OT1)            figure on mountaintop,
to Meet Enoch                              arguably representing
                                           Mahujah/Mahaway)
                                       •   Henning, text A, frg. b
                                           (Mainz 317)
              Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                    1081


Thematic               Book of                                          Narrative
                                     Book of Giants
Resemblances           Moses                                            Outline

K. Enoch Clothed       7:2–4         •   4Q531 14, 1–4                     —
with Glory

L. Gibborim            7:13, 15–16   •   4Q531 frg. 22, l. 3–7              K
Defeated in Battle                   •   4Q531 frg. 7, l. 5–6
                                     •   Henning, text G
                                     •   Henning, text Q
                                     •   Henning, text A, frg. i
                                     •   MCP, Kósa 2016, fig. 2a
                                         (armored angels protecting
                                         a divine figure, arguably
                                         representing Enoch)
                                     •   Sundermann, M5900,
                                         1551–1556, 1574–1581

M. The “Roar of        7:13          •   4Q531 frg. 22, l. 8                K
Lions/Wild Beasts”                   •   Henning, text A, frg. c
Following Battle                     •   Henning, text A, frg, k

N. Repentant           7:16–18       •   Henning, text G                   —
Gather to Divinely                   •   Henning, text S (Kephalaia,
Prepared Cities                          45 [117])

O. Imprisonment        7:38–39       •   Henning, text A, frg. l            N
of the Wicked                        •   4Q203 8, 2
                                     •   4Q203 7b I, 5
                                     •   Henning, text T
                                     •   Henning, text P (Kephalaia,
                                         38 [93])
                                     •   Henning, text S (Kephalaia,
                                         45 [117])

P. Flood of Noah       7:42–43       •   4Q530 frg. 7 II, l. 10             T
Anticipated in                       •   (Compare 4Q530 frgs. 2 col.
Vision/Dream                             II + 6 + 7 Col. I + 8–11 +
                                         12(?), l. 10–12)

Q. The Earth Cries     7:48          •   4Q203 frg. 8, l. 9–11          (Compare
Out against the                                                            E)
Wicked

R. Ascent of Enoch’s   7:69          •   MCP, Gulácsi 2015 (small          —
people to the bosom                      palaces in a divine realm
of God                                   adjacent to a divine palace)
1082     Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

       For example, Jens Wilkens argues that some of the BG
       material that Stuckenbruck assigned to the second journey
       of Mahaway better fits with his first journey.216 However, we
       will see later how the added witness of the Book of Moses
       may contribute to the resolution of this ambiguity.
   •   Deliberate or accidental changes and omissions in various
       versions and recensions of BG. As Stuckenbruck writes,
       readers should hold in mind “a two-fold awareness that
       the relationship between the Qumran fragments and the
       Manichaean Book of Giants, on the one hand, and the
       relationship among the Qumran materials themselves, on
       the other, may very well have been . . . complicated. . . . Not
       only does one have to reckon with the likelihood that over
       time parts of the Book of Giants were abbreviated, expanded,
       or conflated, but also that in places the order of the Vorlage
       was affected. Furthermore, it ought not to be assumed
       that each manuscript belonging to Qumran BG must have
       represented an identical recension.”217 Moreover, it is natural
       that the Qumran and Manichaean recensions would have
       differed in at least some respects, perhaps in some cases with
       the Manichaean texts having been altered or paraphrased
       “in order to gloss over dissonances with the Manichaean
       doctrine.”218 Surprisingly, however, in at least one instance
       it seems that an important, dissonant BG element was left
       standing by the Manichaeans, even though it contradicted
       core Manichaean doctrine.219
   •   Significant differences in provenance and pedigree. If indeed
       there is early, shared content that sits behind both BG and
       Moses 6–7, we must assume that the process of transmission
       was very different in each case. While BG went through
       many hands over centuries, likely in oral as well as in
       written forms, Latter-day Saints who see the Book of Moses
       Enoch account as containing traditions from antiquity
       are likely either to posit a much shorter and direct line of
       transmission between the Joseph Smith and ancient tradents
       of a Moses 6–7 Vorlage or, alternatively, to see the account as
       directly revealed to the Prophet with no prior written texts
       as sources.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants              1083

Overall comparison of Moses 6–7 to Stuckenbruck’s proposal
for principal themes and narrative outline sequencing
With these considerations as a backdrop, we are prepared to consider
the contents of column 4 of the summary table. A first finding
of great interest is the fact that—despite significant differences
of pedigree and provenance between Moses 6–7 and BG, as well
as the latter’s fragmentary nature and the likelihood of changes,
abbreviations, expansions, and conflation discussed above—when
we look specifically at the structure and text of portions of BG that
are similar to the Book of Moses, we find a generous quantity of
plausible resemblances, many of them unique in the ancient Enoch
literature. The eighteen resemblances are spread across a large swath
of the narrative of both accounts, touching to a greater or lesser
degree on ten of the twenty-two letters identifying the individual
elements in Stuckenbruck’s narrative sequence, while adding three
additional points of resemblance to elements of BG that were not
included in Stuckenbruck’s selective outline.
     Consistent with my previous arguments that ’Ohyah and
Hahyah are the characters in BG most likely to have been invented
ad hoc for literary purposes, it is not surprising that the portions of
Stuckenbruck’s narrative outline having to do with their activities
are largely missing in the Book of Moses (F, G). Others are missing
because Stuckenbruck’s schema mistakenly assumes that Enoch
was already permanently situated in heaven at the beginning of the
story (C, D, E), having not fully taken into account the relevant
Manichaean fragments that witness his initial direct preaching
mission on earth. In addition, it is not surprising that J, L, M, U,
and V are missing from the Book of Moses, since they have to do
with further entertaining intrigues among ’Ohyah, Hahyah, and
the gibborim as well as the second set of dreams and the subsequent
report of Mahaway. Significantly, it should be observed that none
of the just-mentioned elements from BG that are lacking in the
Book of Moses appear in any significant detail elsewhere within
the ancient Enoch literature, lending credence that they have all
been specially invented by the redactor(s) of BG or of the tradents
of older traditions from which BG inherited.
     While the number and quality of the resemblances between the
Book of Moses Enoch account and BG will not be unexpected for
1084      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

those who are already familiar with previously published results of
earlier comparisons, it was new and surprising to me to learn that
the list of apparent affinities between Moses 6–7, ordered by chapter
and verse, more often than not follow the same relative sequence
posited by Stuckenbruck for BG. If our admittedly preliminary
and tentative analysis holds up under continuing scrutiny, the
similarity in sequence of shared narrative elements in the two texts
of interest can be taken as further evidence of a common ancient
tradition behind both.
    The seeming exceptions in column 4 to Stuckenbruck’s
alphabetic ordering of events (O [twice], S, E, K) can be accounted
for by a different interpretation of the ordering of events. In some
cases, this reordering can be supported by evidence from the
Book of Moses, on basis of my personal assumption that it is the
more reliable of the two witnesses. The two “O” exceptions can
be accounted for under the assumption that they are a mistaken
interpretation by Stuckenbruck when he takes certain events
from Mahaway’s first journey as being from his second journey.
Correcting his presumably faulty assignment of BG material
to “O” (having to do with the reading of Enoch’s message and
reactions to his call to repentance), the table moves these events
to an earlier part of the narrative. Another difference (S) has to do
with Stuckenbruck’s placement of the second journey of Mahaway
earlier in the overall account than the Book of Moses. Apparently,
BG conflates Enoch’s ascent in the presence of Mahaway in Moses
7:2–4 (S) with the account of Enoch’s grand vision in a later part of
the same chapter, which included the story of the great flood (T).
The motif of the earth crying out against the wicked (E) also occurs
as part of Enoch’s grand vision in the Book of Moses account.
    The fourth exception (K) occurs because the reference to a “wild
man” occurs early in the Book of Moses account but appears in a
later part of the BG story. Because the BG account is so incomplete,
this is not necessarily an inconsistency between the two accounts.
Rather, it seems possible, considering the frequent doubling of
phenomena in BG discussed previously,220 that the reference to a
“wild man” later in the story may correspond to an earlier reference
to the same rare term corresponding to the early position of the
Book of Moses use of it. Such a doubling of the application of the
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants               1085

term “wild man”—used the first time, sarcastically, to describe
Enoch and applied the second time, pathetically, to describe
Gilgamesh—becomes another instance of the literary irony that
pervades the two texts.

Specific sources cited in the table of thematic resemblances
Full citations for the short references to BG works listed in column
three of the table are listed below. These are the primary sources:
    •   Gulácsi 2015 [Manichaean Cosmology Painting]: Zsu-
        zsanna Gulácsi. Mani’s Pictures: The Didactic Images of the
        Manichaeans from Sasanian Mesopotamia to Uygur Central
        Asia and Tang-Ming China. Nag Hammadi and Manichaean
        Studies 90. Leiden: Brill, 2015.
    •   Henning 1943 [Manichaean BG fragments]: W. B. Henning.
        “The Book of the Giants.” Bulletin of the School of Orien-
        tal and African Studies 11, no. 1 (1943): 52–74. http://www.
        sacred-texts.com/chr/giants/giants.htm.
    •   Kósa 2016 [Manichaean Cosmology Painting]: Gábor Kósa.
        “The Book of Giants Tradition in the Chinese Manichaica,”
        in Ancient Tales of Giants from Qumran and Turfan: Con-
        texts, Traditions, and Influences, edited by Matthew Goff,
        Loren T. Stuckenbruck, and Enrico Morano, 145–86. Wis-
        senschlaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament 360,
        edited by Jörg Frey. Tübingen, Germany: Mohr Siebeck,
        2016.
    •   Parry 2013 [Qumran BG fragments]: Donald W. Parry and
        Emanuel Tov, eds. The Dead Sea Scrolls Reader, vol. 1, Texts
        Concerned with Religious Law, Exegetical Texts and Parabib-
        lical Texts. 2nd ed. Leiden: Brill, 2013.
    •   Sundermann 1973 [Manichaean BG fragments]: Werner
        Sundermann. Mittelpersische und parthische kosmogonische
        und Parabeltexte der Manichäer. Schriften zur Geschichte und
        Kultur des Alten Orients 8. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1973.
        https://www.scribd.com/document/396552610/Werner-
        Sundermann-Mittelpersische-und-parthische-kosmo
        gonische-und-Parabeltexte-der-Manichaer-1973.

Other important sources, analyses, and commentaries listed
in the summary table and the detailed tables for each thematic
resemblance include the following:
1086     Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

   •   Angel 2016: Joseph L. Angel. “The Humbling of the Arro-
       gant and the ‘Wild Man’ and ‘Tree Stump’ Traditions in
       the Book of Giants and Daniel 4,” in Ancient Tales of Giants
       from Qumran and Turfan: Contexts, Traditions, and Influ-
       ences, edited by Matthew Goff, Loren T. Stuckenbruck, and
       Enrico Morano, 61–80. Wissenschlaftliche Untersuchungen
       zum Neuen Testament 360, edited by Jörg Frey. Tübingen,
       Germany: Mohr Siebeck, 2016.
   •   Gardner 1995: Iain Gardner, ed. The Kephalaia of the
       Teacher: The Edited Coptic Manichaean Texts in Translation
       with Commentary. Nag Hammadi and Manichaean Studies
       37, edited by James M. Robinson and H. J. Klimkeit. Leiden:
       Brill, 1995.
   •   Martínez 1996: Florentino García Martínez, ed. The Dead
       Sea Scrolls Translated: The Qumran Texts in English. Trans-
       lated by Wilfred G. E. Watson. 2nd ed. Grand Rapids, MI:
       Eerdmans, 1996.
   •   Milik 1976: J. T. Milik and Matthew Black, eds. The Books
       of Enoch: Aramaic Fragments from Qumran Cave 4.
       Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1976. https://archive.org/details/
       MILIKEnochInAramaicQumranCave4.
   •   Reeves 1992: John C. Reeves, Jewish Lore in Manichaean
       Cosmogony: Studies in the Book of Giants Traditions. Mono-
       graphs of the Hebrew Union College 14. Cincinnati, OH:
       Hebrew Union College Press, 1992.
   •   Stuckenbruck 1997: Loren T. Stuckenbruck, The Book of
       Giants from Qumran: Texts, Translation, and Commentary.
       Tübingen, Germany: Mohr Siebeck, 1997.
   •   Stuckenbruck 2017: Loren T. Stuckenbruck, The Myth of
       Rebellious Angels. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2017.
   •   Sundermann 1984: Werner Sundermann. “Ein weiteres
       Fragment aus Manis Gigantenbuch,” in Orientalia J. Duch-
       esne-Guillemin emerito oblata. Acta Iranica 23, 491–505.
       Leiden: Brill, 1984.
   •   Wilkens 2016: Jens Wilkens. “Remarks on the Manichaean
       Book of Giants: Once Again on Mahaway’s Mission to Enoch,”
       in Ancient Tales of Giants from Qumran and Turfan: Contexts,
       Traditions, and Influences, edited by Matthew Goff, Loren T.
       Stuckenbruck, and Enrico Morano, 213–29. Wissenschlaftliche
       Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament 360, edited by Jörg Frey.
       Tübingen, Germany: Mohr Siebeck, 2016.
           Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                1087




 Figure 11. a. Manichaean Cosmology Painting (MCP) containing motifs from
                    BG; b. Visual syntax of the painting.221
     In addition to these written sources, we will draw on details
from the fourteenth–fifteenth century Manichaean Cosmology
Painting (MCP), depicted on a hanging scroll as shown above. In
the Manichaean tradition, such paintings were often created for
didactic purposes. It was only recently discovered that from this
painting significant portions of the BG account of Enoch can be
illustrated, filling in gaps in our overall understanding of the story
and defining the events and characters more concretely.222
     With one exception (i.e., illustration of the imprisonment
of “demons”), the details from MCP in figures later in the study
are taken from the depiction of the eighth and fifth layers in the
section named “eight layers of the earth.”223 These layers, shown
within the bottom third of tthe painting shown above, feature
a symbolic representation of the four continents of the earth
below a large treelike mountain—in Indian culture, this feature
is identified as Mount Sumēru, the sacred center place. The
name “Sumēru,” which literally means “good Mēru,” refers not
1088        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




 Figure 12. Detail of MCP, depicting the “eighth and fifth layers of the earth.”224
Mount Sumēru, the treelike sacred center place, is surrounded by four continents
and the great ocean.225 Thirty-two palaces at the top of Sumēru surround a larger
   palace of Deity, pictured with an acolyte on either side. The four supplicants
  surrounding the throne may correspond to four figures who bring the judicial
 complaint of the earth or a plea for clemency of the repentant wicked before the
heavenly judge.226 The four archangels mentioned in BG, who (in the Manichaean
   conception) led the battles against the wicked227 and gathered the repentant,
   are clothed in armor in front of a seated deity—likely Enoch228—among the
  smaller green mountains at the foot of Mount Sumēru.229 In other parts of the
   painting (not shown) wicked “demons” are imprisoned.230 In the upper right,
  two repentant figures kneel. In addition, a solitary figure—perhaps Mahujah/
   Mahaway—kneels while perched on a high mountaintop, seemingly evoking
        themes from Mahujah/Mahaway’s second journey to meet Enoch.

only to a place in the symbolic geography of the story but also to an
actual mountain located in the Himalayas.231
    Each of the thematic resemblances will be examined in more
detail, one by one, below.
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                 1089

A. The begetting of the sons of God / Watchers, the giants, and
the gibborim
Table 4. Examples of resemblances for narrative theme A

 Book of Moses                          Book of Giants
 And this is the genealogy of           1. the Watch]ers are defiled [
 the sons of Adam, who was              2. they begot] giants [= gibborim]
 the son of God, with whom God,         and monsters [= nephilim] [
 himself, conversed (6:22)              3. of the Watchers] they begot,
 And the giants of the land, also,      and behold, as g[iants ? (Parry
 stood afar off . . . (7:15)            2013, 4Q531, frg. 1, l. 1–3, p.
                                        953; see Stuckenbruck 1997, pp.
 And Noah and his sons                  149–53; Reeves 1992, pp. 67–76)
 hearkened unto the Lord, and
 gave heed, and they were called        . . . and ravished them. They
 the sons of God. And when these        chose beautiful [women], and
 men began to multiply on the           demanded . . . them in marriage.
 face of the earth, and daughters       Sordid . . . (Henning 1943, text
 were born unto them, the sons          A, frg. i, 100, p. 62; see Reeves
 of men saw that those daughters        1992, pp. 75–76)
 were fair, and they took them
 wives, even as they chose              1. They [descended?] to earth
 (8:13–14)                              because
                                        2. of the beauty of the female
 There were giants [= nephilim] in      beings
 the earth in those days; and also      3. [li]ke assailants among
 after that, when the sons of God       4. . . . they came down (?) from
 came in unto the daughters of          (Sundermann 1973, 20 (M
 men, and they bare children to         8280), Verso/I/, 1–4, pp. 76–77;
 them, the same became mighty           translated in Reeves 1992, p. 75)
 men [= gibborim] which were of
 old, men of renown (Genesis 6:4)

The Bible, the Book of Moses, and the Book of Giants share a
common concerns with the offspring of the sons of God (equated
with the Watchers in BG), the gibborim (literally “mighty men,”
often erroneously translated as “giants”), and the nephilim (literally
“fallen ones,” usually translated as giants/monsters). All three
accounts describe the parentage of one or more of these classes
of individuals as mismatched couples of partly divine (or, at least,
1090      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

divinely commissioned) parentage whose progeny (in some of the
ancient Enoch literature) becomes literally monstrous in their
appearance and—in the Bible, the Book of Moses, and the ancient
Enoch literature—figuratively monstrous in their evil deeds. These
evil deeds lead to the inevitable consequences of a great flood in the
days of Noah.
     While most scholars agree on these general points, the
interpretation of their specifics is mired in controversy. The
description in Genesis 6:4 is tantalizingly brief and allusive,
seemingly hinting at an larger, untold story.232 The Book of Moses
is closer to the ancient Enoch literature than to the Bible in its more
expansive descriptions of the wickedness of these groups and of
Enoch’s early interventions well prior to Noah’s ministry.
     Importantly, the BG and Moses 6–7 accounts are more alike
in other respects. While both the Book of Giants and the Book of
Moses describe the nephilim and the gibborim as distinct groups,
English Bible translations often equate them.233 Also, as mentioned
previously, both BG and Moses 6–7 are similar to each other and
different from the Book of the Watchers in 1 Enoch in that their
stories spotlight the human gibborim rather than a group of
rebellious divine Watchers.
     The Book of Moses motif of mismatched couples begins in
earnest within the later story of Noah. The Enoch account in Moses
6–7 opens its description of the three groups by emphasizing the
orderly and righteous posterity of Adam through Seth and down to
Enoch (Moses 6:22). They are “sons of God,” and, like Adam, are
not fallen angels but rather mortals who have received a fulness of
the Melchizedek Priesthood (Moses 6:67–68) and the charge to serve
as “preachers of righteousness” (Moses 6:23). In these respects, the
Book of Moses account is closer to Syriac Christian and Islamic
traditions. In a fashion that is analogous to but not identical with the
Book of Moses, these two traditions saw the “sons of God” as Sethites
and the “daughters of men” as Cainites. For example, Ephrem the
Syrian understood the events relatinig to the mismatched marriages
as meaning that “those who lived on higher ground, who were called
‘the children [=sons] of God,’ left their own region and came down to
take wives from the daughters of Cain down below.”234 This subject is
treated in greater detail elsewhere.235
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                 1091

    In brief, BG and Moses 6–7 generally are more similar to each
other than they are to the Bible and 1 Enoch. They differ in some
ways, most importantly in that BG sees the “sons of God” as divine
beings, whereas the Book of Moses, analogous to Syriac Christian and
Islamic traditions, sees them as divinely commissioned individuals.

B. Murders
Table 5. Examples of resemblances for narrative theme B

 Book of Moses                          Book of Giants
 . . . in their own abominations        2. ]and they knew [
 have they devised murder (6:28)        3. ] was great upon the earth[
 . . . wars and bloodshed; and a        4. ] and they killed man[y
 man’s hand was against his own         5. ]a hundred giants, [a]ll who[
 brother, in administering death        (Parry 2013, 1Q23, frgs. 9 + 14 +
 . . . seeking for power (6:15)         15, l. 2–5, p. 939; see Stuckenbruck
                                        1997, pp. 58–59; Reeves 1992, pp.
                                        74–76)

                                        2. his companions [
                                        3. Ḥobabish and [
                                        4. and what will you give me for
                                        k[illing (Parry 2013, 4Q203, frg.
                                        3, l. 2–4, p. 943; see Stuckenbruck
                                        1997, pp. 70–74, 124–26)

                                        Thereupon the giants began to
                                        kill each other and [to abduct
                                        their wives]. The creatures, too,
                                        began to kill each other (Henning
                                        1943, text A, frg. j, p. 60; see
                                        Stuckenbruck 1997, pp. 50, 59, 72;
                                        Reeves 1992, p. 76)

The theme of widespread murder, introduced on an individual scale
in the earlier biblical stories of Cain and Lamech, is given full sway
in Moses 6–7 and BG. Although the love of bloodshed as a proof
of manliness seems more than sufficient to motivate the wicked at
the time of Enoch to great slaughter, Moses 6:15 makes additional
incentives explicit—namely, an all-consuming quest for “power”
1092      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

and riches. This is the essence of the Mahan principle, what Hugh
Nibley called “the great secret of converting life into property”236—
“your life for my property.”237 Why should a well-respected gibbor
settle for the pleasure of murder alone if a financial bonus can
be added to the deal? Hence, BG’s report of one of the gibborim
repeating, “What will you give me for killing?”238—a close echo of
Satan’s famous golden question, “Have you any money?”239
    In short, both BG and the Book of Moses chronicle the perennial
appeal and virtually inseparable relationship of power, ill-gotten
riches, and murder.

C. Oath-inspired violence
The bloodshed described previously was accompanied by other
forms of violence. The Book of Moses speaks of how “Satan had
great dominion among men, and raged in their hearts” (Moses
6:15), and Stuckenbruck sees the truncated phrases of 1Q23 17, 1–3
(“and they entered,” “through their hands,” “and they began to”)
as indicating a list describing the variety of their wicked acts.240
The Henning fragment gives us to understand that this included
subjecting various peoples to servitude.241
    Of greatest significance in these descriptions from the Book
of Moses and BG is their emphasis on the secret oaths behind
the violence, a prominent theme in both texts that is absent from
the Bible. Moses 6:28–29 refers with vivid imagery to the people
having “sought their own counsels in the dark” and having also
“foresworn themselves . . . by their oaths.” The mention of “secret
works” and “administering death” in close proximity within Moses
6:15 parallels the description in BG: “They knew the se[crets242 . . .]
and they killed ma[ny . . .].”243 Gestures associated with these oaths
may be conjectured in the mention that one of the gibborim “[made
an oath?] before the sun, one hand in the air, [while with] the other
[performed deeds of wickedness?].”244
    Elsewhere the Qumran manuscripts clarify these brief
references by describing the spread of the “mystery of wickedness.”245
Later Islamic tradition taught that the most important of these
mysteria, wickedly taught by the Watchers to a woman who was
their accomplice in sin,246 was knowledge of the “Name of God,” by
means of which the fallen angels were able to “ascend to Heaven.”247
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                  1093

Table 6. Examples of resemblances for narrative theme C

 Book of Moses                          Book of Giants
 Wherefore, they have foresworn         1. and they entered[ ] [
 themselves, and, by their              2. through their hands [
 oaths, they have brought upon          3. and they began to[ (Parry 2013,
 themselves death; and a hell I         1Q23, frg. 17, l. 1–3, p. 939; see
 have prepared for them, if they        Stuckenbruck 1997, pp. 49–50)
 repent not (6:29)
                                        all . . . carried off . . . severally
 . . . have sought their own            they were subjected to tasks and
 counsels in the dark (6:28)            services. And they . . . from each
 And in those days Satan had            city . . . and were, ordered to
 great dominion among men,              serve the . . . The Mesenians [were
 and raged in their hearts; and         directed] to prepare, the Khūzians
 from thenceforth came wars and         to sweep [and] water, the Persians
 bloodshed; and a man’s hand            to . . . (Henning 1943, text A, frg.
 was against his own brother, in        i, 103–10, p. 62; see Reeves 1992,
 administering death, because of        pp. 75–76)
 secret works, seeking for power
 (6:15)                                 ]and they knew m[ysteries (Parry
                                        2013, 1Q23, frgs. 9 + 14 + 15, l. 2,
                                        p. 939. “Mysteries” or “secrets” is
                                        restored conjecturally to the text
                                        by some translators.)

                                        The creatures, too, began to kill
                                        each other. Sām . . . before the
                                        sun, one hand in the air, the other
                                        (Henning 1943, text A, frg. j, p.
                                        60; see Stuckenbruck 1997, p. 50;
                                        Reeves 1992, p. 76)

This interpretation is consistent with Nibley’s conclusion that
traditions about these illicitly revealed “secrets” have their roots in
the wicked practice of “divulging the pure ordinances of heaven
to people unworthy to receive them, who then proceed . . . to
exercise them in unrighteousness while proclaiming their own
righteousness on the grounds of possessing them.”248
    As discussed earlier, a tentative case can be made for the
identification of the BG Mahujah with the biblical Mehuja-el,
1094        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

who was a descendant of Cain and the grandfather of the wicked
Lamech,249 by virtue of the similarity of their names. This case is
only made stronger when we consider the additional material about
Mehuja-el’s family line included in the Joseph Smith account. Note
that in the Book of Moses, Mehuja-el’s grandson, like the other
“sons of men” (Moses 5:52, 55), “entered into a covenant with
Satan after the manner of Cain” (Moses 5:49). Similarly, drawing
on the additional background provided in 1 Enoch,250 we come to
understand that a group of conspirators, here depicted as fallen sons
of God, “all swore together and bound one another with a curse.”
Elsewhere in 1 Enoch we learn additional details about that oath:
       This is the number of Kasbe’el, the chief of the oath, which
       he showed to the holy ones when he was dwelling on high in
       glory, and its (or “his”) name (is) Beqa. This one told Michael
       that he should show him the secret name, so that they might
       mention it in the oath, so that those who showed the sons of
       men everything that was in secret might quake at the name
       and the oath.251

The passages in 1 Enoch are similar to a section of the Book of Moses
that describes a “secret combination” that had been in operation
“from the days of Cain” (Moses 5:51). As to the deadly nature of the
oath, we read in the Book of Moses, “Swear unto me by thy throat,
and if thou tell it thou shalt die,”252 just as in 1 Enoch, when the
conspirators “bound one another with a curse”253 that would take
effect if they broke their oath.
    In 1 Enoch, the conspirators agreed on their course of action by
saying, “Come, let us choose for ourselves wives from the daughters
of men.” 254 Likewise, in the Book of Moses, Mehuja-el’s grandson
became infamous because he “took unto himself . . . wives”255 to
whom he revealed the secrets of their wicked league (to the chagrin
of his fellows).256 In 1 Enoch, as in the Book of Moses,257 we also read
specifically of how “they all began to reveal mysteries to their wives
and children.”258
    In summary, BG, 1 Enoch, and the Book of Moses are in
agreement in their emphasis on the secret oaths that stood behind
the increasing violence, a prominent theme in the Enoch texts that,
significantly, is absent from the Bible.
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                     1095




 Figure 13. Giorgio Schiavone (1436/7–1504), Samson Smiting a Philistine with
  the Jawbone of an Ass.259 In the background lies a beast he has already slain.

D. A “wild man”
Table 7. Examples of resemblances for narrative theme D

 Book of Moses                           Book of Giants
 And they came forth to hear             3. [ I am] mighty, and by the
 him, upon the high places, saying       mighty strength of my arm and
 unto the tent-keepers: Tarry ye         my own great strength
 here and keep the tents, while          4. [and I went up against a]ll flesh,
 we go yonder to behold the seer,        and I made war against them; but
 for he prophesieth, and there is a      I did not
 strange thing in the land; a wild       5. [prevail, . . .
 man hath come among us (6:38;           8. ] of the wild beast has come,
 emphasis added)                         and the wild man they call [me]
                                         (Parry 2013, 4Q531, frg. 22, l.
                                         3–8, p. 959; emphasis added; see
                                         Stuckenbruck 1997, pp. 161–67;
                                         Reeves 1992, pp. 118–22; Angel
                                         2016, pp. 66–68)

The term “wild man” is uncommon and in both texts fairly pops out
at the attentive reader. It is used only once elsewhere in scripture, as
part of Jacob’s prophecy about how Ishmael would live to become
everyone’s favorite enemy.260 It is a translation of the literal Hebrew
“wild-ass man,” calling to mind
1096        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

       the sturdy, fearless, and fleet-footed Syrian onager (Hebrew
       pere’), who inhabits the wilderness and is almost impossible
       to domesticate. Jeremiah describes the wild ass of the desert:
       “snuffing the wind in her eagerness, whose passions none can
       restrain.”261 Hagar[, the mother of Ishmael,] . . . will produce a
       people free and undisciplined.262

Intriguingly, in light of the presumed Mesopotamian background
of both Moses 6–7 and BG, the description of Ishmael as an “onager
man” matches that of Enkidu as akkanu (“onager”) in the Gilgamesh
epic. Enkidu is portrayed as an indomitable warrior whose prowess
was proved in bloody battle: a “wild ass on the run, donkey of
the uplands, panther of the wild”263 who “slaughtered the Bull of
Heaven” and “killed Humbaba.”264
     How can the application of the term “wild man” to Enoch in
the Book of Moses be explained? For reasons that are discussed
at length elsewhere,265 I am persuaded that Enoch did not fit the
mold of a “wild man” in any sense that would have been intelligible
to the gibborim, but rather was simply called one in mockery. A
parallel to such rude humor can be found in Moses 8, in which
a reversal of labels was used to please the partygoers in Noah’s
day. As the drunken crowd of “sons of men”266 who had spurned
Noah’s preaching267 and married his granddaughters268 filled and
refilled their wine cups, they laughingly called themselves the “sons
of God.”269 At the same time, after playfully exalting their own
status, they sarcastically called their wives “daughters of men,”270
deliberately deprecating the lineage of their wives as daughters
of the sons of Noah. Significantly, these sons of Noah, the fathers
of these wives, had been specifically characterized as “the sons of
God.”271 Though the labels vary, this tasteless and worn-out brand
of humor persists in every generation.
     However, by the time we approach the end of the story, we realize
that Enoch’s initial self-characterization as being “but a lad” who is
“slow in speech” has prepared us for the ironic turning of the tables
that plays out on a larger stage in his final military victory (Moses
6:31). This may constitute one of the primary lessons of the account—
namely, that Enoch conquered his foes through the “virtue of the word
of God,”272 in contrast to the gibborim, aspiring wild men who, like
Korihor, “conquered according to [their] strength” (Alma 30:17).
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants              1097

     Consistent with the moral of such a lesson, later biblical authors
pointedly taught that “Israel’s future did not lie along”273 the “way
[of] all [their] warriors [gibborim],”274 but rather in “turn[ing] back
to the Lord with all [one’s] heart.”275 Proverbs 24:25 averred that “a
wise man is mightier than a strong one.”276 Paraphrasing, we might
understand this to mean that the “wise man” is more of a geber277 than
the gibbor—in other words, the “wise man” is more of a “man” than
the “he man.” Similarly, the preacher of Ecclesiastes 9:16 concluded
that “wisdom (ḥokmâ) is superior to [“manly”] heroism (gĕbûrâ).”278
Perhaps the redactor{s) of BG intended to make a similar point.
     In line with this conjecture, as the end of the BG account
approaches, one of the wicked leaders of the gibborim, in all
likelihoood Gilgamesh,279 called himself “the wild man” as part
of his admission of his humiliating defeat and resulting personal
debasement by Enoch and his people.280 Joseph Angel ably compares
the humbling of the arrogant leader of the gibborim, muttering to
himself in dismay after his defeat, to the principal theme of the story
of Nebuchadnezzar, a prominent type of the “wild man” in the Old
Testament. Angel perceptively recognizes that the characterization
of both Nebuchadnezzar and Gilgamesh as “wild men both appear
to be related to the Epic of Gilgamesh.”281 In this dramatic turn of
events, the would-be mighty wild man (in the proud tradition of the
gibborim) is literally or figuratively transformed into a beastly wild
man of Mesopotamian and biblical tragedy.282
     The Book of Moses and the Book of Giants are two different
works, published millennia apart, each with a unique past and its
own story to tell. That said, whatever the exact meaning of the term
“wild man” in these two accounts may be, the fact that this rare
and peculiar description shows up in these already closely related
stories about Enoch hints that they may each contain shards of a
common, preexisting literary tradition. So far as can be determined
at present, the single occurrence of the term “wild man” in the
extant ancient Enoch literature is in the BG, and the only instance
of it in the scripture translations of Joseph Smith is in the Enoch
account in the Book of Moses. And, from a literary perspective, the
conjecture of a paired usage of the term in BG that would contrast
a mocking reference of “wild man” to a meek and mild adversary
at the beginning of the story with a painful application of the term
1098        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

to the proud, defeated leader of the gibborim at the end of the story
would constitute a poignant instance of poetic justice. From a
literary perspective, the twofold occurrence of “wild man” might
be explained as yet another instance of the pattern of “doublings”
that Stuckenbruck has noticed in BG.283
     In short, the fitting references to the term “wild man” in BG
and in the Book of Moses, absent elsewhere in the Enoch literature
and in modern Latter-day Saint scripture, constitute remarkable
evidence of a shared ancient tradition.

E. Name and role of Mahijah/Mahaway revealed in his first,
earthly journey to meet Enoch
Table 8. Examples of resemblances for narrative theme E

 Book of Moses                          Book of Giants
 And there came a man unto              22. [and they delib]erated and
 him, whose name was Mahijah,           said to him: ‘Go [to him for the
 and said unto him: Tell us             ro]ad [of the place] is similar for
 plainly who thou art, and from         you since
 whence thou comest? (6:40)             23. for the first [time] you have
                                        heard his voice (Parry 2013,
                                        4Q530, frgs. 2 II + 6 + 7 I + 8–11
                                        + 12(?), l. 22–23, p. 951; emphasis
                                        added; see Stuckenbruck 1997, pp.
                                        124–27; Reeves 1992, pp. 93–94)

                                        6. and Enoch saw him and hailed
                                        him, . . . and Mahway replied to
                                        him: ‘I have been sent]
                                        7. hither and thither a second time
                                        to Mahway [in order that you will
                                        explain to me/us the meaning of
                                        the two dreams which I/we hear]
                                        (Parry 2013, 4Q530, frg. 7 II, l.
                                        6–7, p. 951; emphasis added; see
                                        Stuckenbruck 1997, pp. 128–34;
                                        Reeves 1992, p. 105; Wilkens
                                        2016, pp. 219–20, 224–25)
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants            1099

Previously, I described the remarkable nature of the resemblance
that Nibley and other scholars saw between the Book of Moses
name “Mahijah” and the BG name “Mahaway,” in addition, I
discussed the possibility of a narrative affinity of Mahijah with the
biblical name Mehujael that one of the descendants of the latter
is mentioned in the Book of Moses in connection with the kinds
of oaths described in BG. Going further, we will now see how the
similarly named characters in BG and the Book of Moses resemble
each other in their respective roles in each text.
    We have already seen that the name Mahijah/Mahujah/
Mahaway might be explained on the basis of the Akkadian maḫḫû,
denoting “a certain class of priests and seers.”284 And what was the
role of these seers? Among other things, the royal archives of the
Old Babylonian kingdom of Mari recount the comings and goings
of maḫḫû as intermediaries and messengers, bearing words of
warning from the gods for the king,285 a role that evokes the role of
Mahaway—“the messenger par excellence of the [gibborim] both in
the [BG] Enochic tradition from Qumran and in Manichaeism.”286
Hugh Nibley presciently observed that “this is exactly the role, and
the only role,” that Mahijah plays in the Book of Moses.287
    Incidentally, Enoch, like Mahijah/Mahaway, is also portrayed
as a messenger. In BG, he is called “the apostle,”288 a word of Greek
derivation signifying one sent forth as a “delegate,” “envoy,” or
“messenger.”289 Thus the roles of Mahijah/Mahaway and Enoch are
both complementary and contrastive—one is the messenger of the
chiefs of the wicked, the other is the messenger of the Lord.
    In the Book of Moses, Mahijah raises a direct question to
Enoch during his earthly preaching mission to the gibborim: “Tell
us plainly who thou art, and from whence thou comest?” (Moses
6:40). Complicating the existence of the Book of Moses account of a
direct preaching mission by Enoch is the fact that an earthly mission
by Enoch is not mentioned explicitly in the surviving fragments
of BG from Qumran. Thus, Stuckenbruck concludes that Enoch
was already permanently ensconced in heaven at the beginning of
the BG story and for this reason could never have interacted with
the gibborim at large.290 However, contradicting Stuckenbruck’s
view, incidents relating to Enoch’s direct preaching to a group of
gibborim, presumably in connection with Mahijah/Mahaway’s first
1100      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

visit to Enoch, is accepted by at least one translator of the Qumran
BG and is likewise explicitly described in the Manichaean BG
fragments.291 I will return to this subject below.
     In the Book of Moses, the name of Enoch’s questioner,
Mahijah, comes out of nowhere. Likewise, the BG gives us no direct
information about Mahaway’s first journey to meet Enoch. However,
BG does give us hints about why Mahaway was the one chosen to
make a journey to Enoch the second time:
   •   Previous familiarity. One of the gibborim states that Mahaway
       already knew Enoch, for he had “heard his voice” previously,
       “the first time” he went there, and that because of his earlier
       visit the “road” would be “similar” to him when he went there
       again the next time.292
   •   Moral fitness. Wilkens concludes, based on a Manichaean BG
       fragment, that Mahaway “is not as corrupted as his fellows.”293
       This would provide a reasonable rationale for Mahaway as a
       mediator who is morally fit to speak with the prophet Enoch.
   •   Physical makeup. Another reason for the choosing of
       Mahaway as the envoy of the gibborim to Enoch may be that
       Mahaway differed in his physical makeup from those who
       selected him. Specifically, among Mahaway’s additional
       qualifications for making the long voyage to the eastern end
       of the earth294 to question Enoch, is that he seems to be “the
       only giant with wings.”295 In this respect and others, Mahaway
       resembles the winged angel Yahoel in the pseudepigraphic
       Apocalypse of Abraham,296 who played a similar mediating
       role for Abraham.
   •   Courage. Nibley gives his opinion that, in contrast to
       Mahaway, the gibborim were afraid of a meeting with
       Enoch. Nibley’s observation is consistent with the evidence
       mentioned earlier about the depiction of ʾOhyah and Hahyah
       as ineffectual worriers.297 Nibley notes: “[The gibborim] are
       scared; they don’t know who Enoch is so they force Mahijah
       [= BG Mahaway] to go.”298
     In conclusion, the posing of direct questions by Mahijah in the
Book of Moses in a first visit that occurred during Enoch’s personal
preaching mission is consistent both with the BG role of Mahaway
as a messenger and with BG fragments describing how Enoch taught
the gibborim face to face on earth before he ascended to heaven.
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                   1101

F. Enoch/Mahaway reads record of deeds
Table 9. Examples of resemblances for narrative theme F

 Book of Moses                          Book of Giants
 For a book of remembrance              1. to you [
 we have written among us,              2. the two tablets[
 according to the pattern given by      3. and the second until now
 the finger of God; and it is given     has not been rea[d (Parry 2013,
 in our own language.                   4Q203, frg. 7b II, l. 1–3, p. 945; see
 And . . . Enoch spake forth the        Stuckenbruck 1997, pp. 84–87)
 words of God (6:46–47)
                                        1. [The] boo[k of ] . . .
                                        3. A copy of the s[ec]ond tablet of
                                        the le[tter ]
                                        4. in a do[cu]ment of the hand of
                                        Enoch, the scribe of interpretation
                                        . . . (Parry, 2013, 4Q203, frg. 8,
                                        l. 1–4, p. 945; see Stuckenbruck
                                        1997, pp. 87–93; Reeves 1992, pp.
                                        109–11)

                                        Bring there (?) what is written
                                        (upon?) these two stone tablets.
                                        . . . Now I have come and brought
                                        these two tablets that I might
                                        read aloud before the [gibborim]
                                        the one about the demons [i.e.,
                                        the gibborim, in this context299].
                                        . . . Read the handwriting
                                        which Enoch the wise [scribe?]
                                        (Sundermann 1984, frg. L, 1r,
                                        II.1–10, pp. 495–96; translated
                                        in Reeves 1992, pp. 109, 117. See
                                        Stuckenbruck 1997, pp. 84–87.)


In Moses 6, we read of Enoch’s preaching to the people out of a
“book of remembrance,”300 in which both the words of God and
the deeds of the people were recorded. The specific type of heavenly
book referred to in the Book of Moses301 is similar to one that
appears frequently in related Old Testament passages and Jewish
1102       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




   Figure 14. Enoch as a preacher. Elijah and Enoch (detail), 17th century.302
pseudepigrapha.303 It resembles most closely what is sometimes
called a Book of Deeds, a “heavenly accounting of people’s works,
good or evil,” which “regulates entrance into eternal happiness.”304
In correspondence to this depiction in the Book of Moses, BG
describes a heavenly book in the form of “two stone tablets”305 that
is given by Enoch to Mahujah to stand as a witness of “their fallen
state and betrayal of their ancient covenants.”306 Both Stuckenbruck
and Reeves plausibly suggest that in BG the speaker introducing
the book in this case is apparently Mahawai, having returned from
his second visit to Enoch with it,307 though it is significant that in
1 Enoch, as in the Book of Moses, the corresponding speaker is
Enoch himself.
     In the Book of Moses, Enoch says that the book from which
Enoch was reading was written “according to the pattern given by
the finger of God” (Moses 6:46). This may allude to the idea that
a similar record of the wickedness of the people was being kept
in heaven. Note that the Book of Giants refers to the second tablet
given to Mahujah by Enoch as being a “copy” (4Q203 frg. 8, l. 2).
     In short, the idea of Enoch as a scribe and witness of the
heavenly book of remembrance, as described in the Book of Moses,
fits squarely into ancient Jewish teachings about Enoch, including
those in BG and 1 Enoch.
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                1103

G. Trembling and weeping after record is read
Table 10. Examples of resemblances for narrative theme G

 Book of Moses                          Book of Giants
 And as Enoch spake forth               they prostrated and wept bef[ore
 the words of God, the people           (Parry 2013, 4Q203, frg. 4, l.
 trembled, and could not stand in       6, p. 943; cf. Martínez 1996, p.
 his presence (6:47)                    260: “they bowed down and
                                        wept in front of [Enoch].” See
                                        Stuckenbruck 1997, pp. 74–76;
                                        Milik 1976, p. 312.)

                                        [when] they saw the apostle
                                        [i.e., Enoch308] … those that
                                        were tyrants and criminals [i.e.,
                                        the unrepentant faction of the
                                        gibborim], they were [worried]
                                        and much afraid (Henning 1943,
                                        text E, p. 66)


In the Book of Moses, Enoch’s reading of the book of remembrance
caused the people to greatly fear: “And as Enoch spake forth the
words of God, the people trembled, and could not stand in his
presence” (Moses 6:47). The BG fragments shown in the table at
right likewise attest to the state of worry and fear that followed
Enoch’s message.
    As mentioned previously, the idea that the gibborim ever met
up with Enoch face-to-face is problematic to Stuckenbruck.309 Thus,
he refrains from making any conjectural reference to Enoch in
his translation of 4Q203 frg. 4, l. 6, as shown in the table above.310
However, Martínez, disagreeing with Stuckenbruck on that point,
reads that BG passage in a way that is consistent with the Book
of Moses, suggesting in his translation that the leaders of the
mighty warriors “bowed down and wept in front of [Enoch].”311
Milik312 views the passage similarly. In additional support of his
interpretation, he cites a Manichaean fragment of BG that says
that “[when] they saw the apostle [i.e., Enoch313] … those that were
tyrants and criminals . . . were [worried] and much afraid.”314
1104        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

   In further support of the idea that the context of fear, trembling,
and prostration of the wicked (who were, in this instance, the
Watchers rather than the gibborim) occurred in the context of
Enoch’s personal rehearsal of their sins, see this parallel passage
from 1 Enoch. It describes a reaction similar to both the Book of
Moses and BG after Enoch finished his preaching:
       Then I [i.e., Enoch] went and spoke to all of them together.
       And they were all afraid and trembling and fear seized them.
       And they asked that I write a memorandum of petition315 for
       them, that they might have forgiveness, and that I recite the
       memorandum of petition for them in the presence of the Lord
       of heaven. For they were no longer able to speak or to lift their
       eyes to heaven out of shame for the deeds through which they
       had sinned and for which they had been condemned. . . . and
       they were sitting and weeping at Abel-Main,316 . . . covering
       their faces.317

In summary, supporting evidence favors the similarity of the
reaction of the gibborim in BG to Enoch’s preaching about their
wicked deeds to the response of Enoch’s hearers in the Book of
Moses.

H. Call to repentance
After describing the rampant wickedness among the gibborim,
both the Qumran and the Book of Moses sermons of Enoch “end
on a note of hope”318—a feature unique in the Enoch literature to
these two accounts. In the Book of Moses account, Enoch draws
attention to God’s invitation of repentance that had been given
previously to Adam:
       If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and
       believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized,
       . . . ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost . . . and whatsoever
       ye shall ask, it shall be given you. (Moses 6:52)

In BG, we are given to understand more specifically that the
possibility of forgiveness through repentance is only available
for the gibborim, not the Watchers.319 Such a distinction would
be consistent with 1 Enoch 12:5, when the Watchers are told that
they are beyond the possibility of forgiveness—even if they should
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                        1105

Table 11. Examples of resemblances for narrative theme H.

 Book of Moses                            Book of Giants
 And he also said unto him: If            14. . . . So now, set loose what you
 thou wilt turn unto me, and              hold captive [
 hearken unto my voice, and               15. and pray. (Parry 2013,
 believe, and repent of all thy           4Q203, frg. 8, l. 14–15, p. 947; see
 transgressions, and be baptized,         Stuckenbruck 1997, pp 87–93;
 . . . ye shall receive the gift of the   Reeves 1992, pp. 116–17)
 Holy Ghost, asking all things            1. and] they [prostrat]ed from [
 in his name, and whatsoever ye           (Parry 2013, 4Q530, frg. 13, l. 1,
 shall ask, it shall be given you         p. 947; see Stuckenbruck 1997, p.
 (6:52)                                   139)

                                          MCP depiction of kneeling
                                          “demons” (Kósa 2016, pp. 173–75;
                                          fig. 2c, p. 185)

                                          [when] they saw the apostle [i.e.,
                                          Enoch320], . . . before the apostle . . .
                                          those demons [i.e., the gibborim,
                                          in this context] that were [timid],
                                          were very, very glad at seeing the
                                          apostle. All of them assembled
                                          before him (Henning 1943, text E,
                                          p. 66; Reeves, 1992, p. 117)

“lament and make petition forever, . . . they will have no mercy or
peace.”321 On the other hand, in BG and the Book of Moses, hope is
provided to the wicked gibborim through repentance. BG relates the
command of Enoch as follows: “Set loose what you hold captive . . .
and pray” (4Q203, frg. 8, l. 14–15).322 It seems that at least part of the
group of hearers subsequently “[prostrat]ed” themselves (4Q530,
frg. 13, l. 1).323 While this repentant group was “very, very glad at
seeing the apostle [i.e., Enoch324]” and “assembled before him,” we
have already seen that Enoch’s message was not received uniformly
by all: “those that were tyrants and criminals [i.e., the unrepentant
faction] . . . were [worried] and much afraid” (Henning, text E).325
     Reeves conjectures that an additional difficult-to-reconstruct
phrase in BG326 might also be understood as an “allusion to a
1106       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




Figure 15. Detail of Manichaean Cosmology Painting (MCP), showing “demons”
  (in this case likely representing a faction of repentant gibborim) kneeling on
                    pitch-dark clouds with their hands clutched.


probationary period for the repentance of the [gibborim].”327 The
description of a period of repentance seems to echo a specific
Jewish tradition that continues to modern times. In this regard, I
note Geo Widengren’s description of the Jewish tradition that “on
New Year’s Day, . . . the judgment is carried out when three kinds
of tablets are presented, one for the righteous, one for sinners, and
one for those occupying an intermediate position.”328 Widengren
explains that “people of an intermediate position are granted ten
days of repentance between New Year’s Day and Yom Kippurim.”329
     Thus, it appears that in both the Book of Moses and BG a “space
[is] granted unto man in which he might repent” (Alma 12:24).
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                 1107

I. Sexual defilement
Table 12. Examples of resemblances for narrative theme I

 Book of Moses                          Book of Giants
 [Enoch said:] And the Lord spake       6. ‘Let it be known to you th[at ] [
 unto Adam, saying: Inasmuch as         7. your activity and (that) of
 thy children are conceived in sin,     [your] wive[s ]
 even so when they begin to grow        8. those ([gibborim])[ and their ]
 up, sin conceiveth in their hearts,    son[s and] the [w]ives o[f ]
 and they taste the bitter, that they   9. through your fornication on the
 may know to prize the good (6:55)      earth (Parry 2013, 4Q203, frg. 8, l.
                                        6–9, p. 945)


Among the declarations that the Book of Moses Enoch makes to his
hearers from the book of remembrance is that their children “are
conceived in sin” (Moses 6:55). Richard Draper, Kent Brown, and
Michael Rhodes explain the appearance of this surprising phrase,
seemingly inconsistent with the preceding verse, as follows:

      This statement appears to be troublesome in light of an
      earlier passage declaring that “children are whole from the
      foundation of the world” (Moses 6:54). The act of conceiving
      between married parents is not itself sinful. Rather, it seems
      that because of the Fall, children come into a world saturated
      with sin. There is no escape. Therefore, “when they begin to
      grow up, sin conceiveth in their hearts.”330

When verses 54 and 55 are put together, it becomes apparent that
the tragic state of the children of Enoch’s hearers is not due simply to
their fallen nature, but rather to the depth of their parents’ willfully
chosen corruption. As Nibley expressed it, “The wicked people of
Enoch’s day . . . did indeed conceive their children in sin, since they
were illegitimate offspring of a totally amoral society”331—in other
words, they were conceived in a sinful world. The relevant passage in
BG reads with a similar import:332 “Let it be known to you th[at ] . . .
your activity and (that) of [your] wive[s ] those (giants) [and their]
son[s and] the [w]ives o[f ] through your fornication on the earth.”333
1108        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




    Figure 16. Angel of Revelation 14:6, carrying a scroll.334 In similar fashion,
  Mahaway, bearing questions from the gibborim, “mounted up in the air like
strong winds and flew with his hands like an eagle to the east of the earth and he
            passed above in the direction of the Paradise of Justice.”335

J. Mahujah/Mahaway’s second, heavenly journey to meet Enoch
In order to explore the career of Mahijah/Mahaway more
extensively, it must be understood that in BG, Mahaway’s role as
a messenger and go-between for the gibborim results in his taking
two separate journeys, one earthly and one heavenly, to meet with
the Enoch. But in the Book of Moses, it is typically assumed that
Mahijah had only one encounter with Enoch, as recorded in Moses
6:40. Are there hints elsewhere in Moses 6–7 of a second journey of
Mahijah corresponding to Mahaway’s second, heavenly journey in
BG? The answer is yes—but before saying more, let’s look more at
the BG account of the second journey of Mahaway in more detail
(4Q530, frg. 7, col. ii, l. 3–5).
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                   1109

Table 13. Examples of resemblances for narrative theme J


 Book of Moses                   Book of Giants
 As I was journeying, and        6. ‘Let it be known to you th[at ] [
 stood upon the place            7. your activity and (that) of [your]
 Mahujah, and cried unto         wive[s ]
 the Lord, there came            8. those ([gibborim])[ and their ] son[s
 a voice out of heaven,          and] the [w]ives o[f ]
 saying—Turn ye, and get         9. through your fornication on the earth
 ye upon the mount Simeon        (Parry 2013, 4Q203, frg. 8, l. 6–9, p. 945)
 (7:2)
                                 3. . . . [ he (i.e., Mahaway) mounted up in
 As I was journeying             the air]
 and stood in the place,         4. like strong winds, and flew with his
 Mahujah and I cried unto        hands like an ea[gle to the east of the
 the Lord. There came            earth and he passed above]
 a voice out of heaven,          5. . . . in the direction of the Paradise of
 saying—Turn ye, and get         Justice] (Parry 2013, 4Q530, frg. 7, col. ii,
 ye upon the mount Simeon        l. 3–5, p. 951; see Stuckenbruck 1997, pp.
 (7:2, OT1, p. 15)               128–34; Reeves 1992, pp. 103–4)

                                 Kneeling figure of Mahujah/Mahaway
                                 (?) on mountaintop (MCP, Gulácsi 2015,
                                 pp. 470, 489)

                                 [Mahaway said:] “Fire was rising.336
                                 And furth[ermore I saw] that the sun
                                 was rising. [Its] palace wa[s] revolving
                                 without being carried over.337 Then,
                                 from heaven above came a voice [of
                                 an archangel?338] It called me and said:
                                 “You, son of Virōgdād [i.e., Mahaway339],
                                 the order for you is exactly this: You [h]
                                 ave seen more than enough! Do not die
                                 prematurely now! Return quickly [from]
                                 here!” And then, besides this, I heard
                                 the voice of the apostle Enoch from the
                                 south. But I did no[t] see him in person.
                                 Then, very affectionately, he called out
                                 my name. . . . I shook (or: beat) my wings
                                 and quickly descended fr[o]m heaven.
1110       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses


Book of Moses                         Book of Giants
                                      . . . And again from above came
                                      a voice. It conferred the words
                                      of the apostle Enoch. It said: “I
                                      call you, o son of Virōgdā[d],
                                      I know [th]is: you are [l]ike
                                      some of them.340 You are . . .
                                      (31–33) (Wilkens 2016, Mainz
                                      317 fragment, pp. 227–28;
                                      Henning 1943, text A, frg. b, p.
                                      65. See Wilkens 2016, 214–29;
                                      Stuckenbruck 1997, pp. 132–34;
                                      Reeves 1992, p. 94)


From BG we learn that Mahaway had to mount up “in the air like
strong winds” and “fly like an eagle” to the “east of the earth . . . in the
direction of . . . Paradise”341 in order to meet Enoch. Though in the
symbolic geography of the ancient world a central, cosmic mountain
typically represents the most sacred place on earth, its “east edge,”342
the dawn horizon,343 the location of the boundary where the round
dome of heaven meets the square plane of earth,344 is not only where
visions of God are often situated but also the “launching point” from
which actual heavenly ascents sometimes occurred.345
     Consistent with this view, in 1 Enoch, the prophet described his
journey as taking him to “the ends of the earth, on which the heaven
rests, and the gates of heaven open,”346 and gave a brief account of
its great beasts347 and birds with beautiful voices.348 Likewise, the
description of Methuselah’s journey to the end of the earth in the
Genesis Apocryphon,349 where Enoch’s “dwelling is with the angels,”350
“can be plausibly understood as [an allusion] to the [Garden of]
Eden.”351
     Couched within this symbolic geography, Mahaway’s second
journey to visit Enoch in BG352 “is clearly from the west to the east
and back again.”353 Among his other qualifications to make this
voyage to the eastern end of the earth,354 he seems to be “the only
giant with wings.”355 Just as Enoch, who flew east with the angels,
used “this mode of transportation . . . to visit areas that normally
humans cannot reach,”356 so also
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                       1111




    Figure 17. Camille Flammarion (1842–1925): Engraving, 1888. “The image
  depicts a man crawling under the edge of the sky, depicted as if it were a solid
     hemisphere, to look at the mysterious Empyrean beyond. The caption . . .
   translates to ‘A medieval missionary tells that he has found the point where
heaven and earth meet.’”357 In line with the idea that the Garden of Eden is at the
     eastern edge of the earth, note the prominent tree just behind the man.358

      the flight of Mahaway should be understood in a similar way.
      [He] is able to reach Eden because he can fly over a desolate
      desert that would be, following this logic, impossible to cross on
      foot. This underscores the extraordinary and difficult nature of
      [his] voyage. Asking Mahaway to undertake such an arduous
      journey highlights how seriously [the gibborim] wanted an
      interpretation to the two visions of ’Ohyah and Hahyah.359

Salvatore Cirillo finds the parallel accounts of Mahaway’s journeys
in BG and the Book of Moses impressive: “The emphasis that
[Joseph] Smith places on Mahijah’s travel to Enoch is eerily similar
to the account of Mahaway to Enoch in [BG].”360
1112       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




  Figure 18. Detail of MCP depicting a solitary, repentant individual, possibly
 representing Mahaway kneeling atop a high mountain. The imagery recalls the
  OT1 text of Moses 7:2 where Mahujah and Enoch “cried unto the Lord” and
  heard the divine command: “Turn ye, and get ye upon the mount Simeon.”361

    In the Manichaean Cosmology Painting, a lone figure kneels
repentantly on the top of the only other mountain shown in the
scene. So far as I am aware, no BG scholar has attempted to identify
this uniquely prominent figure, however it is hard to imagine a
better candidate than Mahijah/Mahujah/Mahaway. But why would
a repentant Mahijah/Mahujah/Mahaway be perched alone on a
mountain top?
    A clue to that possibility lies in Old Testament Manuscript
1 (OT1), the manuscript of the Book of Moses that was directly
recorded from Joseph Smith’s dictation. In the OT1 version of
Moses 7:2, the second and only other mention of Mahijah is found,
though with a slightly different spelling: Mahujah. Importantly,
while the canonized version of Moses 7:2 reads Mahujah as a place
name, OT1 renders Mahujah as a personal name.362 In other words,
the original dictation seems to indicate that Enoch is “standing
with” the figure Mahujah, “not standing on” the place Mahujah.363
    With respect to the mention of “the place,” Kent Brown has
elsewhere observed that in a biblical context, references to “the
place” (Hebrew maqōm; Greek topos) may describe a special or
sacred location. For example, in the New Testament the Garden of
Gethsemane metaphorically becomes “the holy place” where Jesus
           Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants              1113




            Figure 19. Moses 7:2–3, Old Testament 1 Manuscript,
                        Joseph Smith Translation.364

enters to pray and to shed His blood.365 Here, “the [holy] place” also
became a place of prayer for Mahujah and Enoch when they “cried
unto the Lord.” As Draper et al. emphasize,366 it is the cry of the
righteous that mobilizes the Lord to take action—whether it be in
providing further knowledge and understanding, as we see here and
again later throughout the grand vision of Enoch,367 in taking action
to correct injustices,368 or in delivering His people from distress.369
The initial words of God’s command “Turn ye” express something
more than physical movement. Though the Hebrew term teshuvah
literally denotes “return,” it can be understood by modern English
speakers as signifying “repentance” or “conversion” in scriptural
contexts. God turns to the petitioner when the petitioner turns to
Him.370
     All this seems consistent with the idea that Mahaway may
be the individual depicted in the MCP scene shown in figure 18.
Significantly, the mountain on which the figure kneels is nearer to
Mount Sumēru, in other words closer to the sacred center of the
scene, than the other gibborim who kneel in the distant land across
the river.
     As to the similarly spelled name that appears at this point in the
story—“Mahujah” instead of “Mahijah”—the question arises as to
whether this is a scribal error or a deliberate change.371 If taken as a
deliberate and meaningful change, the sacred setting of the change,
in close association with the mention of Enoch’s being “clothed
upon with glory” (Moses 7:2) recalls the bestowal of new names
1114      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

upon Abram/Abraham and Sarai/Sarah.372 Simultaneously seeming
both to highlight Enoch’s personal investment in the spiritual
progress of Mahujah/Mahaway and the sacred symbolism of names
in initiatory rites, BG obliquely relates the brief remembrance of
Mahaway that Enoch “very affectionately . . . called out my name.”373
BG scholar Jens Wilkens comments, “One is tempted to postulate
an emotional relationship between [Mahaway] and Enoch.”374
     Then, as Mahaway departed, Enoch spoke to him a last time:
“I call you, o son of Virogdad, I know [th]is: you are like some
of them.”375 The sense of the warning seems to be “you are too
much like some of them,” in other words, it seems that Mahujah/
Mahaway, like the wicked faction of the gibborim,376 ultimately
would reject the invitation to repent and be exalted with Enoch.
     If additional speculation can be tolerated, the ending of the BG
story of Mahujah/Mahaway might be seen as a sort of parable that
evokes the themes of Jesus’ encounter with the rich young ruler.377
Like the rich young ruler, we might say in modern terms that
Mahujah/Mahaway was offered the gift of eternal life if he would
follow the path he had begun as a disciple of Enoch to its glorious
end through complete obedience to the law of consecration, as
was later strictly observed by Enoch’s people in Zion. Sadly—after
Mahujah/Mahaway’s promising but brief encounter with Enoch
in a sacred place where together they “cried unto the Lord,” a
place where Mahujah/Mahaway had been called by name “very
affectionately” and in sorrow warned at his departure—the account
implies Mahujah/Mahaway not only lost his life but also, more
tragically, perished spiritually.
     We are not told directly whether Mahujah/Mahaway remained
repentant or became recalcitrant when he died, but the BG
description of his slaughter suggests that he remained too long in
the “tents of [the] wicked” (Numbers 16:26) and for that reason, if
for no other, he ultimately shared in their tragic demise. BG records
these words as a lament for Mahaway’s violent death: “Slain, slain
was that angel who was great, [that messenger whom they had378].
Dead were those who were joined with flesh.”379
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                 1115

K. Enoch clothed with glory
Table 14. Examples of resemblances for narrative theme K

 Book of Moses                          Book of Giants
 There came a voice out of heaven,      1. ] a thousand thousands [were
 saying—Turn ye, and get ye upon        serving ] him [
 the mount Simeon.                      2. ] not alarmed at any king and [
 And it came to pass that I turned      3. great fear] seized me and I fell
 and went up on the mount; and as       on my face; I hea[rd] his voice [
 I stood upon the mount, I beheld       4. ] he dwelt [not] among human
 the heavens open, and I was            beings and he did not learn from
 clothed upon with glory;               them[ (Parry 2013, 4Q531, frg. 14,
 And I saw the Lord; and he stood       l. 1–4, p. 957; see Stuckenbruck
 before my face, and he talked with     2013, pp. 154–56)
 me, even as a man talketh one
 with another, face to face (7:2–4)

Though both Enoch and Mahujah were commanded to ascend
(“Turn ye,” using a plural pronoun), it seems that only Enoch made
an immediate response (“I turned and went up on the mount”).
Moses 7:3 relates that as Enoch stood on the mount, the heavens
opened and he was “clothed upon with glory.” 2 Enoch and 3 Enoch
purport to describe the process by which Enoch was “clothed upon
with glory” in more detail, as discussed previously.
     In an uncanonized revelation on Enoch found in Joseph Smith’s
Revelation Book 2,380 Mount Simeon, where Enoch and Mahujah are
called to go, is called the “Mountain of God,”381 appearing to corre-
spond symbolically to a sacred center like Mount Sumēru in the BG
account. The name Simeon (Hebrew Shim’on) is generally taken to
derive from the Hebrew shama’ (= “to hear”), as indicated in Genesis
29:33.382 Remembering that Enoch preached “upon the hills and the
high places,”383 Nibley associates the term with the concepts of “an
audition, a hearing, both attention, a place of preaching” or “conversa-
tion,” hence an “exchange of ideas.”384 Thus, Simeon is a fitting name
for a meeting place between Enoch and the Lord. Incidentally, there is
a Mount Simeon (Jabal Sem’an) in Syria—also known as Mount Nebo.
There Moses received a vision of the promised land.
     The brief summary of the prelude to Enoch’s transfiguration
is augmented by the account in Revelation Book 2. As Enoch
1116        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




  Figure 20. Franz Johansen (1938–), Resurrection. BYU sculpture garden.385
 In a vision of his own resurrection, President Lorenzo Snow, then an Apostle,
 experienced something similar to what is described in 2 Enoch and 3 Enoch.
 He recounted: “I heard a voice calling me by name, saying: ‘He is worthy, he is
 worthy, take away his filthy garments.’ My clothes were then taken off piece by
        piece and a voice said: ‘Let him be clothed, let him be clothed.’”386

       gazed upon nature and the corruption of man, and mourned
       their sad fate, and wept and cried with a loud voice, and heaved
       forth his sighs, “Omnipotence, Omnipotence! O may I see thee!”
          And with his finger he [i.e., God] touched his [i.e., Enoch’s]
       eyes and he saw heaven, he gazed on eternity and sang an
       angelic song and mingled his voice with the heavenly throng,
       “Hosanna! Hosanna!” The sound of the trump around the
       throne of God echoed and echoed again, and rang and reechoed
       until eternity was filled with his voice.
          He saw, yea, he saw and he glorified God.387

Thus, among other things, we learn that Enoch “was not simply
given the privilege of seeing God. Rather the glorious opportunity
to see God came to Enoch because he asked to see God.”388
           Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                      1117




  Figure 21. Gerard Hoet (1648–1733), God Took Enoch.389. In a separate event
that took place long before the long-term translation of Enoch and his people to
 the “bosom of God,” the Book of Moses recounts that Enoch was “clothed upon
                             with glory” (Moses 7:3).

    By taking the liberty to combine insights from both the BG
and Book of Moses accounts, we seem to be able to see a glimpse
of Enoch’s glory in heaven from Mahujah/Mahaway’s secondhand
perspective: “A thousand thousands [were serving ] him. . . . Great
fear] seized me and I fell on my face.”
    After Enoch’s presence is “veiled” following his glorification,390
Wilkens observes that “only Enoch’s voice is mentioned.”391 In
explanation of this state of affairs, Wilkens mentions a Uyghur
fragment of BG in which a speaker says (likely Mahaway, referring
to Enoch), “But I did not see him in person.”392 From the combined
textual evidence, it seems that we are meant to understand that
1118      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

the final scene of Mahaway’s second visit with Enoch “takes place
in the sky”393 in voice-to-voice rather than face-to-face fashion. In
other words, it seems that at this point Mahaway can still speak
with Enoch through the “veil” but is no longer permitted to see
Enoch in his transfigured state in the divine realm. Thus, we read
in 4Q531 14, 1–4, after Enoch passed out of view into the celestial
world, Mahujah/Mahaway’s concluding report: “I hea[rd] his voice.”
     BG scholars differ in their interpretation about what happened
to Enoch after his glorification. While the English translation in
Parry and Tov adds a conjectural “not” to be able to state that
Enoch “dwelt [not] among human beings,”394 Stuckenbruck accepts
the literal reading that Enoch “dwelt among human beings.”395 The
“not” is assumed by scholars who are looking for consistency in this
passage with their view that, in BG, Enoch did not minister directly
to humankind. However, omitting the conjectural “not” leaves us
with a reading that agrees with the Book of Moses account, in which
Enoch continued to lead and teach his disciples personally after his
initial glorification. The Book of Moses separately describes the
eventual, more permanent translation of Enoch and his people at
that time when “Zion fled” (Moses 7:69).

L. Gibborim defeated in battle
The Book of Moses briefly summarizes how the “enemies” of
the “people of God” “came to battle against them,” crediting the
victory of Enoch not to their superior numbers or weaponry but to
the power of the “word of the Lord” that he spoke (Moses 7:13–15).
Notably, Moses 7:15 contains the single mention in the Book of
Moses Enoch account of a group of “giants” who “stood afar off.”
The BG picture of the conflict agrees with the ignominious defeat
of Enoch’s opponents. The profound disappointment of the speaker
of 4Q531 frg. 22, l. 3–7, probably one of the gibborim,396 is magnified
by his overweening ambition to dominate and humiliate his foes.
Reeves writes:
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                   1119

Table 15. Examples of resemblances for narrative theme L


 Book of Moses         Book of Giants
 And so great          3 [ I am] mighty [literally “I am a gibbor”397], and
 was the faith of      by the mighty strength of my arm and my own
 Enoch that he         great strength
 led the people of     4. [and I went up against a]ll flesh, and I made
 God, and their        war against them; but I did not
 enemies came          5. [prevail, and I am not] able to stand firm
 to battle against     against them, for my opponents
 them . . .            6. [are angels who] reside in [heav]en, and they
 And the giants of     dwell in the holy places. vacat And they were not
 the land, also,       7. [defeated, for they] are stronger than I.
 stood afar off;       (Parry 2013, 4Q531, frg. 22, l. 3–7, p. 959; see
 and there went        Stuckenbruck, pp. 161–67; Reeves 1992, pp.
 forth a curse         118–21)
 upon all people
 that fought           5. ] Did not all these depart through your sword[
 against God;          6. much blood was shed, ] like great rivers on
 And from that         [the] e[arth398 (Parry 2013, 4Q531, frg. 7, l. 5–6, p.
 time forth there      955; see Stuckenbruck 1997, pp. 146–49)
 were wars and         And those two hundred demons399 fought a hard
 bloodshed             battle with the [four angels], until [the angels
 among them; but       used] fire, naptha, and brimstone (Henning 1943,
 the Lord came         text G, p. 69; see Reeves, pp. 122–23)
 and dwelt with        “The Righteous who were burnt in the fire, they
 his people, and       endured. This multitude that were wiped out,
 they dwelt in         four thousand. . . . Enoch also, the Sage, the
 righteousness         transgressors being . . .” (Henning 1943, text Q,
 (7:13, 15–16)         p. 72)

                       many . . . were killed, four hundred thousand
                       Righteous . . . with fire, naphtha, and brimstone
                       . . . And the angels veiled (or: covered, or:
                       protected, or: moved out of sight) Enoch
                       (Henning 1943, text A, frg. i, p. 61 [and 62n4]. See
                       Stuckenbruck 1997, 19n82; Wilkens 2016, p. 225.)

                       MCP depiction of Enoch being protected by
                       angels (Kósa 2016, pp. 162–63, 168–69; fig. 2a, p.
                       183)
1120        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses


Book of Moses               Book of Giants
                            “Then Atambīš two hundred . . . he seized . . .
                            he cut off (?) before (?) . . . he smashed and
                            he tossed [to] the four end[s] of the ea[rth].
                            . . . Slain, slain was that angel who was great,
                            [that messenger whom they had400]. Dead
                            were those who were joined with flesh, and
                            defeated were those who were . . . (?) with . . .
                            (?) were slain, those who . . . with one step (?)
                            . . .” (Sundermann 1973, M5900 (22), lines
                            1551–56, 1574–81, pp. 77–78, as translated in
                            Reeves 1992, p. 123. See Stuckenbruck 1997,
                            73n43; Wilkens 2016, p. 227)


       The confident, even boasting character of the [statement]
       accords well with several testimonia contained in Jewish
       sources that stigmatize the “pride” or “arrogance” of the
       [gibborim]. 3 Maccabees 2:4 states: “Those who formerly
       practiced lawlessness, among whom were [gibborim] confident
       of (their) might and boldness.” . . . Note also Wisdom of Solomon
       14:6: “For also in the beginning, while arrogant [gibborim] were
       dying.” . . . Josephus is also familiar with this motif: “. . . sons
       who were arrogant and contemptuous of all that was good,
       placing confidence in their strength.”401

Significantly, BG and the Book of Moses emphasize not only war
but “bloodshed,” which a speaker in BG compares to horrible “great
rivers on the earth.”402
    Some of the BG fragments shown in the table above describe
three specific motifs relating to the battle:403
   •     The idea that battles were waged (at least in part) against
         heavenly forces. In at least one place, “four angels”404 are
         specifically mentioned—a reference to Raphael, Michael,
         Gabriel, and Istrael (also known as Sariel, Uriel, or Fanuel).405
         Kósa’s interpretation suggests that, “in contrast to the non-
         armored, other heavenly figures in the firmaments [of the
         MCP depiction], the four armored angels depicted in action
         constitute a special squad, charged with very difficult
         tasks.”406
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                       1121




Figure 22. Detail from the MCP.407 The four archangels mentioned in BG, who
(in the Manichaean conception) were in the forefront of the battles against the
 wicked408 and helped gather the repentant gibborim, are standing, clothed in
  armor, in front of a seated deity that one scholar suggests may be Enoch.409

   •   The use of “fire, naphtha, and brimstone”410 by these heavenly
       forces.
   •   The fact that although “the Righteous who were burnt in
       the fire, they endured”411 and that Enoch was “veiled” or
       “moved out of sight” for his protection.412 While neither the
       participation of heavenly forces in battles nor the use of
       fire, naphtha, and brimstone are mentioned in the Book of
       Moses, the general idea that Enoch and the righteous were
       protected is consistent with Moses 7:16.
1122       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




Figure 23. Bas-relief showing Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, stabbing a wounded
       lion. North Palace, Nineveh, Mesopotamia, Iraq, ca. 645–635 BCE.

M. The “roar of lions/wild beasts” following battle
Table 16. Examples of resemblances for narrative theme M

 Book of Moses                          Book of Giants
 and he spake the word of the           6. . . . they were not
 Lord, and the earth trembled,          7. [defeated, for they] are stronger
 and the mountains fled, even           than I. vacat
 according to his command; and          8. ] of the wild beast has come,
 the rivers of water were turned        and the wild man they call [me.]
 out of their course; and the roar      (Parry 2013, 4Q531, frg. 22, l.
 of the lions was heard out of the      6–8, p. 959; see Stuckenbruck, pp.
 wilderness; and all nations feared     161–67; Reeves 1992, pp. 118–21;
 greatly, so powerful was the word      emphasis added)
 of Enoch, and so great was the
 power of the language which God        . . . hard . . . arrow . . . bow, he that
 had given him (7:13; emphasis          . . . (Henning 1943, text A, frg. c,
 added)                                 p. 60)

                                        [Not the] . . . of the lion, but the
                                        . . . on his . . . (Henning 1943, text
                                        A, frg. k, p. 60)

The puzzling phrase “[ ] of the wild beast has come” immediately
follows the description of the battle. The first portion of the phrase,
indicated by brackets in Cook’s translation above, has proven
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                      1123

difficult for other translators to reconstruct as well. Thus, for
example, Loren Stuckenbruck renders it simply as two untranslated
letters: “rh” (i.e., “rh of the beasts of the field is coming”413). However,
Martínez and Milik, confident enough to make a conjecture,
respectively understand the phrase as “the roar of the wild beasts
has come”414 and “the roaring of the wild beasts came.”415 Lending
credence to their reading, the Enoch account in the Book of Moses
has a remarkably similar phrase: “The roar of the lions was heard.”416
This phrase, placed in analogous post-battle settings in both texts, is
one of the most striking and unexpected affinities between Joseph
Smith’s Enoch story and the ancient Book of Giants.

Table 17. Comparison of English translations on “the roar of
the wild beasts/lions”

 Stuckenbruck        Martínez            Milik
                                                               Moses 7:13
 Translation         Translation         Translation
 rh of the beasts    the roar of the     the roaring of        the roar of the
 of the field is     wild beasts has     the wild beasts       lions was heard
 coming              come                came

    Brian R. Doak’s sociolinguistic analysis reveals a convincing
rationale for the author of the Book of Giants having placed
these references together. Among other evidence, he cites an Old
Testament example in which victory against an elite adversary (in
this case, a giant) and a prestige animal (lion) were also deliberately
juxtaposed.417 Yet, while there was indeed a close connection in
ancient times between a military victory and “the roar of wild
beasts,” that association would likely have been just as unfamiliar
to Joseph Smith as it is to general readers today.
    In addition to the ironic reversal of the roles of Enoch and his
wicked opponent as “wild men” (as discussed earlier), this example
provides a similar turning of the tables in the subjugation of the
wild beasts/lions to the God of the righteous Enoch, rather than
to his wicked adversaries. The same God who “shut the lions’
mouths”418 to save Daniel from harm opened the mouth of Enoch
to destroy his enemies through the “power of [his] language.”419
1124       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

N. Repentant are gathered to divinely prepared cities
Table 18. Examples of resemblances for narrative theme N

 Book of Moses                          Book of Giants
 the Lord came and dwelt with           And the angels themselves
 his people, and they dwelt in          descended from the heaven to the
 righteousness.                         earth. … And they led one half
 The fear of the Lord was upon all      of them eastwards, and the other
 nations, so great was the glory of     half westwards, on the skirts of
 the Lord, which was upon his           four huge mountains, towards
 people. And the Lord blessed           the foot of the Sumēru mountain,
 the land, and they were blessed        into thirty-two towns which the
 upon the mountains, and upon           Living Spirit had prepared for
 the high places, and did flourish.     them in the beginning. And one
 And the Lord called his                calls (that place) Aryān-Waižān
 people Zion (7:16–18)                  (Henning 1943, Text G, p. 69. See
                                        Reeves, pp. 122–123; Wilkens
                                        2016, p. 220)

                                        Before the children of the
                                        [gibborim] were born, they
                                        who had [no] knowledge of
                                        righteousness in them nor
                                        divinity, thirty-six cities were
                                        assigned and co[nstructed] for
                                        them wherein the children of [the
                                        (gibborim) would] live; they who
                                        would come to beget from each
                                        othe[r, they w]ho shall spend ten
                                        hundred years alive (Gardner
                                        1995, 45 (117), p. 123; Henning
                                        1943, text S, pp. 72–73. See
                                        Reeves, p. 124)


Earlier we described how the wicked gibborim sorrowed and
trembled after Enoch read the record of their deeds out of the
book of remembrance and tendered to them the possibility of
repentance. Drawing jointly on the Manichaean and Qumran
accounts, Matthew Goff conjectures that the Book of Giants follows
a set of Jewish traditions where at least some of the nephilim and
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                       1125




 Figure 24. Adapted from Michael P. Lyon (1952–), Sacred Topography of Eden
 and the Temple, 1994.420 The outbound, downward journey of the Creation and
the Fall at left is mirrored in the inbound, upward journey of the temple at right.


gibborim “are not killed in a flood but rather have long lives.”421
However, we have already seen that there were both supporters and
detractors of Enoch among the gibborim. For example, a Sogdian
fragment of BG tells us that a righteous faction “‘are glad at seeing
the apostle, who is obviously Enoch, and ‘assembled before him.’”422
But those who are called “tyrants and criminals” are “afraid.”423
In one of the most significant thematic resemblances of BG to the
Book of Moses, we are told in both texts that the righteous were
gathered to a place of safety. To fully understand the account of
the gathering of Enoch’s people in BG, we first need to appreciate
how it fits within the conception of a universe that is conceived as
“hierocentric.”
    Hugh Nibley, following Eric Burrows, defined “the term
‘hierocentric’ as that which best describes those cults, states, and
philosophies that were oriented about a point believed to be the
exact center and pivot of the universe.”424 Like the story of Enoch in
BG and the Book of Moses, ancient visualizations and descriptions
in scattered sources are sometimes constructed around a sacred
center, though, of course, representations of this symbolic, pre-
scientific approach to geography vary in significant details.425
1126       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




Figure 25. Adam and Eve at the top of the newly created paradise. Frontispiece,
              Treatise on the Work of the Six Days of Creation.426

    Such sacred centers often coincide with the location of a “moun-
tain or artificial mound and a lake or spring from which four streams
flowed out to bring the life-giving waters to the four regions of the
earth. The place was a green paradise, a carefully kept garden, a refuge
from drought and heat.”427 A version of this perspective is reflected
biblically in the layout of the Garden of Eden and the temple,428 as
well as in the geography of later stories and prophecies of divinely
directed scatterings and gatherings of Israel and other peoples.
    Scholars have argued convincingly that the outbound,
downward journey of the Creation and the Fall in Genesis is
mirrored in the inbound, upward journey of the temple (figure
24).429 The Garden of Eden can be seen as a natural “temple,” where
Adam and Eve lived at first in God’s presence. Significantly, each
major feature of Eden (e.g., the river, the cherubim, the Tree of
Knowledge, the Tree of Life) corresponds to a similar symbol in the
Israelite temple (e.g., the bronze laver, the cherubim, the veil,430 the
menorah431).
    The corresponding course taken by the Israelite high priest
through the temple can be seen as symbolizing the journey of the
Fall of Adam and Eve in reverse. In other words, just as the route
of Adam and Eve’s departure from Eden led them eastward past
the cherubim with the flaming swords and out of the sacred garden
into the mortal world, so in ancient times the high priest would
return westward from the mortal world, past the consuming fire,
the cleansing water, the woven images of cherubim on the temple
           Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                   1127




 Figure 26.a. Adam and Eve Outside Paradise, Cain and Abel, 12th century;432
      b. Top down view of three zones of sacredness in the Garden of Eden
                                and the temple.

veils and, finally, back into the presence of God.433 “Thus,” according
to Parry, the high priest has returned “to the original point of
creation, where he pours out the atoning blood of the sacrifice,
reestablishing the covenant relationship with God.”434
     An analogous conception is depicted in the frontispiece of an
Armenian adaptation of the Treatise on the Work of the Six Days
of Creation by Bartholomew of Bologna (d. 1333. See figure 25).435
It shows Adam and Eve, seemingly within a cave-like structure, at
the top and in the center of the paradisiacal creation. In that unique
setting, they have direct access to the divine Presence above, while
also being surrounded by a perimeter of angels beneath.
     A 12th-century Christian illustration also shows Adam and
Eve at the top of a mountain (figure 26a).436 However, the fig leaf
aprons they wear witness that the scene represents their fallen state
after their transgression but before they were clothed by God.437 In
contrast to the previous figure, they are now “lamenting their Fall
on a brown, bare hill,”438 having lost their access to the luxuriant
trees of the Garden and the continual, protective presence of
heavenly beings, including the Lord Himself. The diagram shown
in figure 26b, annotated with relevant terminology for the benefit
of Latter-day Saint readers, summarizes the symbology of the same
three zones of sacredness depicted in figure 26a. In a central place at
the top of the mountain, Adam and Eve sit within the most sacred
of the three zones pictured. Tongues of flame adorn the upper part
of the hill and the entrance to the cave,439 suggesting both the glory
1128      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

of God within each of the two most sacred zones and the potential
danger for those who approach the portals of entry unprepared. On
the following page of the manuscript is “an image of the Garden of
Eden, now empty, its door barred by three angels.”440
     In the heart of the mountain, the middle zone of sacredness,
an aged Adam and Eve, having been cast out of the Garden and
clad in robes of animal skins made by God for their protection,
confer within a “Cave of Treasures,” in some sources, the cave is
symbolically equated to the Holy Place of the temple, where heaven
and earth meet.441 The “Cave of Treasures” was so named in Jewish
and Christian tradition because it was conceived as a safeguard for
gold, frankincense, and myrrh, retrieved by angels from the Garden
of Eden after Adam and Eve’s departure.442 These three items,
later withdrawn from the earth but thought by some Christians
to have been returned to humankind when the Magi visited the
Christ child, respectively symbolized kingship, priesthood, and
the anointing oil that transformed kings and priests into “sons
of God.”443 The significance of the treasures becomes more clear
with the understanding that the cave where Adam and Eve were
made to dwell was a understood to be a proto-temple, a temporary
replacement and consolation for their loss of Eden.444
     Cain and Abel offer their respective grain and animal sacrifices
on the other hills portrayed on either side of the principal peak at
the center. At right, God is shown consuming the sacrifice of Abel
while, at left, He rejects that of Cain. At the bottom of the mountain,
the mortal world that corresponds symbolically to the “outer
courtyard” of the temple, Cain has words with Abel, leads him out
to the field, and, finally, murders him. Because of Cain’s grievous
killing, we are told in scripture that he and his posterity were “shut
out from the presence of the Lord” and cast further downward
and outward to dwell “in the land of Nod [i.e., wandering], on the
east of Eden.”445 Following what became the standard tradition in
the Syriac Church that saw the “sons of God” as Sethites and the
“daughters of men” as Cainites,446 Ephrem the Syrian wrote that,
tragically, some of “those who lived on higher ground,447 who were
called ‘the children of God,’ left their own region and came down to
take wives from the daughters of Cain down below.”448
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants          1129

    Moses 6:23 speaks of how “preachers of righteousness” who also
symbolically descended from higher ground, initiated a missionary
program aimed at wanderers who had deliberately forsaken God
and dwelt below. Among these preachers was Jared, 449 the father
of Enoch, the root of whose name probably means “to descend.”450
And among those to whom they preached were the “giants” or
nephilim,451 a name that fittingly means “fallen ones.”
    Circular maps with top-down perspectives on a hierocentric
cosmos are common in some cultures. Though they vary widely
in their details, many share general characteristics. Nakamura
Hiroshi used the term mappaemundi to refer to such maps, that,
in contrast to modern maps, were “used to convey a certain idea of
space, and not preoccupied with topographical accuracy.”452 A late
Korean example of such a map is shown in figure 27, but maps that
are at least superficially similar to this one go back thousands of
years. However, despite some similarities, it should be mentioned
that influence on circular Korean maps from Babylonian or
medieval sources seems unlikely, since the earlier maps “had long
been out of circulation when the circular world maps became so
popular in Korea.”453
    In figure 27, an internal continent, corresponding to known
earthly geography, is surrounded by an external continent where
immortals (both good and evil) live, separated from earth by an
internal sea. In such maps, movement away from the center of the
internal continent is represented as being in an eastward direction
that reflects increasing distance from access to the divine. For
example, with respect to the structure of maps like this one, Mark
E. Lewis notes “there is a progressive decline as one moves away
from the center.”454 Note the large medallion bearing the name of
China that is shown near the middle of the map—just east of Mount
K’un-lun, reflecting the idea of China as perhaps the most sacred
place on earth outside of the sacred mountain itself. Mount K’un-
lun, it was anciently revered as the sacred center of the universe
where heaven and earth meet and from which four great rivers
emanate455—recalling the four rivers of Eden.456
1130       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




  Figure 27. ‘Cheonhado’ map of the square earth and the round cosmos, Seoul,
  Korea, ca. 1800.457 In the central area is an internal continent surrounded by
   an internal sea, which is in turn surrounded by an external continent and
    an external sea. The names of real places are shown exclusively within the
internal continent, while the names that appear elsewhere describe mythological
                       locations458 “where immortals live.”459

Though I am not suggesting that Cheonhado maps such as the one
above and the Sogdian fragments of the Book of Giants have any
necessary relationship, at least one scholar has argued for evidence
of “weak and distant influence”460 in the resemblance of the
symbolic geography of Mount K’un-lun to that of Mount Sumēru.
Of relevance for the present chapter is that Mount Sumēru—
the sacred mountain of Hinduism, Jainism, and Buddhism—is
mentioned in Manichaean fragments of the Book of Giants—and
visually depicted in the Manichaean Cosmology Painting—as the
place of resort for the gathered righteous, as we will discuss in more
detail below.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants             1131

    When seen in the light of hierocentric maps of the world,
certain details relating to the layout of sacred, symbolic geography
in both ancient Enoch accounts and the Book of Moses take on
greater meaning. Though the symbolic geography tells us little—
or, more likely, nothing—about the physical geography of the
story, knowing something about it helps unravel the significance of
BG’s narrative of Enoch’s missionary journeys and the subsequent
gathering and scattering of various peoples.
    As mentioned previously, Jewish sources usually detail a
decrease in sacredness as one moves eastward away from the center
and an increase as one travels (or returns) toward it, often in a
westward direction.461 This direction of movement is analogous to
the westward movement toward increasingly sacred compartments
within Israelite temples. An understanding of the map helps us
understand the nature of Enoch’s eastward missionary journey.
For example, in answer to Mahijah’s question in Moses 6:41, Enoch
replied:
     I came out from the land of Cainan, the land of my fathers, a
     land of righteousness unto this day.

     Thus, in line with the presumed hierocentric, symbolic
geography of Enoch’s world, we are not surprised to read the
significant detail in the Book of Moses account that his missionary
journey took him away from the “sacred center”—in other words, he
went out “from the land of Cainan,”462 “a land of righteousness”463
in the west, to the land of the wicked in the east, presumably not far
from the western edge of “the sea east,”464 where he is said to have
received a vision. Significantly, 1 Enoch also records a vision that
Enoch received “by the waters of Dan,”465 arguably corresponding
to the “sea east” mentioned in the Book of Moses.466
     However, 1 Enoch also contains the account of an elaborate
“journey round the world”467 undertaken by Enoch that is lacking
in the Book of Moses and BG. In BG we are only given the account
of Mahaway’s long and apparently direct flight eastward to the end
of the earth to meet Enoch at the mountain of the “Paradise of
Justice,” distinct from the “mountain of God” which, in 1 Enoch,
is located in the north and prominently features the Tree of Life.468
1132        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




 Figure 28. Representation of the world based on 1 Enoch. “In the conception of
the universe in the book of [1 Enoch], the sun emerges from the six eastern gates,
moves in the six months between the winter and summer solstices, and sets in the
 western gates. The seven great mountains are based on the ancient Babylonian
conception of the universe.”469 Although not shown here, the author of 1 Enoch 26
described Jerusalem and “Judaea, the center of the earth” as containing “a sacred
  mountain, the hill of the Temple,”470 as would be expected. Milik observed that
the map shows tension between competing concerns between the requirements of
      cartography and fidelity to the (sometimes conflicting) Enoch texts.471
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                         1133




  Figure 29. Detail of MCP.472 Movement of the wicked and the righteous with
  respect to the high, treelike cliff at the center of the world, corresponding to
  the sacred Mount Sumēru. The cities that were established by the repentant
   gibborim were said to have been situated in earthly mountains that were
  westward of their point of origin. Note the mountains at the foot of Sumēru.

     With this general understanding of roughly analogous
hierocentric circular maps with a mountain at the sacred center
made at other times and places, we are ready to return to the account
of the gathering of Enoch’s people in BG and the Book of Moses.
In the general fashion of Indian cartography, produced under the
influence of Manichaean disciples familiar with BG, the universe is
depicted as “countless spherical separate worlds,” with “our earth
[as] one of the concentric rings in a disc detached from a globe.”473
At the center is Mount Sumēru, “from which flow all rivers.”
     Book of Moses readers will recall that the righteous followers
of Enoch were brought to a place of safety where “the Lord came
and dwelt with his people. … And Enoch … built a city that was
called the City of Holiness, even Zion.”474 One interesting feature of
the Manichaean BG fragments is that they tell us the direction that
Enoch’s people traveled. Specifically, according to BG, four angels
ultimately led the wicked to their eventual destruction in the east—
away from the “sacred center”—while the righteous went westward
to inhabit cities near the foot of the holy mountain, as shown by the
annotations in the figure above.
1134          Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

    Although the Manichaean version of these events highlights
only the prominent role of the angels in leading the battles and
gathering the righteous, we can safely presume that the role of Enoch
was closely intertwined with that of the angels. For example, note
that the protection of Enoch by these angels is mentioned elsewhere
in the Manichaean BG text475 and the angels and Enoch seem to be
shown together visually within MCP as previously mentioned:476

       And the angels themselves descended from the heaven to the
       earth. … And they led one half of them eastwards, and the
       other half westwards, on the skirts of four huge mountains,
       towards the foot of the Sumēru mountain, into thirty-two477
       towns which the Living Spirit had prepared for them in the
       beginning.

   While there are indications in some Manichaean traditions
suggesting that both the eastward and westward bound groups
were wicked,478 Matthew Goff sees it as more reasonable to view the
westward bound group in BG as consisting of repentant gibborim,
reminding readers that the area near Mount Sumēru is the sacred
omphalos mundi479 of Indian tradition”:480

       No reason is given as to why the [gibborim] are placed in cities.
       The division of the [gibborim] along an east-west axis suggests
       two opposed fates for them—one half was killed and the other
       survived. This could be explained by positing that some of the
       [gibborim] repented and changed their ways while others did
       not.

    In a further detail that parallels the Book of Moses, observe
that BG describes the righteous dwelling “on the skirts of four huge
mountains.” 481 Significantly, this imagery recalls Moses 7:17, which
relates that the righteous “were blessed upon the mountains, and
upon the high places, and did flourish.”
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                  1135

O. Imprisonment of the wicked
Table 19. Examples of resemblances for narrative theme O.

 Book of Moses                  Book of Giants
 But behold, these which        Enoch, the apostle, . . . [gave a message
 thine eyes are upon shall      to the demons (i.e., Watchers, in this
 perish in the floods;          context) and their] children (i.e.,
 and behold, I will shut        gibborim): to you . . . not peace [The
 them up; a prison have I       judgment on you is] that you shall be
 prepared for them.             bound for the sins you have omitted. You
 And that which I have          shall see the destruction of your children.
 chosen hath pled before        Ruling for a hundred and twenty [years]
 my face. Wherefore, he         (Henning 1943, text A, frg. l, p. 61; see
 suffereth for their sins;      Stuckenbruck 1997, p. 63)
 inasmuch as they will          There is ]not peace for you[ (Parry
 repent in the day that my      2013, 4Q203, frg. 8, l. 2, p. 943; see
 Chosen shall return unto       Stuckenbruck 1997, p. 63)
 me, and until that day
 they shall be in torment       he has imprisoned us and overpowered
 (7:38–39)                      yo[u (Parry 2013, 4Q203, frg. 7b I, l. 5, p.
                                945; see Stuckenbruck 1997, pp. 83–84;
                                Reeves 1992, pp. 126–27)

                                Then . . . and imprisoned the demons
                                (i.e., Watchers, in this context) (Henning,
                                text T, p. 73; Reeves 1992, pp. 123–24)

                                They bound the Watchers with an eternal
                                chain, in the prison of the blackened ones
                                (?). [Th]ey obliterated their children [i.e.,
                                the gibborim] from the earth (Gardner
                                1995, 38 (93); Henning 1943, text P, p. 72.
                                See Reeves 1992, p. 124.)

                                Before the Watchers rebelled and
                                came down from heaven, a prison was
                                fashioned and constructed for them
                                in the depths of the earth, below the
                                mountains (Gardner 1995, 45 (117), p.
                                123; Henning 1943, text S, pp. 72–73)
1136        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




          Figure 30. William Blake (1757–1827), The Primaeval Giants
                         Sunk in the Soil, 1824–1827.482


The conclusion of the story of the rebellion of the Watchers in 1
Enoch tells of their terrible binding and eternal imprisonment:
       Go, Michael, bind Shemihazah and the others with him, . . .
       bind them . . . in the valleys of the earth, until the day of their
       judgment. . . . Then they will be led away to the fiery abyss, and
       to the torture, and to the prison where they will be confined
       forever.483

Blake’s drawing in figure 30 illustrates canto 31 of Dante’s Divine
Comedy. After seeing what he mistakenly thinks is a ring of towers
surrounding a central deep, Dante is told by Virgil about the Giants
who are sunk to their waists in a well whose massive drop leads
to Cocytus, a great frozen lake of the lowest region of hell. Their
defiant rebellion, born of the same envy and pride that ruled the
fallen angels who “rained down from heaven” in the beginning,484
was all the more terrible and destructive because of the coupling
of their evil will with the brute force of their mighty stature. Now
reduced to pale, mountainous shapes amid the chaos, they stand
eternally unmoved by the sharp fires of lightning above and the
rude blasts of icy storm winds swirling upward from below.
           Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                   1137




  Figure 31. Detail of MCP, showing imprisoned “demons;”485 here most likely
 depicting “Watchers” who are adjudged to have committed unpardonable sins.
    Both the Book of Moses and the Book of Giants contain a
“prediction of utter destruction and the confining in prison that is
to follow”486 for the unrepentant wicked, a scenario that is similar
in some ways to 1 Enoch. From the Book of Moses we read, “But
behold, these . . . shall perish in the floods; and behold, I will shut
them up; a prison have I prepared for them” (Moses 7:38). Likewise,
in BG we read the lament of a speaker who complains, “He has
imprisoned us and overpowered yo[u.”487
    That said, although the three texts are similar in a general way,
there is an important difference between the outlook of 1 Enoch and
that found in the Book of Moses and BG—namely, the possibility
of repentance and salvation for those who have sinned.488 Jed
Woodworth summarizes:
     What is the fate of those who perish in the flood? In [1 Enoch],
     there is one fate only: everlasting punishment. Those who are
     destroyed in the flood are beyond redemption. For God to be
     reconciled, sinners must suffer forever. Enoch has nothing
     to say because God has no merciful side to appeal to. In [the
     Book of Moses account], however, punishment has an end.
     The merciful side of God allows Enoch to speak and be heard.
     God and Enoch speak a common language: mercy. “Lift up
     your heart, and be glad; and look,” God says to Enoch after the
     flood.489 There is hope for the wicked yet:490
        I will shut them up; a prison have I prepared for them. And
     that which I have chosen hath pled before my face. Wherefore,
1138        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

       he suffereth for their sins; inasmuch as they will repent in the
       day that my Chosen shall return unto me, and until that day
       they shall be in torment.
           The Messiah figure in [1 Enoch 45–47] and in [the Book
       of Moses] function in different ways. In [the Book of Moses],
       the Chosen One will come to earth at the meridian of time to
       rescue the sinners of Enoch’s day. After the Messiah’s death
       and resurrection, “as many of the spirits as were in prison
       came forth, and stood on the right hand of God.”491 The
       Messiah figure in [1 Enoch] does not come down to earth and is
       peripheral to the text; he presides over the “elect” around God’s
       throne492 but does not rescue the sinners of Enoch’s day. “In the
       day of trouble evil shall [still] be heaped upon sinners,”493 he
       tells Enoch [in that account].494

     The use of the term “demons” in BG can be confusing because
it applies to different groups at different times. For example, while
the term “demons” denotes the gibborim in some places in BG,495
within the passages on the right-hand side of table 19 above it
clearly refers to the Watchers. In addition, though BG, like 1 Enoch,
does not hold out the possibility of forgiveness for the Watchers
(who apparently are adjudged to have committed unpardonable
sins), we have already seen that BG elsewhere records Enoch’s hope
that the gibborim will reform and escape the severe judgments that
otherwise await them.496 Similarly, in Moses 6:52, Enoch preaches
that it is not too late for the gibborim to change their ways—his
message is “that all men, everywhere, must repent.”497 In brief, the
outlooks of the Book of Moses and the Book of Giants toward the
gibborim are similar to each other but different from 1 Enoch.
     Unfortunately, as later events make clear, the initial sorrowing
of what seems to have been many of the gibborim brought about
only short-lived repentance for some of them. However, drawing on
both the Qumran and Manichaean versions of the Book of Giants,
Matthew Goff concludes that a faction of the gibborim may have
repented more sincerely and permanently. He asks:
       Why would God give the [gibborim] a vision about the Flood
       in the first place? Why give them the opportunity to know
       about the Flood before it happens? If God’s plan is to kill them,
       why bother? The dreams disclosed to Ohyah and Hahyah
       may signify that God, by making clear to the [gibborim] what
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants               1139

     the punishment for their crimes would be, gives them the
     opportunity to repent. This may be a variation of the tradition
     often associated with the 120 years of Genesis 6:3. And, even
     though there is no explicit evidence for this proposal in the
     Qumran BG, the Manichaean BG suggests that this narrative
     element could have been present in the Qumran text and that
     the prayers of the [gibborim], in striking contrast to those of
     the angels in [the 1 Enoch Book of] Watchers, could have been
     successful.498

     Of course, Latter-day Saints know that repentance continues
after this life. And those who accept the possibility of the preaching
of the gospel to those beyond the grave—a group that includes not
only Latter-day Saints499 but also early Christians500 and selected
scholars from outside the Church501—frequently cite 1 Peter 3:18–
20 and 4:5–6.
     These verses are well known among Latter-day Saints. But it
is not common knowledge among them that Peter is alluding to
the unrepentant wicked who heard Enoch’s preaching when he
refers to the “spirits in prison; which sometime were disobedient.”
Of course, the verses in Peter allude to a very long time frame,
stretching from the time of Enoch’s preaching into Noah’s day (i.e.,
when “the ark was a preparing”), but what evidence we have points
to a continuity of culture among the wicked throughout that entire
period. Thus, Peter’s illustration is equally apt for the hearers of
Enoch and the hearers of Noah.
     The eminent Enoch scholar George Nickelsburg502 does not
doubt that Peter is “alluding to the tradition about the Watchers
of 1 Enoch” and that in 1 Peter 3:19–20 Peter “attributes to Jesus a
journey to the underworld that parallels Enoch’s interaction with
the rebel Watchers,” while comparing “baptism with the purifying
effects of the Flood.”503 If Nickelsburg is correct, then Peter’s
writings, like the Book of Moses, imply the hope that God’s mercy
will be extended even to the wicked Watchers who rejected Enoch
while they lived on earth, such that, through eventual repentance
and the power of the Atonement, they might eventually “live
according to God in the spirit” (1 Peter 4:6). Arguing on the basis
of 1 Peter and Moses 7:37–38, Hugh Nibley gives hope of eventual
deliverance for even the most depraved sinners of Enoch’s day:
1140        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

       Those in prison, chains, and darkness are only being kept there
       until the Judgment, which will liberate many, not only because
       of their repentance, but through the power of the Atonement.
       . . . It was specifically the spirits who were disobedient in
       Enoch’s day who were to enjoy the preaching of the Lord and
       the promise of deliverance in the meridian of times.504

    In summary, while the mention of imprisonment is frequent
throughout the ancient Enoch literature, the real hope of repentance
preached by Enoch to the gibborim in the Book of Moses505 and in
BG is both a significant resemblance between these two texts and
also another important difference with 1 Enoch.

P. Flood of Noah anticipated in vision/dream
Table 20. Examples of resemblances for narrative theme P

 Book of Moses                        Book of Giants
 And Enoch also saw Noah,             [in order that we may k]now from
 and his family; that the             you their interpretation. [vac
 posterity of all the sons of         Then Enoch explained to Mahway
 Noah should be saved with a          dreams] (Parry 2013, 4Q530, frg.
 temporal salvation;                  7 II, l. 10, p. 951; see Stuckenbruck
 Wherefore Enoch saw that             1997, pp. 128–34; Reeves 1992, pp.
 Noah built an ark; and that the      102–7)
 Lord smiled upon it, and held
 it in his own hand; but upon         10. [heaven came down. I watched
 the residue of the wicked the        until the di]rt was covered with all
 floods came and swallowed            the water, and the fire burned all
 them up (7:42–43)                    11. [the trees of this orchard all
                                      around and it did not burn the tree
                                      and its shoots on] the earth, whil[e
                                      it was
                                      12. [devastated with tongues of fire
                                      and water of the delug]e. . . .
                                      15. . . . this [dr]eam you will give [to
                                      Eno]ch the noted scribe, and he will
                                      interpret for us (Parry 2013, 4Q530
                                      , frgs. 2 col. II + 6 + 7 col. I + 8–11
                                      + 12(?), l. 10–12, 14, pp. 949, 951.
                                      See Stuckenbruck 1997, pp. 112–15;
                                      Reeves 1992, pp. 84–91)
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                       1141




Figure 32. Boleslaw Parasion (1950–), Noah’s Ark.506 1 Enoch 67:2: “I will put my
 hand upon [the Ark] and protect it.”507 Moses 7:43: “The Lord . . . held [the Ark]
                               in his own hand.”
In the Book of Moses, Enoch is shown the great flood in Noah’s day
as part of his grand vision in chapter 7. The parallel with BG is clear
enough, but it should also be noted that the corresponding dream in
BG seems almost a parody of Enoch’s experience because Hahyah,
one of the hapless twins in BG, receives his knowledge about the
Flood in a nightmare rather than as part of a heavenly vision. In
BG, this nightmare becomes the impetus for sending Mahaway on
a second journey to ask Enoch to interpret the frightening dream.
1142       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

Q. The earth cries out against the wicked
Table 21. Examples of resemblances for narrative theme Q

 Book of Moses                          Book of Giants
 And it came to pass that Enoch         9. (the earth) has [risen up ag]
 looked upon the earth; and he          ainst y[ou and is crying out]
 heard a voice from the bowels          10. and raising accusation against
 thereof, saying: Wo, wo is me, the     you [and ag]ainst the activity of
 mother of men; I am pained, I am       your sons[
 weary, because of the wickedness       11. the corruption which you
 of my children. When shall I           have committed on it (the earth)
 rest, and be cleansed from the         (Parry 2013, 4Q203, frg. 8, l. 9–11,
 filthiness which is gone forth out     p. 945)
 of me? When will my Creator
 sanctify me, that I may rest, and
 righteousness for a season abide
 upon my face? (7:48)


Although the motif of a complaining earth is not found anywhere
in the Bible, it does turn up in both 1 Enoch and BG.508 In 1 Enoch
we find the following:

    •    1 Enoch 7:4–6; 8:4:509 “And the giants began to kill men and
         to devour them. And they began to sin against the birds and
         beasts and creeping things and the fish, and to devour one
         another’s flesh. And they drank the blood. Then the earth
         brought accusation against the lawless ones. . . . (And) as
         men were perishing, the cry went up to heaven.”
    •    1 Enoch 9:2, 10:510 “And entering in, they said to one another,
         ‘The earth, devoid (of inhabitants), raises511 the voice of their
         cries to the gates of heaven. . . . And now behold, the spirits
         of the souls of the men who have died make suit; and their
         groan has come up to the gates of heaven; and it does not
         cease to come forth from before the iniquities that have
         come upon the earth.”
    •    1 Enoch 87:1:512 “And again I saw them, and they began to
         gore one another and devour one another, and the earth
         began to cry out.”
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                 1143

   In BG 4Q203, frg. 8, l. 9–11 we read:513
     6. ‘Let it be known to you th[at ] [
     7. your activity and (that) of [your] wive[s ]
     8. those (giants) [and their] son[s and] the [w]ives o[f ]
     9. through your fornication on the earth, and it (the earth) has
     [risen up ag]ainst y[ou
     and is crying out]
     10. and raising accusation against you [and ag]ainst the activity
     of your sons[
     11. the corruption which you have committed on it (the earth)
     ...
     12. has reached Raphael. . . .

     Consistent with other comparisons that have been made
between the accounts of Enoch in the Book of Moses, BG, and 1
Enoch, Andrew Skinner finds that resemblances to BG are more
compelling than those found in 1 Enoch. First, he notes that the
nature of the wickedness in BG is described as “fornication,”514
which corresponds semantically to the term “filthiness” used in
the Book of Moses.515 By way of contrast, the crimes of wickedness
being complained of in 1 Enoch are murder and violence.
     Second, Skinner notes that in both BG and “Moses 7 the earth
itself complains of and decries the wickedness of the people, while
the [first two] 1 Enoch texts emphasize the cries of men ascending
to heaven”516 by means of the earth.517
     Skinner also notes that in BG and the Book of Moses, “the
ultimate motivation behind the earth’s cry for redress against
the intense wickedness on her surface” is a plea “for a cleansing
of and sanctification from the pervasive wickedness by means of a
heavenly personage and heavenly powers. In the Book of Moses the
earth importunes,518 ‘When shall I rest, and be cleansed from the
filthiness which has gone forth out of me? When will my Creator
sanctify me, that I may rest, and righteousness for a season abide
upon my face?’”519 Likewise, in BG, the earth complains about how
the wicked have corrupted it through licentiousness and anticipates
a destruction that will cleanse it from wickedness.520
     Once again, we find that BG and the Book of Moses are more
similar to each other in their expression of this rare motif than
either of them is to 1 Enoch.
 1144        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




Figure 33. Detail of MCP.521 Ascent and transformation of BG’s thirty-two divinely
 prepared cities of earthly Zion to thirty-two palaces of heavenly Zion atop Mount
            Sumēru. The palaces surround a deity with two attendants
                               in a thirty-third palace.

R. Ascent of Enoch’s people to the bosom of God
Table 22. Examples of resemblances for narrative theme R

 Book of Moses                          Book of Giants
 And Enoch and all the people           Small palaces in the divine realm
 walked with God, and he dwelt          adjacent to the palace of Deity
 in the midst of Zion; and it came      (MCP, Gulácsi 2015, p. 470. See
 to pass that Zion was not, for God     Kósa 2016, pp. 171–172)
 received it up into his own bosom;
 and from thence went forth
 the saying, Zion is Fled (7:69;
 emphasis added)

BG scholar Gåbor Kósa sees the thirty-two palaces, shown “on the
‘foliage’ [at the top] of the tree-like Mount Sumēru,”522 as implying “a
divine association; this is reinforced by the presence of three divine
figures in front of the [much bigger] thirty-third palace, with the
central figure seated on a lotus throne and the two acolytes standing
on either side. All in all, this seems to indicate the purely divine
nature of this Manichaean Mount Sumēru.”523 In addition, Kósa sees
the description of the mountain with its tree-like iconography as
           Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                     1145

resonating with the description of the mountain of God and the
Tree of Life in 1 Enoch 25:2–4:524
      Then I answered him—I, Enoch—and said, “concerning all
      things I wish to know, but especially concerning this tree.”
          And he answered me and said, “this high mountain that
      you saw, whose peak is like the throne of God, is the seat where
      the Great Holy One, the Lord of glory, the King of eternity, will
      sit, when he descends to visit the earth in goodness. And (as
      for) this fragrant tree, no flesh has the right to touch it until the
      great judgment, in which there will be vengeance on all and a
      consummation forever.
The scene also evokes the imagery of Nephi’s vision:
      I was caught away … into an exceedingly high mountain …
         And I said: I desire to behold the things which my father
      saw.
         And the Spirit said unto me: Believest thou that thy father
      saw the tree of which he hath spoken? …
         And I looked and beheld a tree; … and the beauty thereof
      was far beyond, yea, exceeding of all beauty. …
         And I … beheld that the tree of life was a representation of
      the love of God.
Going further, though Kósa recognizes an obvious correspondence
of some kind between the visual depiction of thirty-two palaces at
the top of Mount Sumēru and the report in the BG text of “thirty-
two towns” for the repentant gibborim at the base of Mount Sumēru
he finds it difficult to reconcile the fact that the palaces shown at the
top within MCP “are definitely not towns; [neither are they] at the
foot of the mountains”525 as is described in the text of BG.
     In trying to unravel these anomalies, we should recall that the
Book of Moses chronicles a transformation of the earthly Zion,
symbolically located in the foothills of the “mountain of the Lord,”
into a heavenly Zion, as shown in the annotated figure above. In this
way, the redemptive descensus initiated by Jared and his brethren
culminated in the glorious ascensus led by Enoch:526
      And Enoch and all the people walked with God, and he dwelt
      in the midst of Zion; and it came to pass that Zion was not, for
      God received it up into his own bosom; and from thence went
      forth the saying, Zion is Fled.
1146      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




   Figure 34. Original City of Zion Plat Drawing (detail), with twenty-four
           numbered temple sites located in the center, June 1833.527

Whether or not by sheer coincidence, the symbolic geography
shared by the Manichaean BG fragments and MCP are mirrored
in a general way in the itinerary of the gathering and the layout
for Joseph Smith’s City of Zion in Missouri. This latter-day city is
described in modern scripture in close connection with descriptions
of Enoch’s ancient city.528 As the righteous of Enoch’s day were
remembered by BG as having been divinely led westward, so the
early Saints were told by the Lord: “gather ye out from the eastern
lands” and “go ye forth into the western countries” (Doctrine and
Covenants 45:64, 66).
    Moreover, in both cases the destination of the western movement
of each group is identified as a unique hierocentric location: for
Enoch’s people that location was Mount Sumēru in the middle of
the world map, while for the early Saints that location was “Mount
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants             1147

Zion, which shall be the city of New Jerusalem,”529 a relatively
central location on the North American continent. Significantly,
the city of New Jerusalem envisioned by the Saints is expressly
called in revelation, “the center place,”530 or “center stake.”531
     Finally, while the cosmology painting depicts Mount Sumēru
with thirty-two or thirty-six palaces at its summit, the plat for the
city of Zion prominently featured twenty-four numbered temple
sites at its center. Thus, in the MCP depiction of BG, in the Book
of Moses, and in the envisioned latter-day City of Zion, “God . . .
dwelt in the midst,”532 literally and symbolically central in the eyes
of His people.
     Where in all the ancient Enoch tradition do we find anything
close to the story of the gathering of Enoch’s repentant converts
to cities in the mountains to prepare as a people for an eventual
ascension to the bosom of God? Only in BG and the Book of Moses.

                       Summary of Results
I began this essay with a review of Nibley’s pioneering research on
resemblances of BG to the Book of Moses. In section 2, I argued
that BG, apparently more popular than 1 Enoch among those who
collected the Dead Sea Scrolls and arguably the oldest extant Enoch
manuscript found anywhere, is particularly helpful to scholars
seeking to “reconstruct the literary shapes of the early stages of
the Enochic tradition.”533 I cited scholarship concluding that BG,
discovered in 1948, owes relatively little directly to the Bible and 1
Enoch, the sources most often cited by those who havbe argued that
Moses 6–7 was primarily inspired by sources and ideas available to
Joseph Smith in the nineteenth century.
    I concur with scholars who have found that the antiquity
and unique nature of certain elements of BG traditions can
be better understood by looking “for the original of BG in an
eastern diaspora”534—that is, ancient Mesopotamia. In section 3, I
summarized in-depth studies of recurring appearances and echoes
of various peoples that were called gibborim in the biblical era that
may help us understand the general social setting and symbolic
geography of Enoch’s prediluvian mission in BG and the Book of
Moses.
1148      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

    In section 4, I described some of the most prominent members
of the cast of characters in BG, grouped into rough categories that
highlight co-occurrences of their names in other early texts and in
the Book of Moses. A closer examination led to the conclusion that
of all these names, the only two names mentioned both in the Book
of Moses Enoch account (Enoch and Mahijah/Mahujah) and in BG
(Enoch and Mahaway) are also the most plausible from a historical
perspective.
    Following the analysis of the names and roles of individuals
mentioned in the two Enoch accounts, a simplified storyline of
Moses 6–7 was compared with shared storyline elements in BG and
other ancient Enoch texts. It was found that BG contains hints of
every core narrative storyline element found in the Book of Moses
while containing none of its sacred storyline elements, despite the
fact that hints of each of the “missing” sacred stories can be found
in one form or another elsewhere in the ancient Enoch literature.
These striking and unexpected patterns of inclusion and omission
prompted the suggestion that BG and the Book of Moses may have
been rooted in some of the same ancient Enoch traditions but that
somewhere along the line, the sacred stories now found only in the
Book of Moses were either removed from the tradition inherited
by the BG redactor(s) or, alternatively, were left out when BG was
composed.
    Our discussion of the eighteen thematic resemblances
highlighted not only the interesting ways in which BG descriptions
converged and diverged with the related Book of Moses account,
but also the surprising degree to which they matched the presumed
BG storyline sequence. Significantly, the set of resemblances of BG
was not confined to a small fraction of the Moses 6–7 account, but
instead range throughout the main storyline.
    Now let’s continue to a summary of our comparative analysis
to look for an answer to the following question: Is it reasonable to
believe that the thematic resemblances of BG to the Book of Moses
may not have come merely by chance? In the summary, we will not
only consider the number and relative density of resemblances but
also, like Stuckenbruck, their specificity as an additional indication
of the strength of association between the two texts. Thematic
resemblances to Moses 6–7 that are exclusive to BG and the Book
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                   1149

of Moses will be deemed stronger than ones that co-occur in other
ancient Enoch literature. Resemblances for themes that occur
rarely or are absent outside the ancient Enoch literature will be
seen as stronger than ones that appear elsewhere within passages of
Second Temple texts or the Bible not specifically related to Enoch.
    The two tables below provide a detailed summary of thematic
resemblances of Enoch texts to Moses 6–7, classified by the type of
resemblance. Table 23 displays resemblances found in the major
ancient Enoch texts sampled, excluding BG, whereas table 24 shows
resemblances found within BG.

Table 23. Thematic resemblances of Enoch texts to Moses 6–7, excluding BG,
classified by type

 Type of Thematic Resemblance           Occurrences
 Selected Themes in Enoch               1. Johannine Language Arising
 Traditions, Excluding BG, That            from an Enochic Matrix and
 Also Appear Elsewhere in the              the Opening of His Eyes at
 Bible or Other Second Temple              His Call
 Texts                                  2. Enoch Clothed in Glory
                                        3. Enoch’s Apocalyptic Vision
                                        4. Weeping for Sinful
                                           Humankind535
                                        5. Shaking/Trembling of the
                                           Earth536
 Themes in Enoch Texts,                 6. Turning Waters out of Their
 Excluding BG, That Are Rare or             Course
 Absent Elsewhere                       7. Messianic Titles and
                                            Prophecies
                                        8. Enoch’s People Taken Up to
                                            Heaven
                                        9. Vision Near a Body of Water
                                            During a Journey537
                                        10. Enoch to Receive a Throne of
                                            Glory538
 Specific Terms in Enoch                11. “Lad” in Enoch’s Call
 Traditions, Excluding BG, That         12. The Hand of the Lord to Be
 Are Rare or Absent Elsewhere               on Noah’s Ark539
1150        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

Table 24. Thematic resemblances of BG to Moses 6–7, classified by type


 Type of Thematic Resemblance            Occurrences
 Selected Themes in BG That              1. B. Murders
 Also Appear Elsewhere in the            2. G. Trembling and Weeping
 Bible or Other Ancient Texts               After Record is Read
                                         3. H. Call to Repentance
                                         4. I. Sexual Defilement
                                         5. K. Enoch Clothed with Glory
 Themes in BG That Are Found             6. A. The Begetting of the Sons
 in Other Enoch Texts, But Are               of God/Watchers, the Giants,
 Rare or Absent Outside the                  and the Gibborim
 Enoch Literature                        7. C. Oath-Inspired Violence
                                         8. F. Enoch/Mahaway Reads
                                             Record of Deeds
                                         9. O. Imprisonment of the
                                             Wicked
                                         10. P. Flood of Noah Anticipated
                                             in Vision/Dream
                                         11. Q. The Earth Cries Out
                                             against the Wicked
 Themes in BG That Are Rare              12. J. Mahujah/Mahaway’s
 or Absent Outside of BG and                 Heavenly Journey to Meet
 Moses 6–7                                   Enoch
                                         13. L. Gibborim Defeated in
                                             Battle
                                         14. N. Repentant Gathered to
                                             Divinely Prepared Cities
                                         15. R. Ascent of Enoch’s People
                                             to the Bosom of God
 Specific Terms in BG That Are           16. D. A “Wild Man”
 Rare or Absent Outside of BG            17. E. Mahijah/Mahaway
 and Moses 6–7                           18. M. The “Roar of Lions/Wild
                                             Beasts” Following Battle
           Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                    1151




 Figure 35. Proportion of thematic resemblances of Moses 6–7 to ancient Enoch
                      texts in BG vs. other Enoch sources.
The first question addressed is: “How many of the proposed
thematic resemblances in the sampled Enoch literature to the Book
of Moses Enoch chapters are found in BG?” (see table 23: 1–12;
table 24: 1–18; figure 35). Of course, results of this kind will always
remain tentative because new resemblances can, in principle,
always be found, and previously identified resemblances can always
be disputed or reclassified.
    However, considering the relative brevity of BG, the number
of currently identified thematic resemblances to Moses 6–7 is
remarkable. Although the combined fragments of the Qumran
BG scarcely fill three pages in the English translation of Florentino
García Martínez, the results indicate that this single text contains
eighteen, fully three-fifths, of the thirty proposed thematic
resemblances of the combined ancient Enoch literature to the Book
of Moses Enoch account. These resemblances range from general
themes in the storyline to specific occurrences of rare terms or
phrases in appropriate contexts.540
    To get a better handle on the density of thematic resemblances
to Moses 6–7 within the brief, extant fragments of BG, a comparison
1152        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




 Figure 36. Number of resemblances to Moses 6–7 that are found in the Bible or
other ancient texts of Jewish origin vs. exclusively or nearly exclusively in Enoch
                                    texts alone.
to the size of 1 Enoch may be useful. Because 1 Enoch is so much
longer than BG, any claim that 1 Enoch is more related to Moses 6–7
than BG would need to demonstrate, according to our best current
estimate,541 roughly eight to fifty times the number of thematic
resemblances in 1 Enoch than can be found in BG. However, in
actuality, the parallels in 1 Enoch not only fall far short of that
magnitude542 but also, as we have described in several of the detailed
analyses of thematic resemblances discussed previously, are also
generally looser and less relevant than those in BG. This difference
is even more evident if one excludes the 1 Enoch Book of Parables,
where some of the most important and singular resemblances to
Messianic titles and prophecies occur.543 Note also that a good
proportion of the resemblances between BG and the Book of Moses
are also unique, while many of the resemblances in 1 Enoch are also
found in BG.
     Of course, these rough calculations to estimate relative
density are overly conservative, since they do not include other
sizable works such as 2 Enoch, 3 Enoch, and the Mandaean Enoch
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants             1153

literature, which also were, along with 1 Enoch, among the other
Enoch texts that contributed a significant proportion of the twelve
resemblances to the Book of Moses not found in BG.
     Besides the fact that the BG resemblances are high in relative
density, the sequence of their occurrence is remarkably similar to
the Book of Moses, especially when explanations for the exceptions
are considered.
     Of course, some of the thematic resemblances of Moses 6–7
to ancient Enoch texts are stronger and more specific than others.
Using Stuckenbruck’s study as a model for our approach, I have
separated selected motifs in Moses 6–7 that are not unknown
elsewhere in the Bible or other Second Temple texts from those
that are found exclusively or nearly exclusively in the sampled
ancient literature on Enoch. Again, the results were impressive. Of
the thirty resemblances identified, twenty (fully two-thirds) were
to themes or terms/phrases that are rare or absent outside of the
Enoch literature (see table 23: 6–10; table 24: 6–18; figure 36). Thus
it seems that the Book of Moses is not merely hitting on themes in
the Enoch literature that are just as likely to be found elsewhere in
biblical and Second Temple texts. Instead, Moses 6–7 seems to be
well tuned to many specifically Enoch-related motifs.
     These items are especially notable because they are not isolated
instances, but rather occur in most cases as part of a “uniquely
shared combination of ideas or motifs.”544 Like Stuckenbruck, I
separated items that exhibit a more general, “conceptual level of
commonly held motifs”545 (see table 22: 6–10; table 23: 6–15) from
those that stood out because they shared significant but relatively
rare or specific “terms or closely comparable phrases”546 (table 23:
11–12; table 24: 16–18). Importantly, five of the twenty resemblances
that are rare or absent outside of the ancient Enoch literature share
significant, rare or specific terms or closely comparable phrases
with Moses 6–7.
1154       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses




  Figure 37. Number of resemblances to Moses 6–7 that are found only in BG.

     We have already seen that Moses 6–7 contains more thematic
resemblances to BG than to all the other ancient Enoch literature
combined (table 24: 1–18 vs. table 23: 1–12; figure 35). Not surprisingly
in light of this previous finding, we see here that, compared to other
Enoch texts, BG also contains most of the resemblances (thirteen
out of twenty) that are rare or absent outside the Enoch literature
(table 24: 6–18 vs. table 23: 6–12; figure 37). Going further, we
wonder how many of these resemblances are unique to BG? The
answer is that fully seven of BG’s eighteen resemblances, more than
one-third, are found only in BG, and nowhere else (table 24: 12–18;
figure 37).
     In summary, these results allow us to say that although the
Book of Moses seems to be related in a uniquely close fashion to the
themes of BG, it is also broad enough in scope that it also matches
several important singularly Enochic themes in every other major
ancient Enoch text. Saying it differently, the fact that not only BG
but also nearly all the major Enoch texts from antiquity contain
resemblances to Moses 6–7 helps make the case that the Book of
Moses Enoch account contains themes rooted in a broad, common
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants               1155

inheritance from ancient Enochic traditions stronger than if the
account were only related to BG alone.
    We note that Stuckenbruck’s analysis, like this one, relied
largely on English comparanda and in a situation where “at no
point [could] it be demonstrated that the [later text] quotes from
any passage in [the earlier text].”547 If Stuckenbruck’s study was
sufficient to demonstrate “that the writer of Revelation was either
directly acquainted (through literary or oral transmission) with
several of the major sections of 1 Enoch or at least had access to
traditions that were influenced by these writings,”548 it does not
seem unreasonable to conclude from the results presented here
that an Enoch book that was buried in the rubble until 1948 and
an Enoch book that was independently translated in 1830 may be
related in some way, despite admittedly important differences in
provenance, perspective, and contents.
    One additional observation: Though in this paper I have focused
on the possibility of ancient Mesopotamian precedents for Moses
6–7, David Calabro has provided well-reasoned arguments that the
direct connection between antiquity and the Book of Moses need
go no further back than the late first or early second century CE,
perhaps serving at that time as part of an early Christian baptismal
liturgy, with hints of influence from earlier traditions appearing
only indirectly as part of Joseph Smith’s translation. As Calabro
writes,
     Just as Joseph Smith restored the text in modern times, [an]
     early Christian text may also have been a restoration of a much
     earlier text, although reformulated in language appropriate
     to the times.549 This earlier text may also have been used in a
     ritual context, possibly in the consecration of priests and/or
     the coronation of kings.550

     In line wth Calabro’s conjecture about the uses of an earlier
text within a ritual context, I have argued for the possibility that
the Book of Moses, in an earlier form, could be conceived as a
temple text for ritual use in royal investiture, analogous to temple
rites restored by the Prophet Joseph Smith and containing a
specific sequence of stories illustrating the keeping and breaking of
associated covenants.551
1156        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

     It is my hope that all scholars interested in the nature and
origins of the Book of Moses will include such evidence of literary
affinities of Moses 6–7 to the ancient Enoch literature in tandem
with any complementary arguments they make for nineteenth-
century literary influences on the production of this work of
modern scripture.

                           Concluding Thoughts
Hugh Nibley introduced the term “the expanding gospel”552 to
refer not only to the phenomenon of an open-ended canon due
to continuing revelation but also to the astonishing recovery of
fragments of inspired religious teachings from ancient times.
Even if many conclude that these tattered fragments of admittedly
mixed, uncertain, and checkered provenance may contain little of
enduring religious value, Nibley argued that they could sometimes
serve, despite their imperfections, as valuable witnesses of truths
known anciently. By way of analogy, he wrote:
       If one makes a sketch of a mountain, what is it? A few lines on
       a piece of paper. But there is a solid reality behind this poor
       composition; even if the tattered scrip is picked up later in a
       street in Tokyo or a gutter in Madrid, it still attests to the artist’s
       experience of the mountain as a reality. If the sketch should be
       copied by others who have never seen the original mountain,
       it still bears witness to its reality. So it is with the apocryphal
       writings: most of them are pretty poor stuff, and all of them are
       copies of copies. But when we compare them we cannot escape
       the impression that they have some real model behind them,
       more faithfully represented in some than in others. All we ever
       get on this earth, Paul reminds us, is a distorted reflection of
       things as they really are.553 Since we are dealing with derivative
       evidence only, we are not only justified but required to listen
       to all the witnesses, no matter how shoddy some of them may
       be.554

In closing, I confess my love for the Book of Moses. It is a joy and a
privilege to live in a day when it is widely available, putting us in a
position where we can sound the depths of its inspiring stories and
eternal verities to our heart’s content. Just as prophets have spoken
of God’s hand in the advances of new technology we see in our
           Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants              1157

day,555 I believe that He is equally willing to help us in the discovery
and elucidation of ancient documents that strengthen our witness
and increase our understanding of Restoration scripture. I believe
that many new discoveries relating to ancient scripture are yet to be
made and that the Lord expects us to actively seek them out, since
Latter-day Saints hold as core beliefs many of the essential keys
to understanding and applying them vigorously in their fulness.
Hugh Nibley wrote that discoveries in ancient digs and ancient
texts, tangible artifacts that sometimes provide striking witnesses
of the fact that truths restored in our day were also known in former
times, are a “reminder to the Saints that they are still expected to do
their homework and may claim no special revelation or convenient
handout as long as they ignore the vast treasure-house of materials
that God has placed within their reach.”556 May we all resolve to
search and understand with greater diligence “the vast treasure-
house of materials that God has placed within [our] reach.”


                         Acknowledgments
Appreciation to Matthew L. Bowen, David Calabro, Ryan Dahle,
Jared Ludlow, Kerry Muhlestein, David R. Seely, John W. Welch,
and Stephen T. Whitlock for their contributions to this paper. I
am also grateful to Colby Townsend and Thomas Wayment for
cordial conversations relating to this article. Responsibility for the
arguments and conclusions of this paper remain my own.
1158       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

                              Discussion

Jo Ann H. Seely:
Thank you so much for a thorough and comprehensive view of your
topic, including some fascinating and beautiful images. If we have
time, I’ll ask you a little bit about that, too. But my first question is:
There is such a vast and growing corpus of scholarly publication
and information on the ancient books of Enoch and the Pearl of
Great Price. Where might a Latter-day Saint, who is not familiar
with the scholarly literature but is interested in learning more go
for some beginning resources?

Jeffrey M. Bradshaw:
Well, I’d recommend starting in the same place where I started
when I first began doing serious research on the Book of Moses;
that is with the wonderful commentary on the Pearl of Great Price
written by Richard Draper, Kent Brown, and Michael Rhodes.557 I
found all kinds of interesting things there, including some things I
used in today’s presentation. I think that’s the place to start. After
that, there’s plenty of things that will take you deeper into the text.
We’ve now put all the research resources we could find on the Book
of Moses into a online bibliography, so that might be another good
starting point.558

Jo Ann:
That’s great. Okay. This is just a general question. Why is the study
of all of this context and background to the scripture so important?
Isn’t it more important just to read the scriptures themselves and
figure out what their personal application is for our lives? Why do
we need all this background?

Jeff:
That’s a great question. Obviously if scripture study isn’t helping us
in our quest to become Saints, we are on the wrong track. We might
compare, in a very broad fashion, the blessings of scripture study to
those we receive in doing temple work. We go to the temple to receive
our certain blessings there—essential ordinances we can receive in
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants              1159

no other way—and also to help others on the other side of the veil
to receive the same blessings. Those blessings are conditional, based
on our being faithful in the covenants we make until the end of our
mortal lives and beyond. But if our only thought in participating in
the temple ordinances was to go through the motions, as it were, if
part of the reason we need to go there was not the fact that we also
need specialized instruction and learning that we can get only by
performing and reflecting on the ordinances we receive there, all
the words accompanying the ordinances could simply be omitted
and we could perform each ordinance much more quickly. In
a roughly analogous way, if everything we needed to learn from
the scriptures could be contained in a list of commandments
accompanied by the admonition to love God and our neighbor, the
Lord could have easily condensed our four volumes of canonized
scripture into a short pamphlet-sized tract.
     But I think the Lord gave us a treasure house of lifelong learning
in our scriptures. And I think that He expects us to spend serious
time digging those treasures out. Not just the essential behioral
foundation of Christian ethics and the basic doctrines we can read
in five minutes within the Articles of Faith, but also “wisdom and
great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures” (Doctrine
and Covenants 89:19) that won’t be accessible to us through casual
glances at the words in isolation. Of course, many of these “hidden
treasures” are given to us through revelation, spurred as part of our
prayerful study when accompanied by doing our best to apply what
we have already learned. But, as President Nelson often teaches
us in words (and by example): “The Lord loves effort, and effort
brings rewards.”559 When we start to get a feel for the background
and context of scripture, when we know something about the
ancient languages, when we know something about why things are
expressed in the way that we are, a whole world of understanding
opens up to us. I think helps us not only to better understand the
scriptures, but also to better understand how God works in the
world. None of us has the right to excuse ourselves by saying: “I’m
just not a gospel scholar.” Each of us can start where we’re at and
go from there. And the Lord will love and reward our small efforts
with unimaginable joy.
1160      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

Jo Ann:
That’s certainly true. When our perspective is widened, we learn so
much. We’re often surprised at what we learn.
    What do you make of the fact that the Joseph Smith Translation
consists mostly of additions to the text and rarely deletions or
subtractions?

Jeff:
Well, I think we can find the answer in the Book of Mormon for
that. Nephi was told that in our day the Lord would make known
“other books” that would “make known the plain and precious
things which have been taken away” (1 Nephi 13:39–40). In most
cases the most precious things that we learn from the Book of
Moses are, as you said, part of additions that have been made to
the Bible. Of course, we don’t know enough to say whether these
additions were ever part of some kind of proto-Genesis, whether
they were recorded elsewhere, or whether they were written down
for the first time when Joseph Smith translated them. But, in any
case, we’re very blessed to have so much wonderful truth available
to us, once lost to the world but now restored in our day.

Jo Ann:
Okay. Here’s another question about all of your work. You’ve done
so much detailed work in your study of the Pearl of Great Price.
What do you think are the three most important things that the
members of the church might not realize or be aware of about the
Book of Moses or the Pearl Great Price in general?

Jeff:
Well, first of all, in my opinion, the Book of Moses is absolutely
foundational to our understanding of Latter-day Saint doctrine and
teachings about the plan of salvation and the doctrine of Christ.
I think that’s underappreciated. Secondly, I’d say in connection
with that that the Book of Moses is absolutely foundational, to our
understanding of the priesthood and the ordinances of the temple,
not just the initial stories about the Creation and the Fall of Adam
and Eve, but also the continuous thread of temple teachings that
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants              1161

runs through the rest Book of Moses to Enoch and the law of
consecration that was observed by his people in Zion. I also wish
that these teachings were better appreciated. To learn more about
that, listen to Elder and Sister Hafen’s talk from the September 2020
“Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses” conference.560 It
was wonderful!

Jo Ann:
Yes, it was outstanding.

Jeff
The third thing, how should I say it? The Book of Moses is just
so incredibly beautiful. We heard Brother Bushman quote some
non-Latter-day Saint scholars on that very thing last night. I feel
so edified when I read it. I’m sure not everybody feels the same
way I do about the Book of Moses—different people are touched
by different books of scripture—but each time I read the Book
of Moses I walk away filled with light and joy. Ever since I was a
young boy, I’ve experienced deep feeling of beauty and uplift from
the reading it.

Jo Ann:
That’s wonderful. Well, we’re just about out of time, but I’m going to
sneak in this one little quick question. In so many of your scholarly
publications, you have astonishing images that accompany your
texts. I just want to know if there’s a secret that you have to finding
these. How do you go about that?

Jeff:
No particular secret I can think of. I used to find a lot of these
wonderful drawings in old books but now the old books are getting
harder to find. Sadly, when I do find them I open them up and
learn that they are discards from universities and theological
schools. Sadly, few people are reading old books anymore, which
is something C. S. Lewis found so distressing and frightening even
many decades ago when he wrote about it.561
1162      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

    So I rely increasingly on Google, like everybody else, because I
have no other choice. And, fortunately, many wonderful images are
out there and so easily accessible now, even though so many more
may never be put online and are now almost impossible to find in
print.
    But the most powerful form of advanced search is what comes
to you through the Spirit. Sometimes you really feel the gift of
inspiration, things pop into your mind, you’re led to things, you
run into things and something tells you “this is important”—even
before you’ve had a chance to look at it. When I first ran across
the Manichaean Cosmology Painting, I didn’t fully understand its
importance to the Book of Moses account of Enoch. But then by
chance I ran into a second publication about it, and when I realized
what we had in front of us now, my eyes fairly popped out of my
head. As I studied the painting and the related texts, more and
more ideas started flowing into my mind—and they didn’t come
from me. Who would have believed that somewhere out there we
had an image of Enoch with what seems to be a depiction of Zion
having ascended to the presence of God just a few inches away from
where he was standing? And to think that at last we have what
seems to be a portrait of Mahujah/Mahaway himself kneeling on a
mountain top! These are characters I’ve been aching to know more
about for many years. I don’t attribute those things to advanced
search technology, nor to mere chance.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants              1163

Jeffrey M. Bradshaw (PhD, Cognitive Science, University of Wash­
ington) is a Senior Research Scientist at the Florida Institute for
Human and Machine Cognition (IHMC) in Pensacola, Florida
(www.ihmc.us/groups/jbradshaw; en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jeffrey_M._
Bradshaw). His professional writings have explored a wide range of
topics in human and machine intelligence (www.jeffreymbradshaw.
net). Jeff has been the recipient of several awards and patents and has
been an adviser for initiatives in science, defense, space, industry,
and academia worldwide. Jeff has written detailed commentaries on
the Book of Moses and Genesis 1–11 and on temple themes in the
scriptures. For Church-related publications, see www.TempleThemes.
net. Jeff was a missionary in France and Belgium from 1975 to 1977,
and his family has returned twice to live in France. He and his wife,
Kathleen, are the parents of four children and fifteen grandchildren.
From July 2016 to September 2019, Jeff and Kathleen served missions
in the Democratic Republic of Congo Kinshasa Mission office and the
DR Congo Kinshasa Temple. Jeff serves as a temple ordinance worker
at the Meridian Idaho Temple and as a church service missionary for
the Church History department, with a focus on central Africa. He
and Kathleen currently live in Nampa, Idaho.
1164      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

                           Bibliography
4QEnGiants ar (4Q203), plate 906, fragment 7b, column II,
            a

   B-295417. Full-spectrum color image of recto taken March
   2012 by Shai Halevi. The photograph is mislabeled as being
   of fragment 6; it is actually of fragment 7b, column II. Israel
   Antiquities Authority. “Plate 906, Frag 6.” Leon Levy Dead Sea
   Scrolls Digital Library (accessed March 4, 2020). https://www
   .deadseascrolls.org.il/explore-the-archive/image/B-295417.
4QGiantsb ar (4Q530), plate 437, fragment 1 [fragment 7], B-363379.
   Infrared image taken January 2013 by Shai Halevi. The
   photograph is mislabeled as being of fragment 1; it is actually
   of fragment 7. Israel Antiquities Authority. “Plate 437, Frag 1.”
   Leon Levy Dead Sea Scrolls Digital Library (accessed March
   2, 2020). https://www.deadseascrolls.org.il/explore-the-archive
   /image/B-363379.
Abegg, Martin, Jr., Peter Flint, and Eugene Ulrich, eds. The Dead
   Sea Scrolls Bible. New York: Harper, 1999.
Achtemeier, Paul J. 1 Peter. Hermeneia. Minneapolis: Fortress
   Press, 1996.
Addams, R. Jean. “The Past and the Duture of the Temple Lot
   in Jackson County, Missouri,” in The Temple: Past, Present,
   and Future. Proceedings of the Fifth Interpreter Foundation
   Matthew B. Brown Memorial Conference, 7 November
   2020, edited by Stephen D. Ricks and Jeffrey M. Bradshaw.
   Temple on Mount Zion 6, 31–96. Orem, UT: Interpreter
   Foundation; Salt Lake City: Eborn, 2021. https://journal.
   interpreterfoundation.org/the-past-and-future-of-the-temple
   -lot-in-independence-jackson-county-missouri/ (accessed May
   19, 2021).
Albeck, Chanoch, ed. Midrash Bereshit Rabbati. Jerusalem: Mekitze
   Nirdamim, 1940.
Alexander, P. “3 (Hebrew Apocalypse of) Enoch,” in The Old
   Testament Pseudepigrapha, edited by James H. Charlesworth,
   1:223–315. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1983. https://eclass.
   uoa.gr/modules/document/ (accessed June 15, 2021).
Alexander, T. Desmond. From Eden to the New Jerusalem: An
   Introduction to Biblical Theology. Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel,
   2008.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants             1165

Alighieri, Dante. La Divina commedia di Dante Alighieri, illustrata
    da G. Doré e dichiarata con note tratte dai migliori commenti
    per cura di Eugenio Camerini. Milan, Italy: Società editrici
    Sonzogno, 1900. https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/1027437
    51 (accessed December 4, 2020).
al-Kisa’i, Muhammad ibn ‘Abd Allah. Tales of the Prophets (Qisas
    al-anbiya’). Translated by Wheeler M. Thackston Jr. Great
    Books of the Islamic World. Chicago: KAZI Publications, 1997.
Allan, Sarah. The Shape of the Turtle: Myth, Art, and Cosmos in
    Early China. SUNY Series in Chinese Philosophy and Culture,
    ed. David L. Hall and Roger T. Ames. Albany: State University
    of New York Press, 1991.
al-Tha’labi, Abu Ishaq Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ibrahim.
    ‘Ara’is Al-Majalis Fi Qisas Al-Anbiya’ or “Lives of the Prophets.”
    Translated by William M. Brinner. Studies in Arabic Literature,
    Supplements to the Journal of Arabic Literature 24. Leiden: Brill,
    2002.
Alter, Robert, ed. The Hebrew Bible: A Translation with Commentary.
    3 vols. New York: W. W. Norton, 2019.
Andersen, F. I. “2 (Slavonic Apocalypse of) Enoch,” in The Old
    Testament Pseudepigrapha, edited by James H. Charlesworth,
    1:91–221. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1983.
Anderson, Gary A., and Michael Stone, eds. A Synopsis of the Books
    of Adam and Eve 2nd ed. Society of Biblical Literature: Early
    Judaism and Its Literature, edited John C. Reeves. Atlanta:
    Scholars Press, 1999.
Angel, Joseph L. “The Humbling of the Arrogant and the ‘Wild Man’
    and ‘Tree Stump’ Traditions in the Book of Giants and Daniel 4,”
    in Ancient Tales of Giants from Qumran and Turfan: Contexts,
    Traditions, and Influences, edited by Matthew Goff, Loren T.
    Stuckenbruck, and Enrico Morano, 61–80. Wissenschlaftliche
    Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament 360, edited by Jörg Frey.
    Tübingen, Germany: Mohr Siebeck, 2016.
———. “Reading the Book of Giants in Literary and Historical
    Context.” Dead Sea Discoveries 21 (2014): 313–46.
Annus, Amar. “On the Origin of Watchers: A Comparative Study
    of the Antediluvian Wisdom in Mesopotamian and Jewish
    Traditions.” Journal for the Study of Pseudepigrapha 19, no. 4
1166      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

    (May 2010): 277–320. https://thenightcourser.files.wordpress
    .com/2018/11/watchers-1.pdf (accessed June 15, 2021).
Attridge, Harold W., Wayne A. Meeks, Jouette M. Bassler, Werner
    E. Lemke, Susan Niditch, and Eileen M. Schuller, eds. The
    HarperCollins Study Bible, Fully Revised and Updated, Including
    the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical Books with Concordance.
    Revised ed. New York: HarperOne, 2006.
Bandstra, Barry L. Genesis 1–11: A Handbook on the Hebrew Text.
    Baylor Handbook on the Hebrew Bible. Waco, TX: Baylor
    University Press, 2008.
Barker, Margaret. Christmas: The Original Story. London: Society
    for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 2008.
———. The Hidden Tradition of the Kingdom of God. London:
    Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK), 2007.
———. The Older Testament: The Survival of Themes from the
    Ancient Royal Cult in Sectarian Judaism and Early Christianity.
    London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK),
    1987.
Bauer, Walter. A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament
    and Other Early Christian Literature. Revised and edited by
    Frederick William Danker. 3rd ed. Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press, 2000.
Bauman, Richard. “Commentary: Indirect Indexicality, Identity,
    Performance: Dialogic Observations.” Journal of Linguistic
    Anthropology 15, no. 1 (2005): 145–50.
Bautch, Kelley Coblentz. “Peter and the Patriarchs: A Confluence
    of Traditions?” In With Letters of Light: Studies in the Dead
    Sea Scrolls, Early Jewish Apocalypticism, Magic, and Mysticism,
    edited by Daphna V. Arbel and Andrei A. Orlov, 13–27. Ekstasis:
    Religious Experience from Antiquity to the Middle Ages 2, edited
    by John R. Levison. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 2011.
Baynes, Leslie. The Heavenly Book Motif in Judeo-Christian
    Apocalypses, 200 BCE–200 CE. Supplements to the Journal for
    the Study of Judaism 152. Leiden: Brill, 2012.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants          1167

Beale, Gregory K. The Temple and the Church’s Mission: A Biblical
    Theology of the Dwelling Place of God. New Studies in Biblical
    Theology 1, edited by Donald A. Carson. Downers Grove, IL:
    InterVarsity Press, 2004.
Bednar, David A. “To Sweep the Earth as with a Flood.” Brigham
    Young University Education Week devotional, Provo,
    Utah, August 19, 2014. https://www.lds.org/prophets-a
    nd-apostles/unto-all-the-world/to-sweep-the-earth-as-w
    ith-a-flood?lang=eng (accessed June 15, 2021).
Beecher, Maureen Ursenbach. “The Iowa Journal of Lorenzo Snow.”
    BYU Studies 24, no. 3 (1984): 261–73.
Ben Tov, Yakov (pseudonym of Colby Townsend). “The Book of
    Enoch, the Book of Moses, and the Question of Availability.”
    Faith-Promoting Rumor (blog), September 24, 2017. https:
    //faithpromotingrumor.com/2017/09/24/the-book-of-enoch
    -the-book-of-moses-and-the-question-of-availability/. Note
    that this blog post has since been removed without explanation
    but was not disavowed by the author and was originally archived
    at https://web.archive.org/web/20181217192041/https://faithpro
    motingrumor.com/2017/09/24/the-book-of-enoch-thebook-of
    -moses-and-the-question-of-availability/ (accessed November
    22, 2018). The archive.org version has been removed, but the
    original article can now be found at https://cdn.interpreter
    foundation.org/ifarchive/Ben-Tov-Availability-of-1-Enoch
    -Cirillo-error-The-Book-of-Enoch-the-Book-of-Moses-and
    -t he- Quest ion-of-Ava i labi l it y-FA ITH-PROMOTI NG
    -RUMOR.pdf (accessed June 2, 2021).
Bennett, Byard. “Iuxta unum latus erat terra tenebrarum: The
    Division of Primordial Space in Anti-Manichaean Writers’
    Descriptions of the Manichaean Cosmology,” in The Light and
    the Darkness: Studies in Manichaeism and Its World, edited by
    Paul Mirecki and Jason David BeDuhn, 68–78. Nag Hammadi
    and Manichaean Studies 50, edited by Stephen Emmel. Leiden:
    Brill, 2001.
Birrell, Anne. Chinese Mythology: An Introduction. Baltimore, MD:
    The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993.
Black, Jeremy, Andrew George, and Nicholas Postgate, eds. A
    Concise Dictionary of Akkadian. 2nd ed. Wiesbaden, Germany:
1168      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

    Otto Harrassowitz Verlag, 2000. https://books.google.com/
    books?id=-qIuVCsRb98C (accessed June 15, 2021).
Blair, Judit M. De-Demonising the Old Testament: An Investigation
    of Azazel, Lilith, Deber, Qeteb and Reshef in the Hebrew
    Bible. Forschungen zum Alten Testament 2, vol. 37. Tübingen,
    Germany: Mohr Siebeck, 2009.
Bledsoe, Amanda M. Davis. “Throne Theophanies, Dream Visions,
    and Righteous Seers: Daniel, the Book of Giants, and 1 Enoch
    Reconsidered,” in Ancient Tales of Giants from Qumran and
    Turfan: Contexts, Traditions, and Influences, edited by Matthew
    Goff, Loren T. Stuckenbruck, and Enrico Morano, 81–96.
    Wissenschlaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament 360,
    edited by Jörg Frey. Tübingen, Germany: Mohr Siebeck, 2016.
Bowen, Matthew L. E-mail message to Jeffrey M. Bradshaw, March
    18, 2020.
Box, G. H. 1918. The Apocalypse of Abraham. Translations of Early
    Documents, Series 1: Palestinian Jewish Texts (Pre-Rabbinic).
    London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1919.
    https://www.marquette.edu/maqom/box.pdf. (accessed July 10,
    2020).
Bradshaw, Jeffrey M. “Book of Moses Textual Criticism 3: Was the
    Book of Moses Simply an Unplanned Afterthought to Moses
    1?” Interpreter Foundation Blog, September 10, 2020. https:/
    www.interpreterfoundation.org/blog-book-of-moses-textual-
    criticism-3was-the-book-of-moses-simply-an-unplanned-
    afterthought-to-moses-1 (accessed June 15, 2021).
———. Creation, Fall, and the Story of Adam and Eve. Updated ed.
    In God’s Image and Likeness 1. Salt Lake City: Eborn Books,
    2014. https://archive.org/download/140123IGIL12014ReadingS
    (accessed June 15, 2021).
———. Enoch and the Gathering of Zion: The Witness of Ancient
    Texts for Modern Scripture. Orem, UT: Interpreter Foundation;
    Springville, UT: Book of Mormon Central; Salt Lake City:
    Eborn, 2021.
———. “The Ezekiel Mural at Dura Europos: A Tangible Witness
    of Ancient Jewish Mysteries?” BYU Studies Quarterly 49, no.
    1 (2010): 4–49. https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/byusq/vol49
    /iss1/2/ (accessed June 15, 2021).
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants           1169

———. The First Days and the Last Days: A Verse-By-Verse
   Commentary on the Book of Moses and JS—Matthew in Light of
   the Temple. Orem, UT: Interpreter Foundation; Salt Lake City:
   Eborn, 2021.
———. “The LDS Book of Enoch as the Culminating Story of a
   Temple Text.” BYU Studies Quarterly 53, no. 1 (2014): 39–73.
   https://byustudies.byu.edu/article/the-lds-story-of-enoch-
   as-the-culminating-episode-of-a-temple-text/;       https://www
   .youtube.com/watch?v=DjUToZa-e8U (accessed June 15, 2021).
   Updated and expanded as “The Book of Moses as a Temple
   Text,” in this proceedings.
———. Temple Themes in the Oath and Covenant of the Priest­
   hood. Updated ed. Salt Lake City: Eborn Books, 2014.
   https://archive.org/details/151128TempleThemesInTheOath
   AndCovenantOfThePriesthood2014Update;             https://archive
   .org/details/140910TemasDelTemploEnElJuramentoYEl
   ConvenioDelSacerdocio2014UpdateSReading (accessed June
   15, 2021).
———. The Tree of Knowledge as the Veil of the Sanctuary,” in
   Ascending the Mountain of the Lord: Temple, Praise, and Worship
   in the Old Testament, edited by David Rolph Seely, Jeffrey R.
   Chadwick, and Matthew J. Grey. The 42nd Annual Brigham
   Young University Sidney B. Sperry Symposium (26 October,
   2013), 49-65. Provo UT: Religious Studies Center, Brigham
   Young University; Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 2013. https:
   //rsc.byu.edu/ascending-mountain-lord/tree-knowledge-veil
   -sanctuary ; https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LfIs9YKYrZE
   (accessed June 15, 2021).
———. “Truth and Beauty in the Book of Moses,” in The
   Temple: Symbols, Sermons, and Settings. Proceedings of the
   Fourth Interpreter Foundation Matthew B. Brown Memorial
   Conference, 10 November 2018, edited by Stephen D. Ricks and
   Jeffrey M. Bradshaw. Temple on Mount Zion 5, 2021. Orem, UT:
   Interpreter Foundation; Salt Lake City: Eborn, 2021, in press.
Bradshaw, Jeffrey M., and Ryan Dahle. “Could Joseph Smith Have
   Drawn On Ancient Manuscripts When He Translated the
   Story of Enoch? Recent Updates on a Persistent Question,”
   Interpreter: A Journal of Latter-day Saint Faith and Scholarship
1170      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

   33 (2019): 305–73. https://interpreterfoundation.org/could
   -joseph-smith-have-drawn-on-ancient-manuscripts-when-he
   -t ra nslated-t he-stor y-of-enoch-recent-upd ates-on-a
   -persistent-question/ (accessed June 15, 2021).
Bradshaw, Jeffrey M., and Brenden Fullmer. “What Did Enoch
   Scholar Matthew Black Say To Hugh Nibley about the Book
   of Moses Enoch Account?,” 2021. https://www.youtube.com
   /watch?v=AaQM5IVFvWQ (accessed June 3, 2021).
Bradshaw, Jeffrey M., and Ronan James Head. “The Investiture
   Panel at Mari and Rituals of Divine Kingship in the Ancient
   Near East.” Studies in the Bible and Antiquity 4 (2012): 1–42.
   https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/sba/vol4/iss1/1/ (accessed June
   15, 2021).
Bradshaw, Jeffrey M., and David J. Larsen. Enoch, Noah, and the
   Tower of Babel. In God’s Image and Likeness 2. Salt Lake City:
   Interpreter Foundation and Eborn Books, 2014. https://archive.
   org/download/131203ImageAndLikeness2ReadingS (accessed
   June 15, 2021).
Bradshaw, Jeffrey M., David J. Larsen, and Stephen T. Whitlock.
   “Moses 1 and the Apocalypse of Abraham: Twin Sons of
   Different Mothers?” in this proceedings.
Bradshaw, Jeffrey M., Jacob A. Rennaker, and David J. Larsen.
   “Revisiting the Forgotten Voices of Weeping in Moses 7: A
   Comparison with Ancient Texts,” Interpreter: A Journal of
   Mormon Scripture 2 (2012): 41–71. https://journal.interpre
   terfoundation.org/revisiting-the-forgotten-voices-of-weeping-
   in-moses-7-a-comparison-with-ancient-texts/ (accessed June 2,
   2021).
Bradshaw, Jeffrey M., Shirley S. Ricks, and Stephen T. Whitlock,
   eds. Hugh Nibley Observed. Orem, UT: Interpreter Foundation;
   Salt Lake City: Eborn, 2021.
Brown, S. Kent. The Testimony of Luke. Brigham Young University
   New Testament Commentary. Provo, UT: BYU Studies, 2015.
Brown, S. Kent, and Jeffrey M. Bradshaw. “Man and Son of Man:
   Probing Theology and Christology in the Book of Moses and in
   Jewish and Christian Tradition,” in this proceedings.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants           1171

Brueggemann, Walter. “The Costly Loss of Lament.” Journal for the
   Study of the Old Testament 36 (1986): 57–71. Reprinted in The
   Psalms: The Life of Faith, edited by Patrick D. Miller, 98–111.
   Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1995. http://individual.utoronto
   .ca/mf kolarcik/CostlyLossof Lament_WBrueggemann.pdf
   (accessed June 15, 2021).
Bruno, Cheryl L. “Congruence and Concatenation in Jewish
   Mystical Literature, American Freemasonry, and Mormon
   Enoch Writings.” Journal of Religion and Society 16 (2014): 1–19.
Buckley, Jorunn Jacobsen. The Mandaeans: Ancient Texts and
   Modern People. American Academy of Religion: The Religions
   Series. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.
Budge, E. A. Wallis, ed. The Book of the Cave of Treasures. London:
   The Religious Tract Society, 1927. Reprint, New York City:
   Cosimo Classics, 2005. Reprint version has the same pagination
   as the original.
Burne, Charlotte Sophia, and Georgina F. Jackson. Shropshire Folk-
   Lore: A Sheaf of Gleanings, Part III. London: Trübner, 1886.
   https://archive.org/details/shropshirefolkl01jackgoog (accessed
   June 3, 2021).
Burrows, Eric. “Some Cosmological Patterns in Babylonian
   Religion,” in The Labrynth: Further Studies in the Relation
   between Myth and Ritual in the Ancient World, edited by
   Samuel Henry Hooke, 43–70. London: Society for Promoting
   Christian Knowledge, 1935. https://archive.org/details/
   labyrinthfurther0000hook/ (accessed June 6, 2021).
Calabro, David. E-mail message to Jeffrey M. Bradshaw, January
   24, 2018.
———. E-mail message to Jeffrey M. Bradshaw, May 18, 2020.
———. “An Early Christian Context for the Book of Moses,” in this
   proceedings.
Cameron, Ron, and Arthur J. Dewey, eds. The Cologne Mani Codex
   (P. Colon. inv. nr. 4780): “Concerning the Origin of His Body.”
   Society of Biblical Literature Texts and Translations 15. Early
   Christian Literature 3. Missoula, MT: Scholars Press, 1979.
Caquot, André. “Les prodromes du déluge: Légendes araméenes
   du Qoumrân.” Revue d’Histoire et de Philosophie religieuses
   83, no. 1 (2003): 41–59. https://www.persee.fr/docAsPDF/rhpr
1172      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

    _0035–2403_2003_num_83_1_1011.pdf (accessed June 15,
    2021).
Carmack, Stanford. “The Importance of Book of Moses English for
    Determining Authorship,” in this proceedings.
Cassuto, Umberto. A Commentary on the Book of Genesis: Part 1;
    From Adam to Noah. Translated by Israel Abrahams. English
    ed. Jerusalem: Magnes Press, Hebrew University, 1998.
Charlesworth, James H. “Odes of Solomon,” in The Old Testament
    Pseudepigrapha, edited by James H. Charlesworth, 2:725–71.
    Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1983.
Cirillo, Salvatore. “Joseph Smith, Mormonism, and Enochic
    Tradition.” Master’s thesis, Durham University, 2010. http://
    etheses.dur.ac.uk/236/ (accessed June 3, 2021).
Clark, E. Douglas. The Blessings of Abraham: Becoming a Zion
    People. American Fork, UT: Covenant Communications, 2005.
Collins, John J. Daniel. Hermeneia. Minneapolis: Fortress Press,
    1993.
Dant, Doris R. “Polish Religious Folk Art: Gospel Echoes from a
    Disparate Clime.” BYU Studies 37, no. 2 (1997–98): 88–112.
Davids, Peter H. The Letters of 2 Peter and Jude. The Pillar New
    Testament Commentary. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2006.
———. II Peter and Jude: A Handbook on the Greek Text. Waco,
    TX: Baylor University, 2011.
Dawood, N. J., trans. The Koran. London: Penguin Books, 1997.
Day, John. “The Enochs of Genesis 4 and 5 and the Emergence of
    the Apocalyptic Enoch Tradition,” in Sybyls, Scriptures, and
    Scrolls: John Collins at Seventy, edited by Joel Baden, Hindy
    Najman, and Eibert J. C. Tigchelaar, 1:293–313. Leiden: Brill,
    2016. https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004324749_019.
Doak, Brian R. “The Giant in a Thousand Years: Tracing Narratives
    of Gigantism in the Hebrew Bible and Beyond,” in Ancient Tales
    of Giants from Qumran and Turfan: Contexts, Traditions, and
    Influences, edited by Matthew Goff, Loren T. Stuckenbruck,
    and Enrico Morano, 13–32. Wissenschlaftliche Untersuchungen
    zum Neuen Testament 360, edited by Jörg Frey. Tübingen,
    Germany: Mohr Siebeck, 2016.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants           1173

Dorofeeva-Lichtmann, Vera. “‘Inversed Cosmographs’ in Late East
    Asian Cartography and the Atlas Production,” in East-West
    Encounter in the Science of Heaven and Earth. Proceedings of
    the International Conference on Traditional Sciences in Asia
    2017, edited by Tokimasa Takeda and Bill M. Mak, 144–74.
    Kyoto, Japan: Institute for Research in Humanities, Kyoto
    University, 2019. http://www.myoldmaps.com/late-medieval
    -maps-1300/293-inversed_cosmographs_in.pdf (accessed May
    27, 2021).
Draper, Richard D., S. Kent Brown, and Michael D. Rhodes. The
    Pearl of Great Price: A Verse-by-Verse Commentary. Salt Lake
    City: Deseret Book, 2005.
Drawnel, Henryk. “The Mesopotamian Background of the Enochic
    Giants and Evil Spirits.” Dead Sea Discoveries 21 (2014): 14–38.
Drower, E. S., ed. The Canonical Prayerbook of the Mandaeans.
    Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill, 1959. http://www.gnosis.org
    /library/ginzarba.htm (accessed September 11, 2007).
Eastmond, Antony. “Narratives of the Fall: Structure and Meaning
    in the Genesis Frieze at Hagia Sophia, Trebizond,” in Symposium
    on Aesthetics and Presentation in Byzantine Literature, Art and
    Music. Dumbarton Oaks Papers 53, 219-36. Washington, DC:
    Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection, 1999. http:
    //www.doaks.org/publications/doaks_online_publications
    /DOP53/DP53ch12.pdf and http://www.doaks.org/publications
    /doaks_online_publications/DOP53/DP53ch12.pdf (accessed
    October 22, 2008).
Edson, E., and E. Savage-Smith. Medieval Views of the Cosmos.
    Oxford, England: The Bodleian Library, University of Oxford,
    2004.
Ehrman, Bart D. Lost Christianities: The Battles for Scripture and
    the Faiths We Never Knew. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
    2003.
Elliott, J. K. The Apocryphal New Testament: A Collection of
    Apocryphal Christian Literature in an English Translation.
    Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Ephrem the Syrian. “The Hymns on Paradise,” in Hymns on
    Paradise, translated and edited by Sebastian Brock, 77–195.
    Crestwood, NY: St. Vladimir’s Seminary Press, 1990.
1174      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

Esplin, Scott C. “Wondering at His Words: Peter’s Influence on the
    Knowledge of Salvation for the Dead,” in The Ministry of Peter,
    the Chief Apostle, edited by Frank F. Judd Jr., Eric D. Huntsman,
    and Shon D. Hopkin, 297–315. Provo, UT: Religious Studies
    Center, Brigham Young University; Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret
    Book, 2014.
Etheridge, J. W., ed. The Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan Ben
    Uzziel on the Pentateuch, with the Fragments of the Jerusalem
    Targum from the Chaldee. 2 vols. 1865. Reprint, Piscataway,
    NJ: Gorgias Press, 2005. http://www.targum.info/pj/psjon.htm
    (accessed June 3, 2021).
Faulkner, Raymond O. A Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian.
    1962. Oxford: Griffith Institute, Ashmolean Museum, 1991.
    https://community.dur.ac.uk/penelope.wilson/Hieroglyphs/
    Faulkner-A-Concise-Dictionary-of-Middle-Egyptian-1991.pdf
    (accessed June 3, 2021).
Faulring, Scott H., Kent P. Jackson, and Robert J. Matthews,
    eds. Joseph Smith’s New Translation of the Bible: Original
    Manuscripts. Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center, Brigham
    Young University, 2004.
Fitzmyer, Joseph A., ed. The Genesis Apocryphon of Qumran Cave 1
    (1Q20): A Commentary. 3rd ed. Biblica et Orientalia 18B. Rome:
    Editrice Pontificio Istituto Biblico, 2004.
Flake, Kathleen. “‘Not to Be Riten’: The Mormon Temple Rite as Oral
    Canon.” Journal of Ritual Studies 9, no. 2 (Summer 1995): 1–21.
    https://mormonstudies.as.virginia.edu/wp-content/uploads
    /2018/09/Jrn-Ritual-Studies-Temple-as-Oral-Canon.pdf
    (accessed June 3, 2021).
Freedman, David Noel. Anchor Bible Dictionary. New York:
    Doubleday, 1992.
Frölich, Ida. “Giants and Demons,” in Ancient Tales of Giants from
    Qumran and Turfan: Contexts, Traditions, and Influences,
    edited by Matthew Goff, Loren T. Stuckenbruck, and Enrico
    Morano, 97–114. Wissenschlaftliche Untersuchungen zum
    Neuen Testament 360, edited by Jörg Frey. Tübingen, Germany:
    Mohr Siebeck, 2016.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants             1175

Gardner, Iain, ed. The Kephalaia of the Teacher: The Edited Coptic
   Manichaean Texts in Translation with Commentary. Nag
   Hammadi and Manichaean Studies 37, edited by James M.
   Robinson and H. J. Klimkeit. Leiden: Brill, 1995.
George, Andrew, trans. The Epic of Gilgamesh. London: Penguin
   Group, 2003.
Ginzberg, Louis, ed. The Legends of the Jews. Translated by
   Henrietta Szold and Paul Radin. 7 vols. Philadelphia: Jewish
   Publication Society of America, 1909–38. Reprint, Baltimore:
   Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998. Page references are to
   the 1998 volumes.
Givens, Terryl L., and Fiona Givens. The God Who Weeps: How
   Mormonism Makes Sense of Life. Salt Lake City: Ensign Peak,
   2012.
Goff, Matthew. “Gilgamesh the Giant: The Qumran Book of Giants’
   Appropriation of Gilgamesh Motifs.” Dead Sea Discoveries 16,
   no. 2 (2009): 221–53.
———. “The Sons of the Watchers in the Book of Watchers and
   the Qumran Book of Giants,” in Ancient Tales of Giants from
   Qumran and Turfan: Contexts, Traditions, and Influences,
   edited by Matthew Goff, Loren T. Stuckenbruck, and Enrico
   Morano, 115–27. Wissenschlaftliche Untersuchungen zum
   Neuen Testament 360, edited by Jörg Frey. Tübingen, Germany:
   Mohr Siebeck, 2016.
———. “Where’s Enoch? The Mythic Geography of the Qumran
   Book of Giants,” in Sybyls, Scriptures, and Scrolls: John Collins
   at Seventy, edited by Joel Baden, Hindy Najman, and Eibert J.
   C. Tigchelaar, 1:472–88. Leiden: Brill, 2016. https://religion.fsu.
   edu/sites/g/files/upcbnu446/files/media/files/faculty/misc/Goff.
   Where%27s%20Enoch.Sibyls_%20Scriptures_%20and%20
   Scrolls%20%28JJC%20FS%29.pdf (accessed June 3, 2021).
Graham, Lloyd D. “Mythogeography and Hydromythology in
   the Initial Sections of Sumerian and Egyptian King-Lists.”
   Direct Release to Academia.edu, 2019. https://www.academia.
   edu/40832066/Mythogeography_and_hydromythology_in_
   the_initial_sections_of_Sumerian_and_Egyptian_king_lists
   (accessed June 3, 2021).
1176      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

Grossman, Jonathan. “Who Are the Sons of God? A New
   Suggestion.” Biblica 99, no. 1 (January 2018): 1–18. https://www
   .academia.edu/40515229/_Who_are_the_Sons_of_God_A
   _New_Suggestion_ (accessed June 3, 2021).
Gulácsi, Zsuzsanna. Mani’s Pictures: The Didactic Images of the
   Manichaeans from Sasanian Mesopotamia to Uygur Central
   Asia and Tang-Ming China. Nag Hammadi and Manichaean
   Studies 90. Leiden: Brill, 2015.
Hafen, Bruce C., and Marie K. Hafen. “Adam, Eve, the Book
   of Moses, and the Temple: The Story of Teceiving Christ’s
   Atonement,” in this proceedings.
Hallo, William W., and K. Lawson Younger, eds. The Context of
   Scripture. 3 vols. Leiden: Brill, 1996–2002.
Halloran, J. A. Sumerian Lexicon: A Dictionary Guide to the Ancient
   Sumerian Language. Los Angeles, CA: Logogram Publishing,
   2006. https://www.sumerian.org/sumerlex.htm (accessed June
   3, 2021).
Hamilton, Victor P. The Book of Genesis: Chapters 1-17. Grand
   Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1990.
Hartman, Louis F., and Alexander A. Di Lella. The Book of Daniel.
   The Anchor Yale Bible. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
   2005.
Hayward, C. T. R. Interpretations of the Name Israel in Ancient
   Judaism and Some Early Christian Writings: From Victorious
   Athlete to Heavenly Champion. Oxford: Oxford University
   Press, 2005.
Heimpel, Wolfgang. Letters to the King of Mari: A New Translation
   with Historical Introduction, Notes, and Commentary. Winona
   Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns, 2003.
Hendel, Ronald S. “Genesis,” in The HarperCollins Study Bible,
   Fully Revised and Updated, Including the Apocryphal/
   Deuterocanonical Books with Concordance, edited by Harold
   W. Attridge, Wayne A. Meeks, Jouette M. Bassler, Werner E.
   Lemke, Susan Niditch, and Eileen M. Schuller. Revised ed. New
   York: HarperOne, 2006.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants             1177

Hendel, Ronald S. “Genesis 1–11 and Its Mesopotamian Problem,”
     in Cultural Borrowings and Ethnic Appropriations in Antiquity,
     edited by Erich S. Gruen, 23–36. Stuttgart, Germany: Franz
     Steiner Verlag, 2005.
———. “The Nephilim Were on the Earth: Genesis 6:1–4 and Its
     Ancient Near Eastern Context,” in The Fall of the Angels, edited
     by C. Auffarth and Loren T. Stuckenbruck, 11–34. Leiden: Brill,
     2004.
———. “Of Demigods and the Deluge: Toward an Interpretation of
     Genesis 6:1–4.” Journal of Biblical Literature 106 (1987): 13–26.
———. The Text of Genesis 1–11: Textual Studies and Critical
     Edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.
Henning, W. B. “The Book of the Giants.” Bulletin of the School
     of Oriental and African Studies 11, no. 1 (1943): 52–74. https:
     //www.cambridge.org/core/journals/bulletin-of-the-school
     -of-oriental-and-african-studies/article/book-of-the-giants
     /F09AF3F19C427A250B9D562F82640944 (accessed June 3,
     2021).
Henze, Matthias. “Additions to Daniel: Bel and the Dragon,” in
     Outside the Bible: Ancient Jewish Writings Related to Scripture,
     edited by Louis H. Feldman, James L. Kugel, and Lawrence H.
     Schiffman, 2:135–39. Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society,
     2013.
Hess, Richard S. Studies in the Personal Names of Genesis 1–11.
     Winona Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns, 2009.
Holzapfel, Richard Neitzel, and David Rolph Seely. My Father’s
     House: Temple Worship and Symbolism in the New Testament.
     Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1994.
Jackson, Kent P. “Some Notes of Joseph Smith and Adam Clarke,”
     Interpreter: A Journal of Latter-day Saint Faith and Scholarship
     40 (2020): 15–60.
Jellinek, Adolph, ed. Bet ha-Midrasch. Sammlung kleiner
     midraschim und vermischter Abhandlungen aus der ältern
     jüdischen Literatur. Vol. 4. Leipzig, Germany: C. W. Vollrath,
     1857.
Jensen, Robin Scott, Robert J. Woodford, and Steven C. Harper,
     eds. Manuscript Revelation Books. Facsimile Edition. First
     volume of the Revelations and Translations series of The Joseph
1178      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

    Smith Papers, edited by Dean C. Jessee, Ronald K. Esplin, and
    Richard Lyman Bushman. Salt Lake City: Church Historian’s
    Press, 2009.
Jones, Joy D. “An especially noble calling.” Ensign 50, April 2020.
    https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/general-conference
    /2020/04/14jones?lang=eng. (accessed April 3, 2021).
Kawashima, Robert S. “Sources and Redaction,” in Reading Genesis:
    Ten Methods, edited by Ronald S. Hendel, 47–70. Cambridge,
    England: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
Kee, Howard C. “Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs,” in The Old
    Testament Pseudepigrapha, edited by James H. Charlesworth,
    1:775–828. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1983.
Kimball, Spencer W. The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball. Salt Lake
    City: Bookcraft, 1982.
Klimkeit, Hans-Joachim. Manichaean Art and Calligraphy. Icono-
    graphy of Religions 20. Institute of Religious Iconography, State
    University Groningen. Leiden: Brill, 1982.
Koehler, Ludwig, and Walter Baumgartner. The Hebrew and
    Aramaic Lexicon of the Old Testament. 4 vols. Leiden: Brill,
    1994–2000.
Kósa, Gábor. “The Book of Giants Tradition in the Chinese
    Manichaica,” in Ancient Tales of Giants from Qumran and
    Turfan: Contexts, Traditions, and Influences, edited by Matthew
    Goff, Loren T. Stuckenbruck, and Enrico Morano, 145–86.
    Wissenschlaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament 360,
    ed. Jörg Frey. Tübingen, Germany: Mohr Siebeck, 2016.
———. “Peacocks under the Jewel Tree: New Hypotheses on the
    Manichaean Painting of Bezeklik (Cave 38).” Journal of Inner
    Asian Art and Archaeology 4 (2009): 135–48. https://www
    .researchgate.net/publication/285171957_Peacocks_under
    _the_Jewel_Tree_New_Hypotheses_on_the_Manichaean
    _Painting_of_Bezeklik_Cave_38 (accessed June 3, 2021).
Kugel, James L. The Bible as It Was. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press
    of Harvard University Press, 1997.
———. “Jubilees,” in Outside the Bible: Ancient Jewish Writings
    Related to Scripture, edited by Louis H. Feldman, James L. Kugel
    and Lawrence H. Schiffman. 3 vols. 1:272–465. Philadelphia:
    The Jewish Publication Society, 2013.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants            1179

Kulik, Alexander. “Apocalypse of Abraham,” in Outside the Bible:
   Ancient Jewish Writings Related to Scripture, edited by Louis H.
   Feldman, James L. Kugel and Lawrence H. Schiffman. 3 vols.
   2:1453-81. Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society, 2013.
LaCocque, André. The Captivity of Innocence: Babel and the
   Yahwist. Eugene, OR: Cascade Books, 2010.
———. Onslaught against Innocence: Cain, Abel, and the Yahwist.
   Eugene, OR: Cascade Books, 2008.
Lambert, Wilfred G. Babylonian Wisdom Literature. Oxford: Oxford
   University Press, 1960. Reprint, Winona Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns,
   1996. http://books.google.com/books?id=vYuRDcieF2EC&dq.
   (accessed June 3, 2021). Page references are to the 1996 edition.
Langkjer, Erik. “From 1 Enoch to Mandaean religion.” Academia
   .edu. https://www.academia.edu/8438522/From_1.Enoch_to
   _Mandaean_Religion (accessed September 7, 2019).
Langlois, Michael. “Shemihazah et compagnie(s). Onomastique
   des anges déchus dans les manuscrits araméens deu Livre
   d’Hénoch,” in Aramaica Qumranica: Proceedings of the Con-
   ference on the Aramaic Texts from Qumran in Aix-en-Provence
   30 June–2 July 2008, edited by Katell Berthelot and Daniel
   Stökl Ben Ezra, 145–80. Studies on the Texts of the Desert of
   Judah 94, edited by Florentino García Martínez, Peter W.
   Flint, and Eibert J. C. Tigchelaar. Leiden: Brill, 2010. https://
   michaellanglois.org/medias/langlois-2010-shemihazah
   -et-compagnies-in-ara maica-qumra nica-145 –180.pdf
   (accessed June 3, 2021).
Larsen, David J. “Enoch and the City of Zion: Can an Entire
   Community Ascend to Heaven?” BYU Studies Quarterly 53, no.
   1 (2014): 25–37.
Laurence, Richard, trans. The Book of Enoch the Prophet: Translated
   from an Ethiopic Manuscript in the Bodleian Library [. . .]. 1821.
   London: Kegan Paul, Trench, 1883. http://archive.org/details/
   bookofenochproph00laur (accessed June 3, 2021).
Lemaire, André. “Nabonide et Gilgamesh: L’araméen en
   Mésopotamie et à Qoumrân,” in Aramaica Qumranica:
   Proceedings of the Conference on the Aramaic Texts from
   Qumran in Aix-en-Provence 30 June–2 July 2008, edited by
   Katell Berthelot and Daniel Stökl Ben Ezra, 125–44. Studies on
1180      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

    the Texts of the Desert of Judah 94, edited by Florentino García
    Martínez, Peter W. Flint, and Eibert J. C. Tigchelaar. Leiden:
    Brill,    2010.     http://www.digitorient.com/wp/wp-content/
    uploads/2011/03/LemaireAramaicQumranica.pdf (accessed
    June 3, 2021).
Lesses, Rebecca. “‘They Revealed Secrets to Their Wives’: The
    Transmission of Magical Knowledge in 1 Enoch,” in With
    Letters of Light: Studies in the Dead Sea Scrolls, Early Jewish
    Apocalypticism, Magic, and Mysticism, edited by Daphna
    V. Arbel and Andrei A. Orlov, 196–222. Ekstasis: Religious
    Experience from Antiquity to the Middle Ages, edited by John R.
    Levison. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 2011.
Lewis, C. S. 1939. “Learning in War-Time,” in C. S. Lewis: Essay
    Collection and Other Short Pieces, edited by Lesley Walmsley,
    47–63. London: HarperCollins, 2000.
———. “On the Reading of Old Books,” on God in the Dock, edited
    by Walter Hooper, 200–207. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans,
    1970. http://www.pacificaoc.org/wp-content/uploads/On-the
    -Reading-of-Old-Books.pdf (accessed August 8, 2017).
Lewis, Mark Edward. The Construction of Space in Early China.
    Albany: State University of New York Press, 2006.
Lidzbarski, Mark, ed. Ginza: Der Schatz oder das Grosse Buch der
    Mandäer. Quellen der Religionsgeschichte, der Reihenfolge des
    Erscheinens 13:4. Göttingen and Leipzig, Germany: Vanden-
    hoeck & Ruprecht, J. C. Hinrichs’sche, 1925. https://ia802305
    .us.archive.org/7/items/MN41563ucmf_2/MN41563ucmf_2
    .pdf (accessed September 7, 2019).
Lindsay, Jeff and Noel B. Reynolds. “‘Strong Like unto Moses’: The
    Case for Ancient Roots in the Book of Moses Based on Book of
    Mormon Usage of Related Content Apparently from the Brass
    Plates,” in this proceedings.
Loewe, Michael. Ways to Paradise: The Chinese Quest for
    Immortality. London: George Allen & Unwin, 1979.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants          1181

Ludlow, Jared W. Abraham Meets Death: Narrative Humor in
   the “Testament of Abraham.” Journal for the Study of the
   Pseudepigrapha Supplement Series 41. London: Sheffield
   Academic Press, 2002.
———. “Abraham’s Vision of the Heavens,” in Astronomy,
   Papyrus, and Covenant, edited by John Gee and Brian M.
   Hauglid. Studies in the Book of Abraham 3, 57–73. Provo, UT:
   Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 2005.
   https://archive.bookofmormoncentral.org/content/abrahams
   -vision-heavens (accessed June 3, 2021).
———. “‘Enoch Walked with God, and He Was Not’: Where Did
   Enoch Go after Genesis?” in this proceedings.
Lundquist, John M. “What Is Reality?” In By Study and Also by
   Faith: Essays in Honor of Hugh W. Nibley, edited by John M.
   Lundquist and Stephen D. Ricks. 2 vols. 1:428-38. Salt Lake
   City, UT: Deseret Book, 1990.
Machiela, Daniel A. The Dead Sea Genesis Apocryphon [1QapGen]:
   A New Text and Translation with Introduction and Special
   Treatment of Columns 13–17. Studies on the Texts of the Desert
   of Judah 79. Leiden: Brill, 2009. https://books.google.com
   /books?id=7O4oKMuLeaQC (accessed June 3, 2021).
———. “Situating the Aramaic texts from Qumran: Reconsidering
   Their Language and Socio-historical Settings,” in Apocalyptic
   Thinking in Early Judaism: Engaging with John Collins’ ‘The
   Apocalyptic Imagination,’” edited by Sidnie White Crawford
   and Cecilia Wassén, 88–109. Supplements to the Journal for the
   Study of Judaism 182, edited by René Bloch and Karina Martin
   Hogan. Leiden: Brill, 2018.
Major, John S. Heaven and Earth in Early Han Thought: Chapters
   Three, Four, and Five of the Huainanzi. Albany: State University
   of New York Press, 1993.
Malan, Solomon Caesar, ed. The Book of Adam and Eve, Also Called
   the Conflict of Adam and Eve with Satan, a Book of the Early
   Eastern Church, Translated from the Ethiopic, with Notes from
   the Kufale, Talmud, Midrashim, and Other Eastern Works.
   London: Williams and Norgate, 1882. Reprint, San Diego, CA:
   Book Tree, 2005.
1182      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

“Marriage superstitions, and the Miseries of a Bride Elect,
   Part 1.” The St. James’ Magazine 28 (7, New Series) (1871): 549–
   54. https://books.google.com/books?id=nbwRAAAAYAAJ. (ac-
   cessed June 3, 2021).
Martínez, Florentino García. “The Book of Giants (1Q23),” in The
   Dead Sea Scrolls Translated: The Qumran Texts in English, edited
   by Florentino García Martínez, 260. Translated by Wilfred G.
   E. Watson. 2nd ed. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1996.
———. “The Book of Giants (4Q203),” in The Dead Sea Scrolls
   Translated: The Qumran Texts in English, edited by Florentino
   García Martínez, 260–61. Translated by Wilfred G. E. Watson.
   2nd ed. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1996.
———. “The Book of Giants (4Q530),” in The Dead Sea Scrolls
   Translated: The Qumran Texts in English, edited by Florentino
   García Martínez, 261–62. Translated by Wilfred G. E. Watson.
   2nd ed. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1996.
———. “The Book of Giants (4Q531),” in The Dead Sea Scrolls
   Translated: The Qumran Texts in English, edited by Florentino
   García Martínez, 262. Translated by Wilfred G. E. Watson. 2nd
   ed. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1996.
———, ed. The Dead Sea Scrolls Translated: The Qumran Texts in
   English. Translated by Wilfred G. E. Watson. 2nd ed. Grand
   Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1996.
———. “Genesis Apocryphon (1QapGen ar),” in The Dead Sea
   Scrolls Translated: The Qumran Texts in English, edited by
   Florentino García Martínez, 230–37. Translated by Wilfred G.
   E. Watson. 2nd ed. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1996.
Martyr, Justin. ca. 150–157. “The Second Apology of Justin for
   the Christinas. Addressed to the Roman Senate,” in The Ante-
   Nicene Fathers (The Writings of the Fathers Down to AD 325),
   edited by Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson. 10 vols.
   1:188–93. Buffalo, NY: The Christian Literature Company,
   1885. Reprint, Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 2004.
Matt, Daniel C., ed. The Zohar: Pritzker Edition. Vol. 1. Stanford,
   CA: Stanford University Press, 2004.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants           1183

McKane, William. “Matthew Black: 1908–1994,” in 1995
   Lectures and Memoirs, 283–94. Proceedings of the British
   Academy 90. London: British Academy, 1996. https://www
   .thebritishacademy.ac.uk/publishing/memoirs/pba-90/black
   -matthew-1908-1994/ (accessed June 3, 2021).
Migne, Jacques P. “Livre d’Adam,” in Dictionnaire des Apocryphes,
   ou, Collection de tous les livres Apocryphes relatifs a l’Ancien
   et au Nouveau Testament, pour la plupart, traduits en
   français, pour la première fois, sur les textes originaux,
   enrichie de préfaces, dissertations critiques, notes historiques,
   bibliographiques, géographiques et théologiques, edited by
   Jacques P. Migne, 1:1–290. Troisième et Dernière Encyclopédie
   Théologique 23. Paris: J.-P. Migne, 1856. http://books.google.
   com/books?id=daUAAAAAMAAJ (accessed June 3, 2021).
Mika’el, Bakhayla. “The Book of the Mysteries of the Heavens and
   the Earth.” Ca. 1400. In The Book of the Mysteries of the Heavens
   and the Earth and Other Works of Bakhayla Mika’el (Zosimas),
   edited by E. A. Wallis Budge, 1–96. Oxford: Oxford University
   Press, 1934. Reprint, Berwick, ME: Ibis Press, 2004. Page
   references in the 1934 edition are idential to the 2004 edition.
Milik, J. T., and Matthew Black, eds. The Books of Enoch: Aramaic
   Fragments from Qumran Cave 4. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1976.
   https://archive.org/details/MILIKEnochInAramaicQumran
   Cave4 (accessed June 3, 2021).
Mitchell, Stephen. Gilgamesh: A New English Version. New York:
   Free Press, 2004.
Mitton, George L. “The Book of Mormon as a Resurrected Book
   and a Type of Christ,” in Remembrance and Return: Essays in
   Honor of Louis C. Midgley, edited by Ted Vaggalis and Daniel
   C. Peterson, 121–46. Orem, UT: Interpreter Foundation; Salt
   Lake City: Eborn, 2020.
Mobley, Gregory. “The Wild Man in the Bible and the Ancient Near
   East.” Journal of Biblical Literature 116, no. 2 (1997): 217–33.
   https://www.jstor.org/stable/3266221.
———. The Empty Men: The Heroic Tradition of Ancient Israel. The
   Anchor Bible Reference Library. New York: Doubleday, 2005.
Mopsik, Charles, ed. Le Livre Hébreu d’Hénoch ou Livre des Palais.
   Les Dix Paroles. Lagrasse, France: Éditions Verdier, 1989.
1184      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

Morano, Enrico. “Il Libro dei Giganti di Mani,” in Il mito e la
   dottrina. Testi manichei dell’Asia centrale e della Cina, 81–107.
   Vol. 3 of Il manicheismo, edited by Gherardo Gnoli. Milan:
   Fondazione Lorenzo Valla / Arnoldo Mondadori Editore, 2008.
   https://1lib.us/book/1236609/604020?id=1236609          (accessed
   June 3, 2021).
———. “Some New Sogdian Fragments Related to Mani’s Book
   of Giants and the Problem of the Influence of Jewish Enochic
   Literature,” in Ancient Tales of Giants from Qumran and
   Turfan: Contexts, Traditions, and Influences, edited by Matthew
   Goff, Loren T. Stuckenbruck, and Enrico Morano, 187–98.
   Wissenschlaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament 360,
   edited by Jörg Frey. Tübingen, Germany: Mohr Siebeck, 2016.
Morrow, Jeff. “Creation as Temple-Building and Work as Liturgy in
   Genesis 1-3.” Journal of the Orthodox Center for the Advancement
   of Biblical Studies (JOCABS) 2, no. 1 (2009). http://www.ocabs
   .org/journal/index.php/jocabs/article/viewFile/43/18 (accessed
   July 2, 2010).
Mozgovine, Cyrille. De Abdallah à Zorrino: Dictionnaire des Noms
   Propres de Tintin. Tournai, Belgium: Casterman, Bibliothèque
   de Moulinsart, 1992.
Muhlestein, Kerry. “The Doctrine and Covenants and the Book
   of Moses: An Outpouring of Revelations and the Beginning
   of Joseph Smith’s ‘New Translation’ of the Bible,” in this
   proceedings.
Muir, Lynette R. The Biblical Drama of Medieval Europe. Cambridge,
   England: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
Nelson, Russell M. Teachings of Russell M. Nelson. Salt Lake City:
   Deseret Book, 2018.
Nes, Solrunn. The Uncreated Light: An Iconographical Study of
   the Transfiguration in the Eastern Church. Grand Rapids, MI:
   Eerdmans, 2007.
Newington, Samantha. “Greek Titans and Biblical Giants,” in
   Ancient Tales of Giants from Qumran and Turfan: Contexts,
   Traditions, and Influences, edited by Matthew Goff, Loren T.
   Stuckenbruck, and Enrico Morano, 33–40. Wissenschlaftliche
   Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament 360, edited by Jörg Frey.
   Tübingen, Germany: Mohr Siebeck, 2016.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants           1185

Neyrey, Jerome H. 2 Peter, Jude: A New Translation with Introduction
   and Commentary. The Anchor Bible 37C. New York: Doubleday,
   1993.
Nibley, Hugh W. Abraham in Egypt. Collected Works of Hugh Nibley
   14. Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon
   Studies; Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 2000.
———. An Approach to the Book of Mormon. 1957. 3rd ed. Collected
   Works of Hugh Nibley 6. Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient
   Research and Mormon Studies; Salt Lake City: Deseret Book,
   1988.
———. “The Babylonian Background,” in Lehi in the Desert, The
   World of the Jaredites, There Were Jaredites, edited by John W.
   Welch, Darrell L. Matthews, and Stephen R. Callister, 350–79.
   Collected Works of Hugh Nibley 5. Provo, UT: Foundation for
   Ancient Research and Mormon Studies; Salt Lake City: Deseret
   Book, 1988.
———. “But What Kind of Work?” in Approaching Zion, edited
   by Don E. Norton, 252–89. Collected Works of Hugh Nibley
   9. Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon
   Studies; Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989.
———. “Churches in the Wilderness,” in The Prophetic Book of
   Mormon, edited by John W. Welch, 289–327. Collected Works
   of Hugh Nibley 8. Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient Research
   and Mormon Studies; Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989.
———. “Churches in the Wilderness,” in Nibley on the Timely and
   the Timeless, edited by Truman G. Madsen, 155–212. Provo,
   UT: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University; Salt
   Lake City: Bookcraft, 1978.
———. “Deny Not the Gifts of God,” in Approaching Zion, edited
   by Don E. Norton, 118–48. Collected Works of Hugh Nibley
   9. Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon
   Studies; Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989.
———. “Educating the Saints.” 1970. In Brother Brigham Challenges
   the Saints, edited by Don E. Norton and Shirley S. Ricks, 306–
   45. Collected Works of Hugh Nibley 13. Provo, UT: Foundation
   for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies; Salt Lake City:
   Deseret Book, 1994.
1186      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

———. Enoch the Prophet. Collected Works of Hugh Nibley 2. Provo,
  UT: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies;
  Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986.
———. “The Expanding Gospel,” 1965. In Temple and Cosmos:
  Beyond This Ignorant Present, edited by Don E. Norton, 177–
  211. Collected Works of Hugh Nibley 12. Provo, UT: Foundation
  for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies; Salt Lake City:
  Deseret Book, 1992.
———. “Gifts,” in Approaching Zion, edited by Don E. Norton,
  85–117. Collected Works of Hugh Nibley 9, Provo, UT:
  Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies; Salt
  Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989.
———. Hugh Nibley on the Book of Enoch. Excerpted from a
  FARMS videocassette entitled “The Dead Sea Scrolls: A New
  Era Dawns.” The videocassette contains material recorded
  in connection with a National Interfaith Conference on
  the Dead Sea Scrolls, November 20, 1992, in the Kresge
  Auditorium of Stanford University. https://www.youtube.com
  /watch?v=9tTuzRQ6bcI&t=18 (accessed June 3, 2021).
———. “An Intellectual Autobiography: Some High and Low
  Points,” in Hugh Nibley Observed, edited by Jeffrey M. Bradshaw,
  Shirley S. Ricks, and Stephen T. Whitlock, 37–54. Orem, UT:
  Interpreter Foundation; Salt Lake City: Eborn, 2021.
———. 1951. “The Hierocentric State,” in The Ancient State, edited
  by Donald W. Parry and Stephen D. Ricks. Collected Works of
  Hugh Nibley 10, 99–147. Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient
  Research and Mormon Studies; Salt Lake City: Deseret Book,
  1991.
———. “The Law of Consecration” in Approaching Zion, edited
  by Don E. Norton, 422–86. Collected Works of Hugh Nibley
  9. Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon
  Studies; Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989.
———. The Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri: An Egyptian
  Endowment. 2nd ed. Collected Works of Hugh Nibley 16. Provo,
  UT: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies;
  Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 2005.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants         1187

Nibley, Hugh W. “A New Look at the Pearl of Great Price.”
   Improvement Era, 1968–1970. Reprint, Provo, UT: Foundation
   for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1990.
———. “Return to the Temple,” in Temple and Cosmos: Beyond This
   Ignorant Present, edited by Don E. Norton, 42–90. Collected
   Works of Hugh Nibley 12. Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient
   Research and Mormon Studies; Salt Lake City: Deseret Book,
   1992.
———. “A Strange Thing in the Land: The Return of the Book
   of Enoch, Part 13.” Ensign, August 1977, 64–65. https://www
   .churchofjesuschrist.org/study/ensign/1977/08/a-strange
   -thing-in-the-land-the-return-of-the-book-of-enoch-part
   -13?lang=eng (accessed June 3, 2021).
———. Teachings of the Pearl of Great Price. Provo, UT: Foundation
   for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 2004.
———. The World and the Prophets. Collected Works of Hugh Nibley
   3. Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon
   Studies; Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1987.
Nickelsburg, George W. E., ed. 1 Enoch 1: A Commentary on the Book
   of 1 Enoch, Chapters 1–36; 81–108. Hermeneia. Minneapolis:
   Fortress Press, 2001.
———. “The Bible Rewritten and Expanded,” in The Literature of
   the Jewish People in the Period of the Second Temple and the
   Talmud, vol. 2, Jewish Writings of the Second Temple Period:
   Apocrypha, Pseudepigrapha, Qumran Sectarian Writings, Philo,
   Josephus, edited by Michael E. Stone, 89–156. Leiden: Brill,
   1984. https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004275119_004 (accessed
   June 3, 2021).
———. “Enoch, Levi, and Peter: Recipients of Revelation in Upper
   Galilee.” Journal of Biblical Literature 100, no. 4 (December
   1981): 575–600.
———. “The Nature and Function of Revelation in 1 Enoch,
   Jubilees, and Some Qumranic Documents,” in Pseudepigraphic
   Perspectives: The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha in Light of the
   Dead Sea Scrolls, edited by Esther G. Chazon, Michael Stone,
   and Avital Pinnick, 91–119. Leiden: Brill, 1998. http://orion.
   mscc.huji.ac.il/symposiums/2nd/papers/Nickelsburg97.html
   (accessed June 3, 2021).
1188     Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

Nickelsburg, George W. E., and James C. VanderKam, eds. 1 Enoch:
   A New Translation. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2004.
———, eds. 1 Enoch 2: A Commentary on the Book of 1 Enoch,
   Chapters 37–82. Hermeneia. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2012.
Noah, Mordecai M., ed. The Book of Jasher. Translated by Moses
   Samuel. Salt Lake City: Joseph Hyrum Parry, 1887. Reprint,
   New York: Cosimo Classics, 2005. Page numbers in the 2005
   edition are identical to those in the 1887 edition.
Odeberg, Hugo. 3 Enoch, or The Hebrew Book of Enoch. Cambridge,
   England: Cambridge University Press, 1926.
Oh, Sang-Hak. “Circular World Maps of the Joseon Dynasty:
   Their Characteristics and Worldview.” Korea Journal 48, no. 1
   (2008): 8–45. https://www.ekoreajournal.net/issue/view_pop.
   htm?Idx=3460 (accessed June 3, 2021).
Oppenheim, A. Leo. Ancient Mesopotamia: Portrait of a Dead
   Civilization. 1964. Revised ed. Chicago: University of Chicago
   Press, 1977.
Orlov, Andrei A. The Enoch-Metatron Tradition. Texts and Studies
   in Ancient Judaism 107. Tübingen, Germany: Mohr Siebeck,
   2005.
———. “‘The Learned Savant Who Guards the Secrets of the
   Great Gods’: Evolution of the Roles and Titles of the Seventh
   Antediluvian Hero in Mesopotamian and Enochic Traditions
   (Part II: Enochic Traditions).” Scrinium 2, no. 1 (2006): 165–
   213. https://brill.com/view/journals/scri/2/1/article-p165_11.
   xml?lang=en (accessed June 3, 2021).
Parry, Donald W. “Garden of Eden: Prototype Sanctuary,” in
   Temples of the Ancient World, edited by Donald W. Parry, 126–
   51. Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book, 1994.
Parry, Donald W. Personal communication to Jeffrey M. Bradshaw,
   March 2, 2020.
Parry, Donald W., and Emanuel Tov, eds. The Dead Sea Scrolls
   Reader. 6 vols. Leiden: Brill, 2005.
Parry, Donald W., and Emanuel Tov, eds. The Dead Sea Scrolls
   Reader, vol. 1, Texts Concerned with Religious Law, Exegetical
   Texts and Parabiblical Texts. 2nd ed. Leiden: Brill, 2013. All
   page references herein are to the 2013 edition.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants            1189

Parry, Jay A., and Donald W. Parry. “The temple in heaven: Its
    description and significance,” in Temples of the Ancient World,
    edited by Donald W. Parry, 515-32. Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret
    Book, 1994.
Paulsen, David L. “The Redemption of the Dead: A Latter-day Saint
    Perspective on the Fate of the Unevangelized,” in Salvation in
    Christ: Comparative Christian Views, edited by Roger R. Keller
    and Robert L. Millet, 263–97. Provo, UT: Religious Studies
    Center, Brigham Young University, 2005.
Paulsen, David L., Roger D. Cook, and Kendel J. Christensen. “The
    Harrowing of Hell: Salvation for the Dead in Early Christianity.”
    Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 19, no. 1 (2010): 56–77.
    https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/jbms/vol19/iss1/7      (accessed
    June 3, 2021).
Penner, Ken M. “Did the Midrash of Shemihazai and Azael Use the
    Book of Giants?” In Sacra Scriptura: How “Non-canonical” Texts
    Functioned in Early Judaism and Early Christianity, edited by
    James H. Charlesworth and Lee M. McDonald, 15–45. London:
    T&T Clark, 2014. https://www.academia.edu/4024730/Did_
    the_Midrash_of_Shemihazai_and_Azael_use_the_Book_of_
    Giants (accessed June 3, 2021).
Petersen, Anders Klostergaard. “The Notion of Demon: Open
    Questions to a Diffuse Concept,” in Die Dämonen. Die
    Dämonologie der israelitisch-jüdischen und frühchristlichen
    Litteratur im Kontext ihrer Umwelt (Demons: The Demonology
    of Israelite-Jewish and Early Christian Literature in Context of
    their Environment), edited by A. A. Lange, H. Lichetenberger
    and K. F. D. Römheld, 23-41. Tübingen, Germany: Mohr
    Siebeck, 2003.
Philonenko, Marc. “Une citation manichéenne du livre d’Hénoch.”
    Revue d’histoire et de philosophie religieuses 52, no. 3 (1972):
    337–40. https://www.persee.fr/docAsPDF/rhpr_0035–2403_19
    72_num_52_3_4112.pdf (accessed June 3, 2021).
Pietersma, Albert, and Benjamin G. Wright, eds. A New English
    Translation of the Septuagint and the Other Greek Translations
    Traditionally Included under That Title. Oxford: Oxford
    University Press, 2007.
1190      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

Price, Randall. Rose Guide to the Temple. Torrance, CA: Rose
    Publishing, 2012.
Reade, Julian Edgeworth. “The Assyrian Royal Hunt,” in I Am
    Ashurbanipal: King of the World, King of Assyria, edited by
    Gareth Brereton. London: Thames & Hudson, 2019.
Reed, Annette Yoshiko. Demons, Angels, and Writing in Ancient
    Judaism. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press,
    2020.
———. Fallen Angels and the History of Judaism and Christianity:
    The Reception of Enochic Literature. Cambridge, England:
    Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Reeves, John C. Jewish Lore in Manichaean Cosmogony: Studies
    in the “Book of Giants” Traditions. Monographs of the Hebrew
    Union College 14. Cincinnati, OH: Hebrew Union College
    Press, 1992.
———. Heralds of That Good Realm: Syro-Mesopotamian Gnosis
    and Jewish Traditions. Nag Hammadi and Manichaean Studies
    41, edited by James M. Robinson and Hans-Joachim Klimkeit.
    Leiden: Brill, 1996.
———. “Midrash of Shemhazai and Azael.” University of North
    Carolina at Charlotte. Accessed May 13, 2020. https://pages.
    uncc.edu/john-reeves/course-materials/rels-2104-hebrew
    -scripturesold-testament/bereshit-rabbati-on-shemhazai-
    azael/ (accessed June 3, 2021).
———. “Some Parascriptural Dimensions of the ‘Tale of Harut
    wa-Marut.’” Journal of the American Oriental Society 135, no.
    4 (October–December 2015): 817–42. https://www.academia.
    edu/4681769/Some_Parascriptural_Dimensions_of_the_
    Muslim_Tale_of_Harut_wa_Marut_) (accessed June 3, 2021).
Reeves, John C., and Annette Yoshiko Reed. Sources from Judaism,
    Christianity, and Islam. Enoch from Antiquity to the Middle
    Ages 1. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018.
Ri, Andreas Su-Min. Commentaire de la Caverne des Trésors: Étude
    sur l’Histoire du Texte et de ses Sources Supplementary Volume
    103. Corpus Scriptorum Christianorum Orientalium 581.
    Leuven, Belgium: Peeters, 2000.
Rich, Tracey R. “Days of Awe,” in Judaism 101. http://www.jewfaq.
    org/holiday3.htm (accessed March 31, 2020).
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants           1191

Rowland, Christopher, and Christopher R. A. Morray-Jones. The
    Mystery of God: Early Jewish Mysticism and the New Testament.
    Compendia Rerum Iudaicarum ad Novum Testamentum 12.
    Leiden: Brill, 2009.
Rubinkiewicz, Ryszard. L’Apocalypse d’Abraham en vieux slave :
    Introduction, texte critique, traduction et commentaire.
    Towarzystwo Naukowe Katolikiego Uniwersytetu Lubelskiego,
    Zrodlai i monografie 129. Lublin, Poland: Société des Lettres et
    des Sciences de l’Université Catholique de Lublin, 1987.
Russell, James R. “Hārūt and Mārūt: The Armenian Zoroastrian
    Demonic Twins in the Qur’ān Who Invented Fiction,” in
    Commentationes Iranicae: Sbornik statei k 90-letiyu V.A.
    Livshitsa, edited by S. Tokhtasev and P. Luria, 469–80. St.
    Petersburg: Institute of Oriental Manuscripts of the Russian
    Academy of Sciences and Nestor-Historia, 2013. http://nrs.
    harvard.edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:34881481 (accessed June 3,
    2021).
Sanders, E. P. “Testament of Abraham,” in The Old Testament
    Pseudepigrapha, edited by James H. Charlesworth, 1:871–902.
    Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1983.
Sanders, John. “Those Who Have Never Heard: A Survey of Major
    Positions,” in Salvation in Christ: Comparative Christian Views,
    edited by Roger R. Keller and Robert L. Millet, 299–325. Provo,
    UT: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 2005.
———, ed. What About Those Who Have Never Heard? Three
    Views on the Destiny of the Unevangelized. Downers Grove, IL:
    InterVarsity Press, 1995.
Sanders, Seth L. From Adapa to Enoch: Scribal Culture and Religious
    Vision in Judea and Babylon. Texts and Studies in Ancient
    Judaism 167. Tübingen, Germany: Mohr Siebeck, 2017.
Sarna, Nahum M., ed. Genesis. The JPS Torah Commentary.
    Philadelphia, PA: Jewish Publication Society, 1989.
Savedow, Steve, ed. Sepher Rezial Hemelach: The Book of the Angel
    Rezial. Boston, MA: WeiserBooks, 2000.
Seely, David Rolph, and Jo Ann H. Seely. “The Crown of Creation,”
    in Temple Insights: Proceedings of the Interpreter Matthew B.
    Brown Memorial Conference ‘The Temple on Mount Zion,’ 22
    September 2012, edited by William J. Hamblin and David
1192      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

    Rolph Seely. Temple on Mount Zion Series 2, 11-23. Orem, UT:
    Interpreter Foundation; Salt Lake City: Eborn, 2014.
Shiner, Whitney. Proclaiming the Gospel: First-Century Performance
    of Mark. Harrisburg, PA: Trinity Press International, 2003.
Shoulson, Mark, comp. The Torah: Jewish and Samaritan Versions
    Compared. La Vergne, TN: Lightning Source, 2008.
Silverstein, Michael. “Axes of Evals: Token versus Type Inter-
    discursivity.” Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 15, no. 1
    (2005): 6–22.
Skinner, Andrew C. “Joseph Smith Vindicated Again: Enoch,
    Moses 7:48, and Apocryphal Sources,” in Reason, Revelation,
    and Faith: Essays in Honor of Truman G. Madsen, edited by
    Donald W. Parry, Daniel C. Peterson, and Stephen D. Ricks,
    365–81. Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient Research and
    Mormon Studies, 2002. https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/cgi
    /viewcontent.cgi?filename=14&article=1066&context=mi&typ
    e=additional (accessed June 3, 2021).
Smith, Joseph, Jr. History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
    Saints. 2nd ed., edited by B. H. Roberts. 7 vols. Salt Lake City:
    Deseret Book, 1978.
———. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. 1938. Salt Lake City:
    Deseret Book, 1969.
Smith, Morton. The Secret Gospel: The Discovery and Interpretation
    of the Secret Gospel according to Mark. 1982. Middletown, CA:
    Dawn Horse Press, 2005.
Smoot, Stephen O. “‘I Am a Son of God’: Moses’ Prophetic Call and
    Ascent into the Divine Council,” in this proceedings.
Snell, David. “New Find in Dead Sea Scrolls Reveals Joseph Smith
    Scored Another ‘Lucky Guess.’” Third Hour (blog). June 16, 2020.
    thirdhour.org/blog/faith/scripture/dead-sea-scrolls-joseph
    -smith-book-of-remembrance/ (accessed June 3, 2021).
Stone, Michael E. “Enoch and the Fall of the Angels.” Dead Sea
    Discoveries 22, no. 3 (2015): 342–57. https://brill.com/view/
    journals/dsd/22/3/article-p342_7.xml (accessed June 3, 2021).
———. Secret Groups in Ancient Judaism. Oxford: Oxford University
    Press, 2018. https://www.scribd.com/document/390527947
    /Secret-Groups-in-Ancient-Judaism-M-Stone (accessed June 3,
    2021).
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                        1193

Stordalen, Terje. Echoes of Eden: Genesis 2–3 and the Symbolism
    of the Eden Garden in Biblical Hebrew Literature. Leuven,
    Belgium: Peeters, 2000.
Stuckenbruck, Loren T. “The Apocalypse of John, 1 Enoch, and
    the Question of Influence,” in The Myth of Rebellious Angels,
    edited by Loren T. Stuckenbruck, 281–325. Grand Rapids, MI:
    Eerdmans, 2017.
———. “The Book of Giants among the Dead Sea Scrolls:
    Considerations of Method and a New Proposal on the
    Reconstruction of 4Q530,” in Ancient Tales of Giants from
    Qumran and Turfan: Contexts, Traditions, and Influences,
    edited by Matthew Goff, Loren T. Stuckenbruck, and Enrico
    Morano, 129–41. Wissenschlaftliche Untersuchungen zum
    Neuen Testament 360, edited by Jörg Frey. Tübingen, Germany:
    Mohr Siebeck, 2016. https://www.academia.edu/36691330
    /The_Book _of_Giants_among _the_Dead_ Sea_ Scrolls
    _Considerations_of_Method_and_a_New_Proposal_on
    _the_Reconstruction_of_4Q530 (accessed June 3, 2021).
———. The Book of Giants from Qumran: Texts, Translation, and
    Commentary. Tübingen, Germany: Mohr Siebeck, 1997.
———. “Giant Mythology and Demonology: From the Ancient
    Near East to the Dead Sea Scrolls,” in Die Dämonen: Die
    Dämonologie der israelitisch-jüdischen un frühchristlichen
    Literatur im Kontext ihrer Umwelt (Demons: The Demonology
    of the Israelite-Jewish and Early Christian Literature in Context
    of Their Environment), edited by A. Lange and H. Lichtenberger,
    318–38. Tübingen, Germany: Mohr Siebeck, 2003. https://www
    . a c a d e m i a . e d u / 2 2 0 9 7 31 / G i a n t _ M y t h o l o g y _ a n d
    _Demonology_from_the_Ancient_Near_East_to_the_Dead
    _Sea_Scrolls (accessed June 3, 2021).
———. The Myth of Rebellious Angels. 2014. Grand Rapids, MI:
    Eerdmans, 2017.
Sundermann, Werner. “Ein weiteres Fragment aus Manis
    Gigantenbuch,” in Orientalia J. Duchesne-Guillemin emerito
    oblata, 491–505. Acta Iranica 23. Leiden: Brill, 1984.
———. Mittelpersische und parthische kosmogonische und Parabel
    texte der Manichäer. Schriften zur Geschichte und Kultur des
    Alten Orients 8. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1973. https://www
1194      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

    .scribd.com/document/396552610/Werner-Sundermann
    -Mittelpersische-und-parthische-kosmogonische-und
    -Parabeltexte-der-Manichaer-1973 (accessed June 3, 2021).
Taylor, Scott. “Elder Uchtdorf’s Devotional on Technology in
    Missionary Work Is ‘Almost Like a Worldwide Zoom Meeting.”
    Church News. Updated February 25, 2021. https://www
    .thechurchnews.com/leaders-and-ministry/2021–02–25/elder
    -uchtdorf-sister-missionary-devotional-technology-205086
    (accessed June 3, 2021).
Thomas, Samuel I. The “Mysteries” of Qumran: Mystery, Secrecy,
    and Esotericism in the Dead Sea Scrolls. Early Judaism and Its
    Literature 25, edited by Judith H. Newman. Atlanta: Society of
    Biblical Literature, 2009.
Thomasson, Gordon C. “Matthew Black and Mircea Eliade Meet
    Hugh Nibley,” in Hugh Nibley Observed, edited by Jeffrey M.
    Bradshaw, Shirley S. Ricks, and Stephen T. Whitlock, 423–32.
    Orem, UT: Interpreter Foundation; Salt Lake City: Eborn, 2021.
Touger, Eliyahu, trans. The Rambam’s Mishneh Torah. By Rabbi
    Moshe ben Maimon. Brooklyn, NY: Moznaim, n.d. https:
    //www.chabad.org/library/article_cdo/aid/682956/jewish
    /Mishneh-Torah.htm (accessed March 31, 2020).
Townsend, Colby. “Appropriation and Adaptation of J Material in
    the Book of Mormon.” Honors thesis, University of Utah, 2016.
———. “Returning to the Sources: Integrating Textual Criticism in
    the Study of Early Mormon Texts and History,” intermountain
    West Journal of Religious Studies 10, no. 1 (2019): 55–85. https
    ://digitalcommons.usu.edu/imwjournal/vol10/iss1/6/ (accessed
    June 3, 2021).
Townsend, Colby [Hans Rosekat, pseud.]. “The King James Bible
    in the Book of Moses, Part 1.” Rational Faiths (blog). April 12,
    2014. https://rationalfaiths.com/king-james-bible-book-mose
    s/ (accessed June 3, 2021).
Tsedaka, Benyamim, and Sharon Sullivan, eds. The Israelite
    Samaritan Version of the Torah. Translated by Benyamim
    Tsedaka. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2013.
          Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants           1195

Tuval, Michael. “‘Συναγωγὴ Γιγάντων’ (Prov 21:16): The Giants in
   Jewish Literature in Greek,” in Ancient Tales of Giants from
   Qumran and Turfan: Contexts, Traditions, and Influences,
   edited by Matthew Goff, Loren T. Stuckenbruck, and Enrico
   Morano, 41–57. Wissenschlaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen
   Testament 360, edited by Jörg Frey. Tübingen, Germany: Mohr
   Siebeck, 2016.
van Wolde, Ellen. “The Sons of God and the Daughters of Men in
   Genesis 6:1–4.” Vetus Testamentum 63 (2013): 63–74.
VanderKam, James C. Enoch: A Man for All Generations. Columbia:
   University of South Carolina Press, 1995.
Vermes, Geza, ed. The Complete Dead Sea Scrolls in English. 1962.
   Revised ed. London: Penguin Books, 2004.
Vernay-Nouri, Annie. Livres d’Arménie: Collections de la Biblio-
   thèque nationale de France. Paris, France: Bibliothèque
   nationale de France, 2007. https://books.openedition.org/
   editionsbnf/1133. (accessed May 26, 2021).
Wayment, Thomas A., and Haley Wilson-Lemmon. “A Recovered
   Resource: The Use of Adam Clarke’s Bible Commentary
   in Joseph Smith’s Bible Translation,” in Producing Ancient
   Scripture: Joseph Smith’s Translation Projects in the Development
   of Mormon Christianity, edited by Mark Ashurst-McGee,
   Michael Hubbard MacKay, and Brian M. Hauglid, 262–84. Salt
   Lake City: University of Utah Press, 2020.
Welburn, Andrew, ed. Mani, the Angel, and the Column of Glory:
   An Anthology of Manichaean Texts. Edinburgh: Floris Books,
   1998.
Wenham, Gordon J., ed. Genesis 1-15. Word Biblical Commentary 1.
   Nelson Reference and Electronic, 1987.
———. “Sanctuary Symbolism in the Garden of Eden Story,” in
   I Studied Inscriptions before the Flood: Ancient Near Eastern,
   Literary, and Linguistic Approaches to Genesis 1–11, edited
   by Richard S. Hess and David Toshio Tsumura. Sources for
   Biblical and Theological Study 4, 399–404. Winona Lake, IN:
   Eisenbrauns, 1994.
Westermann, Claus, ed. Genesis 1-11: A Continental Commentary
   1st ed. Translated by John J. Scullion. Minneapolis: Fortress
   Press, 1994.
1196      Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

Whittaker, David J. “Substituted Names in the Published
   Revelations of Joseph Smith.” BYU Studies Quarterly 23, no. 1
   (1983): 103–12.
Widengren, Geo. The Ascension of the Apostle and the Heavenly
   Book (King and Saviour III). Uppsala, Sweden: Lundequistska
   Bokhandeln, 1950.
Wilkens, Jens. “Remarks on the Manichaean Book of Giants: Once
   Again on Mahaway’s Mission to Enoch,” in Ancient Tales of
   Giants from Qumran and Turfan, edited by Matthew Goff,
   Loren T. Stuckenbruck, and Enrico Morano, 213–29. Tübingen,
   Germany: Mohr Siebeck, 2016.
Williams, Frederick Granger. The Life of Dr. Frederick G. Williams:
   Counselor to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Provo, UT: BYU Studies,
   2012.
Wintermute, O. S. “Jubilees,” in The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha,
   edited by James H. Charlesworth, 2:35–142. Garden City, NY:
   Doubleday, 1983.
Wise, Michael, Martin Abegg Jr., and Edward Cook, eds. The Dead
   Sea Scrolls: A New Translation. New York: HarperCollins, 1996.
Woodworth, Jed L. “Extra-Biblical Enoch Texts in Early American
   Culture,” in Archive of Restoration Culture: Summer Fellows’
   Papers, 1997–1999, edited by Richard Lyman Bushman, 185–93.
   Provo, UT: Joseph Fielding Smith Institute, 2000.
Wright, Archie T. The Origin of Evil Spirits. Wissenschaftliche
   Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament 2. Reihe 198. Tübingen,
   Germany: Mohr Siebeck, 2005.
Wyatt, Nicolas. Space and Time in the Religious Life of the Near
   East. Sheffield, England: Sheffield Academic Press, 2001.
Young, Brigham. 1874. “Discourse by President Brigham Young,
   delivered in the Third Ward Meeting House, Salt Lake City,
   Sunday evening, June 23, 1874,” in Journal of Discourses. 26
   vols. 18:235–49. Liverpool and London: Latter-day Saints Book
   Depot, 1853–1886.
Zinner, Samuel. “Underemphasized Parallels between the Account
   of Jesus’ Baptism in the Gospel of the Hebrews/Ebionites and
   the Letter to the Hebrews and an Overlooked Influence from
   1 Enoch 96:3’” in Textual and Comparative Explorations in
   1 and 2 Enoch, edited by Samuel Zinner, 225–29. Orem, UT:
   Interpreter Foundation; Salt Lake City: Eborn, 2014.
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                  1197

                                   Notes

1.    T. L. Givens and F. Givens, God Who Weeps, 24.
2.    Carmack, “Book of Moses English.”.
3.    Carmack, “Book of Moses English.” Among other findings, Carmack
      also notes the following: “[The Book of Moses’ pattern] is similar to
      the Book of Mormon’s pattern, which is an uncommon, early modern
      pattern. However, at least one linguistic pattern found in the Book of
      Moses is quite unlike Book of Mormon usage: the absence of relatively
      heavy periphrastic did usage.”.
4.    Bradshaw, God’s Image 1, 1–9. Joseph Smith’s “translation” did not
      involve the study of original manuscripts in ancient languages but was
      the result of his prophetic gifts.
5.    J. Smith Jr., History of the Church, 1:245.
6.    Though the precises dates of dictation for Moses 6:52–7:1 (given
      sometime between December 1 and December 10, 1830) and Moses
      7:2–8:30 (given sometime between ca. December 10, 1830, and March 7,
      1831) are uncertain, current evidence suggests that other large sections
      of the preceding sections of the Book of Moses were each “probably
      translated and written in one day”: Moses 5:43–51 (October 21, 1830);
      Moses 5:52–6:18 (November 30, 1830); Moses 6:19–52 (December 1,
      1830; Faulring et al., Original Manuscripts, 57).
7.    Muhlestein, “Doctrine and Covenants and the Book of Moses.”.
8.    E.g., Townsend, “King James Bible”; Townsend, “Appropriation and
      Adaptation”; Townsend, “Returning to the Sources”; Wayment and
      Wilson-Lemmon, “Recovered Resource.”
9.    See Bradshaw, “Truth and Beauty,” where arguments for nineteenth-
      century sources for Moses 1, 6, and 7 are summarized and evaluated.
      For a more accessible version of arguments for ancient affinities
      within Moses 6–7 see Bradshaw, Enoch and the Gathering of Zion.
      For a one-volume verse-by-verse commentary on the Book of Moses
      taking ancient sources into account, see Bradshaw, The First Days and
      the Last Days. This shorter commentary draws upon and updates the
      more extensive commentary found in Bradshaw, God’s Image 1 and
      Bradshaw, et al, God’s Image 2. See also Draper et al., Commentary, an
      excellent commentary on the entire Pearl of Great Price.
10.   See Bradshaw, “Truth and Beauty.”
11.   See Jackson, “Some Notes”; Bradshaw, “Book of Moses Textual
      Criticism 3.”
12.   See Bradshaw, “Truth and Beauty.”
13.   See Jeffrey M. Bradshaw and Ryan Dahle, “Could Joseph Smith Have
      Drawn on Ancient Manuscripts?”
14.   Ben Tov (pseudonym of Colby Townsend), “Book of Enoch.”
15.   See Bradshaw, Larsen, and Whitlock, “Twin Sons of Different Mothers.”.
1198       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

16. See, e.g., Lindsay and Reynolds, “Strong Like unto Moses,” in this
    proceedings; Calabro, “Early Christian Context.”.
17. See Stuckenbruck, “Apocalypse of John.”
18. Nibley, Enoch the Prophet, 276. Cf. Nibley, 267–68. Nibley complained
    that the Ensign editors only gave him two pages to wrap up the series,
    implying that they were weary of it. Nibley, “Hugh Nibley on the Book
    of Enoch.”
19. Published as Milik and Black, Books of Enoch.
20. Milik and Black, Books of Enoch.
21. See Bradshaw, Bowen, and Dahle, “Where Did the Names Mahaway
    and Mahujah Come From?,” 193.
22. Nibley, “Strange Thing,” 64.
23. Milik and Black, Books of Enoch.
24. See Bradshaw, Bowen, and Dahle, “Where Did the Names Mahaway
    and Mahujah Come From?”
25. See Townsend, “Returning to the Sources,” 80–82.
26. See Townsend, “Returning to the Sources,” 82.
27. Milik and Black, Books of Enoch, 305. Photo by Stephen T. Whitlock
    taken on February 1, 2021. Photo ID: HBLL-ASR_STW9072-EC.jpg.
28. For a description of Matthew Black’s encounter with the Book of
    Moses, see Thomasson, “Matthew Black and Mircea Eliade,” 423–27.
    Professor S. Kent Brown’s recollections of Matthew Black’s visit, which
    includes details on the dates and setting of Black’s two BYU lectures
    can be found in Brown, “Enoch, the Book of Moses, and the Book of
    Giants.” Two brief video accounts of this incident are available: Nibley,
    “Hugh Nibley on the Book of Enoch”; Bradshaw et al., “What Did
    Enoch Scholar Matthew Black Say.”
29. According to Gordon Thomasson, immediately after hearing about
    the Book of Moses Enoch account, Matthew Black “formulated a
    hypothesis . . . that a member of one of the esoteric groups he had
    described previously [i.e., clandestine groups who had maintained, sub
    rosa, a religious tradition based in the writings of Enoch that predated
    Genesis] must have survived into the 19th century, and hearing of
    Joseph Smith, must have brought the group’s Enoch texts to New York
    from Italy for the prophet to translate and publish.” Thomasson then
    comments, “I did not argue the point that the Book of Mormon might
    not have been available in Europe in time for someone to sail to the
    United States and get to upstate New York to meet a late 1830 (or even
    1832) ‘publication deadline’” (Thomasson, “Matthew Black and Mircea
    Eliade,” 426).
30. After meeting Thomasson and at his suggestion, Black made a
    previously unplanned trip to BYU to meet Hugh Nibley. S. Kent Brown,
    then the director of Ancient Studies, extended the invitation to Black,
    sent him pages of the Book of Moses, and managed the logistics of the
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                      1199

      visit (Brown, “Enoch, the Book of Moses, and the Book of Giants”).
      Although Nibley recounts that Black declined to take questions about
      the Book of Moses in his public lectures in Provo, Nibley reported that
      in private: “He did say a number of times, shaking his head in a bemused
      fashion, ‘Someday we will find out where Joseph Smith got that. . . .
      Someday a source will turn up.’ Which I doubt not for a moment, since
      we already have an impressive sampling. I am afraid it will not be what
      Brother Black is hoping for” (quoted in Thomasson, “Matthew Black
      and Mircea Eliade,” 427).
31.   McKane, “Matthew Black,” 282.
32.   Courtesy Elizabeth Thomasson. Email message to author, April 9, 2021.
33.   Cirillo, “Joseph Smith,” 97. Cf. Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 27.
34.   In this and later quotes from Cirillo, the names of works he cites will be
      spelled out rather than abbreviated as they were originally.
35.   See Ludlow, “‘Enoch Walked with God.’”
36.   For an accessible discussion of relevant scholarship, see Bradshaw,
      Enoch and the Gathering of Zion. For more extensive discussions, see
      Bradshaw, The First Days and the Last Days; Bradshaw et al., God’s
      Image 2.
37.   Migne, speaking of Enoch and those with him, said: “By fleeing and
      hiding the people on high have ascended higher than us. We have
      never known them. All the same, there they are, clothed with glory
      and splendors. . . . And now they are sheltered from our blows” (“Livre
      d’Adam,” 21, p. 170).
38.   David Calabro kindly checked and updated Hugh Nibley’s translation
      of the account below from Jellinek, Bet ha-Midrasch, 4:131–32.
      Jellinek’s account is almost identical to the one found in Noah, Book
      of Jasher, 3:24–38, pp. 7–8. Ginzberg summarizes this account, with an
      addition recounting that when the people searched for those who had
      gone with Enoch, “they discovered the bodies” (Legends, 1:129–130).
      Though this idea might be reasonably inferred, it is found explicitly
      in neither of the two original accounts. Jellinek’s version from Bet
      ha-Midrasch is included here because it is more difficult to find in
      English translation:

        It happened at that time, that as the children of men were sitting
        with Enoch[,] he was speaking to them, that they lifted up their eyes
        and saw something like a great horse coming down from heaven,
        and the horse moving in the air [wind] to the ground[.] And they
        told Enoch what they had seen. And Enoch said to them, “It is on
        my account that that horse is descending to the earth; the time and
        the day have arrived when I must go away from you and no longer
        appear to you.”
            And at that time that horse came down and stood before Enoch,
        and all the people who were with Enoch saw it. And then Enoch
1200        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

        commanded, and there came a voice to him saying, “Who is the
        man who delights to know the ways of the Lord his God? Let him
        come this day to Enoch before he is taken from us.” And all the
        people gathered together and came to Enoch on that day. . . .
            And after that he got up and rode on the horse, and he went forth,
        and all the children of men left and went after him to the number of
        800,000 men. And they went with him for a day’s journey. Behold,
        on the second day he said to them, “Return back to your tents; why
        are you coming?” And some of them returned from him, and the
        remainder of them went with him six days’ journey, while Enoch
        was saying to them every day, “Return to your tents lest you die.”
        But they did not want to return and they went with him. And on the
        sixth day men still remained, and they stuck with him. And they
        said to him, “We will go with thee to the place where thou goest; as
        the Lord liveth, only death will separate us from thee!” And it came
        to pass that they took courage to go with him, and he no longer
        addressed them. And they went after him and did not turn away.
        And as for those kings, when they returned, they made a count
        of all of them (who returned) to know the number of men who
        remained, who had gone after Enoch.
            And it was on the seventh day, and Enoch went up in a tempest
        into heaven with horses of fire and chariots of fire. And on the
        eighth day all the kings who had been with Enoch sent to take the
        number of the men who had stayed behind with Enoch [when the
        kings left him] at the place from which he had mounted up into the
        sky.
            And all the kings went to that place and found all the ground
        covered with snow in that place, and on top of the snow huge blocks
        of snow. And they said to each other, “Come, let us break into the
        snow here to see whether the people who were left with Enoch died
        under the lumps of snow.” And they hunted for Enoch and found
        him not because he had gone up into the sky.

          For threads in Jewish tradition of groups of worshippers who
      figuratively ascended to heaven through ritual, see Larsen, “Enoch and
      the City of Zion”; Bradshaw, “Ezekiel Mural.”
39.   See Henning, “Book of the Giants,” text G (Sogdian), p. 69. See more on
      this topic below.
40.   See Kósa, “Book of Giants Tradition,” p. 172, in light of the discussion
      later on in this essay.
41.   Photograph from 4Q530 (4QGiantsb ar), fragment 7b, column II.
      Mislabeling of photograph in online source confirmed by Donald W.
      Parry (personal communication, March 2, 2020).
42.   E.g., Milik and Black, Books of Enoch, p. 306. Cf. Reeves, Jewish Lore,
      105.
           Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                       1201

43. Parry and Tov, Dead Sea Scrolls Reader (DSSR), 4Q530, fragment 7,
    column ii, end of line 7, p. 951.
44. Morano, “Some New Sogdian Fragments,” 197.
45. See Henning, “Book of the Giants.”
46. See Sundermann, Mittelpersische; Morano, “Libro dei Giganti”; Morano,
    “Some New Sogdian Fragments”; Kósa, “Book of Giants Tradition.”
    For a comprehensive though somewhat dated study of the manuscript
    evidence, see Reeves, Jewish Lore. The Manichaean BG sources are
    translated into English and discussed at length in Reeves’ work. Reeves
    concludes that the Book of Giants, a foundational work of Manichaean
    cosmogony, is indebted in important respects to traditional Jewish
    interpretations of Genesis 6:1–4.
47. See Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 2.
48. However, 1 Enoch and the Book of Giants both touch on some related
    themes. For a summary of the literary relationship between the Book of
    the Watchers in 1 Enoch and the Book of Giants, see Stuckenbruck, Book
    of Giants, 24–28.
49. See Homilies 25:2–5; Psalm-Book 46:21–47:4; Gardner, Kephalaia, 5:22–
    26, p. 11.
50. Lemaire, “Nabonide et Gilgamesh,” 125. Lemaire writes (my
    translation):

       Since we live more than two thousand years after the Qumran
       manuscripts were copied, we may be tempted as modern readers
       to recognize . . . [a] direct link with the books of the Bible. Such
       a conclusion seems obvious from the titles given to certain
       manuscripts. . . . However, these titles may give the false impression
       that the Aramaic manuscripts of Qumran were centered on the
       Bible and dependent on it even though the Bible itself . . . did not
       yet exist. A bibliocentric vision of this sort appears anachronistic.
       (p. 125)

51. With specific reference to Enoch texts, Reeves and Reed continue as
    follows:

       Scholars of the Hebrew Bible and specialists in ancient Judaism
       and Christianity have increasingly come into conversation around
       the trajectories of biblical interpretation and the continued lives of
       authoritative writings within and between religious communities.
       Alongside traditional source-critical, redaction-critical, and text-
       critical inquiries into the Torah/ Pentateuch, for instance, new
       approaches have emerged in the attempt to recover what James
       Kugel has termed “the Bible as It Was” [Kugel, Bible as It Was]—
       that is, not simply the text of this or that biblical book as it came
       to be fixed in writing, but also the much broader array of common
       exegetical motifs and legends through which premodern peoples
1202       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

       encountered the primeval and patriarchal past. What has emerged,
       in the process, is a new sense of the degree to which premodern Jews,
       Christians, and Muslims—as well as Samaritans, Manichaeans,
       “gnostics,” and others—participated in preserving and developing
       a common store of traditions about figures such as Adam, Noah,
       Abraham, and Moses.
           So too with Enoch. The traditions associated with this figure,
       however, expose the limitations of modern notions of “the Bible”
       to capture the scope, dynamism, and complexity of premodern
       discourses about the biblical past. There has been much attention,
       for instance, to Jewish and Christian traditions about the fallen
       angels in relation to the exegesis of Genesis 6. What such studies
       have shown, however, is the impossibility of accounting for the
       history of interpretation without a sense of the ample influence of
       Enochic and other texts now commonly deemed “noncanonical.”
       So too with Genesis 5 and traditions about Enoch, which took form
       from an ancient matrix of Mesopotamian traditions that continued
       to be developed in new ways in writings produced alongside and
       after what we know now as “the Bible.”
           Traditions surrounding Enoch thus offer especially rich foci for
       tracing the transmission and transformations of traditions across
       religious boundaries. In light of new insights into scribal practices
       and textual fluidity from the biblical and related manuscripts
       among the Dead Sea Scrolls, it has become clear that the process
       of the formation of “the Bible” was much longer and more complex
       than previously imagined. Likewise, the recent growth of concern
       for the mechanics of written and oral transmission and pedagogy
       among ancient Jews has redescribed biblical “authorship” in
       continuum with interpretation, redaction, collection, and
       transmission—wherein oral/aural and written/visual components,
       moreover, often remained intertwined in various ways in various
       settings. Just as these insights lead us to question the assumption
       of any clear line between scripture and interpretation in relation
       to the Torah/Pentateuch, so they also open the way for integrating
       what we know of the formation, transmission, and reception of
       Enochic literature into a more complete picture of the biblical
       past as remembered by premodern Jews, Christians, Muslims, and
       others. (Enoch from Antiquity, 1:8–9)

52. Reeves, “Some Parascriptural Dimensions,” 840–41. Reeves explains:

       The . . . “Bible” and Qur’an are magnetized nodes within a common
       “text network” that share a lexicon of ancestral heroes, places,
       and narrativized events, a lexicon not limited by the constraints
       of canon or its lemmata governed by the “tyranny of canonical
       assumptions.” Within this lexicon resides a rich reservoir of
       revered tales, ancestral folklore, and tribal traditions about the
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                          1203

        pre-Deluge era that antedate their varying literary presentations in
        works such as the many redacted forms of Genesis, the Enochic
        Book of Watchers, renditions of the Second Temple book of Jubilees,
        and so-called rewritten components of the biblical primeval
        history (Genesis 1–11). Therein also resides the cultural memory—
        and perhaps even physical exemplars—of the written sources
        and editorial moves that preceded the later formal crystallization
        of discrete textual entities such as proto-Masoretic “Genesis” or
        “Jubilees.” (pp. 840–41)

53. Silverstein, “Axes of Evals”; Bauman, “Commentary.” Thanks to David
    Calabro for pointing me to these articles.
54. Reeves, Jewish Lore, 88.
55. Dawood, Koran, 2:102, 19. For a collection of related traditions in Islam,
    see al-Tha’labi, “Lives,” 86–91.
56. Regarding the popularity of the Book of Giants at Qumran, Ken M.
    Penner writes:

        If the identification of Qumran fragments belonging to Giants is
        correct, the work was very popular at Qumran: about ten copies
        were found, in four caves. The significance of these numbers
        becomes apparent when compared to those of the Aramaic book of
        [1 Enoch] itself: only seven copies found, all in a single cave. The only
        books more popular at Qumran are Psalms (36 copies), the books of
        the Pentateuch (23–24, 16, 12–13, 9, 35 copies respectively), Isaiah
        (21), Jubilees (17), and the Community Rule (13); the Damascus
        Document and Rule of the Congregation each have ten. (Midrash
        of Shemihazai and Azael, 44–45)

57.   Stuckenbruck dates the Book of Giants to “sometime between the late 3rd
      century and 164 BCE” (Book of Giants, 31). For a more recent summary
      of the literature concerning dating and geographical origins of the
      book, see Angel, “Reading the Book of Giants,” 315n5. Angel generally
      agrees with Stuckenbruck’s dating. For a summary of evidence relating
      to Mesopotamian and Hellenistic influences in the Book of Giants, see
      Angel, 315n5.
         Notwithstanding the unrivaled prominence and antiquity of the
      Book of Giants at Qumran, the first reflex of some scholars is to attribute
      any resemblances to 1 Enoch to “borrowing” from the latter source.
      However, caution should be exercised in concluding a straightforward
      dependence of the Book of Giants on 1 Enoch. For example, comparing
      Ezekiel 1, Daniel 7, 1 Enoch 14, and the Book of Giants, Bledsoe argues
      that 1 Enoch 14’s adoption of the Danielic idea of the deity shows
      only that this idea was “accepted even at a late period, and does not
      automatically make [1 Enoch 14] older even if the tradition may be
      observed in generally more ancient writings” (“Throne Theophanies,”
1204        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

    85). More generally, Bledsoe concludes Daniel, 1 Enoch, and the Book
    of Giants “drew from a common tradition(s) regarding the heavenly
    throne and then adapted it to fit within their individual context” (p.
    90).
        Regarding Angel’s thesis that the Book of Giants, as we have it,
    reflects “the realities of life under Hellenistic imperial occupation,” the
    author himself hints at more ancient and complex roots for the story:

       There are hints in the Book of Giants that signal a more nuanced
       and developed plot. The giants argue with one another and there
       are perhaps different factions among them. Thus, if I am correct
       that the Book of Giants models the humbling of Hellenistic figures
       of power, it seems that the composition now before us preserves
       only the remains of a complex allegory, whose original referents
       cannot be recovered. (“Humbling,” 80)

58. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 11.
59. Stuckenbruck, “Giant Mythology,” 319. Stuckenbruck describes three
    factors that make the Book of Giants distinctive from contemporary
    Jewish works (319–321):

       1.   Whereas the other Enochic compositions are “pseudepigrapha”
            in the technical sense, the Book of Giants seems not to have
            been a first-person account attributed to Enoch himself (contra
            Milik . . .). . . . In the Book of Giants Enoch is never clearly
            portrayed as a first person narrator and, furthermore, none of
            the Book of Giants materials unambiguously cast Enoch in the
            role of being the recipient of visions or dreams. . . .
       2.   Secondly, the Book of Giants distinguishes itself in the role
            assigned to Enoch. As just mentioned, he is not the recipient
            of dreams; instead he functions in the narrative as a dream
            interpreter par excellence as he clarifies the meaning of the
            ominous visions given to the giants. . . .
       3.   Thirdly, and most significant . . . , the author(s) of the Book
            of Giants cast the spotlight on the gigantic offspring of the
            watchers more than any other extant Jewish document written
            or copied during the Second Temple period. . . . It is only in the
            Book of Giants that any of the giants are actually given proper
            names.

        Notwithstanding the unique nature of the narrative and the
    unrivaled prominence and antiquity of the Book of Giants at Qumran,
    the first reflex of some scholars is to attribute any resemblances to
    1 Enoch to “borrowing” from the latter source. As part of a larger
    effort to counter such reflexive tendencies, Reeves has demonstrated
    with a well-argued example that the tale of Hārūt and Mārūt, though
             Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                       1205

      sharing some affinities with 1 Enoch, is actually more dependent in
      its conceptual foundations on the book of Jubilees. He has concluded
      that the relative neglect of Jubilees in scholarly circles, “a work . . . that
      does not necessarily ‘rewrite’ any of the ‘canonical’ versions” (“Some
      Parascriptural Dimensions,” 833), can be attributed, at least in part,
      to misconceptions about Jubilees itself that relegate it (like the Book of
      Giants) to a secondary, derivative status:

        Speaking in both conceptual and archaeological (i.e., physical)
        terms, it seems to be more responsible to view Jubilees as simply
        one pre-canonical manifestation of the rich pool of sub-textual
        ancestral traditions that also surface in related but distinctive
        forms of the biblical books of Genesis–Exodus as well as in other
        places outside those books that utilize many of the same characters,
        stories, and themes. (833n50)

60. Lemaire, “Nabonide et Gilgamesh,” 144.
61. Bledsoe, “Throne Theophanies,” 90.
62. Stuckenbruck, Myth of Rebellious Angels, 118.
63. Angel, “Humbling,” 80.
64. Caquot, “Les prodromes,” 50.
65. Frölich, “Giants and Demons,” 100.
66. See Sanders, From Adapa to Enoch.
67. See George, Gilgamesh, pp. xvi–xxx.
68. Goff, “Gilgamesh the Giant,” 253.
69. Machiela, “Situating the Aramaic Texts,” 90.
70. Machiela, 91–92.
71. Machiela, 105.
72. See, for example, this sense of gibborim in Moses 8:21 (the children of
    the self-proclaimed “sons of God”), Genesis 10:8–9 (Nimrod), Genesis
    10:25 (Peleg), and Genesis 11:4 (the builders of the Tower of Babel who
    wanted to make themselves a name).
73. Namely, Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 7:3, p. 182. See Nickelsburg’s views on
    the implications of this verse on p. 186.
74. The current convention of using terms that correspond to “giants”
    to refer to the gibborim is due largely to the later influences of the
    Greek Septuagint translation of the Hebrew Bible (see, for example,
    Wright, Evil Spirits, 83–84) and of widespread transmission of various
    translations of the Book of Giants within the works of Mani. Though the
    title of Mani’s Book of Giants appears “in several Manichaean and anti-
    Manichaean documents scattered throughout Europe and through
    Africa as far as Asia Minor and Chinese Turkistan, almost nothing was
    known of the contents of this document before the appearance of the
    remarkable article by W. B. Henning” in 1943 (Milik and Black, Books
    of Enoch, 298; see Henning, “Book of the Giants”).
1206       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

        Wright gives two possibilities for the somewhat unexpected use of
     gigantes, the Greek word for “giants,” in the Septuagint:

       It may be suggested that the Greek translators of the Hebrew Bible
       had difficulty in understanding some of the Hebrew terminology
       (e.g., nephilim and gibborim) in the text and therefore translated the
       terms imprecisely, thus enhancing the ambiguity of the passage.
       Another possibility is that modern scholars have misunderstood
       what the Greek translators meant by their use of the term [gigantes].
       It appears that more work needs to be done in order to discover the
       use of this term in the Greek literature prior to the translation of
       the [Septuagint]. (Evil Spirits, 92)

        For more on the impact of the Septuagint on later traditions and
    on interactions among related Jewish and Greek conceptions of the
    “giants,” see Tuval, Giants in Jewish Literature; and Newington, “Greek
    Titans.” For Mesopotamian influences in descriptions of the “giants” in
    1 Enoch, see Drawnel, “Mesopotamian Background.”
75. Frölich, “Giants and Demons,” 106–7.
76. Reeves gives the following summary of the complex and somewhat
    controversial meanings that have been attributed to these terms, as well
    as to the semidivine “Watchers”:

       The term gbryn is the Aramaic form of Hebrew gibborim (singular
       gibbor), a word whose customary connotation in the latter language
       is “mighty hero, warrior,” but which in some contexts later came
       to be interpreted in the sense of “giants.” [The term is translated
       seventeen times with the Greek word for “giants” in the Septuagint.]
       . . . Similarly nplyn is the Aramaic form of the Hebrew np(y)lym
       (i.e., nephilim), an obscure designation used only three times in the
       Hebrew Bible. Genesis 6:4 refers to the nephilim who were on the
       earth as a result of the conjugal union of the [“sons of God” and
       the “daughters of Adam”] and further qualifies their character by
       terming them gibborim. [More plausibly, Wright (Evil Spirits, 81–82)
       and Grossman (“Who Are the Sons of God?,” 5–8) argue for Genesis
       6:1–4 as being a description that proceeds in strict chronological
       order, concluding that the nephilim were on the earth before this
       conjugal union between the “sons of God” and the “daughters of
       Adam.”] Both terms are translated in [Septuagint] Genesis 6:4 by
       [“giants”] and in Targum Onkelos by gbry’. Numbers 13:33 reports
       that gigantic nephilim were encountered by the Israelite spies
       in the land of Canaan; here the nephilim are associated with a
       (different?) tradition concerning a race of giants surviving among
       the indigenous ethnic groups that inhabited Canaan. A further
       possible reference to both the nephilim and gibborim of Genesis
       6:4 occurs in Ezekiel 32:27. The surrounding pericope presents a
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                      1207

        description of slain heroes who lie in Sheol, among whom are a
        group termed the gibborim nophelim [sic] me‘arelim. The final word,
        me‘arelim, “from the uncircumcised,” should probably be corrected
        on the basis of the Septuagint . . . to me‘olam, and the whole phrase
        translated “those mighty ones who lie there from of old.” . . .
            The conjunction of gbryn wnpylyn in QG1 1:2 may be viewed as
        an appositional construction similar to the expression ‘yr wqdys—
        “Watcher and Holy One.” . . . However, the phrase might also be
        related to certain passages that suggest there were three distinct
        classes (or even generations) of Giants, names for who of which are
        represented in this line. . . . Compare Jubilees 7:22: “And they bore
        children, the Naphidim [sic] . . . and the Giants killed the Naphil,
        and the Naphil killed the ’Elyo, and the ’Elyo [killed] human beings,
        and humanity (killed) one another.” (Jewish Lore, 69–70; see also
        Wright, Evil Spirits, 79–95)

          Reeves further proposes that “the sons of God are in fact [identical
      with] the giants mentioned in [Genesis 6:4], whereas the ‘heroes’ [i.e.,
      gibborim] described at the end of the story are the results of these
      giants’ [i.e., the nephilim] coupling with the daughters of man” (Jewish
      Lore, 18). While it may well be that the gibborim were the descendants
      of these mixed marriages, and while the Book of Moses agrees with
      Grossman’s conclusion that the nephilim (also known as the “sons of
      God”) were not divine nor even “especially close to God” (“Who Are
      the Sons of God?,” 10), the rationale for the latter conclusion differs, as
      I discuss in Bradshaw, Enoch and the Gathering of Zion.
77.   Moses 7:14–15.
78.   See Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q531, fragment 1, lines 1–3, p. 953.
79.   See Bradshaw and Larsen, Enoch, Noah, and the Tower, 203.
80.   See Bradshaw and Larsen, 203, 225–27.
81.   https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Stele_of_lion_hunt,_from_
      Uruk,_Iraq,_3000-2900_BCE._Iraq_Museum.jpg (accessed June 3,
      2021).
82.   See Hendel, “Nephilim,” 28–29. Note that in his writings, Hendel
      typically conflates the gibborim and the nephilim. See also Bradshaw,
      Enoch and the Gathering of Zion.
83.   Hendel, “Genesis 1–11 and Its Mesopotamian Problem,” 34.
84.   For discussions of Genesis 6:1–4 in the context of additional ancient
      cultures, see Hendel, “Nephilim”; and Hendel, “Demigods.” As early
      as 1915, George A. Barton argued that the list of names in Genesis 4–5
      can be traced to a Sumerian tablet of Nippur (see LaCocque, Onslaught
      against Innocence, 131).
85.   For extensive studies of this gibborim culture, see Mobley, “Wild Man”;
      and Mobley, Empty Men. For more in-depth discussion of the gibborim
1208        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

      culture in the context of Moses 6–7, see Bradshaw, Enoch and the
      Gathering of Zion.
86.   Mobley, Empty Men, 35.
87.   Doak, “Giant in a Thousand Years,” 24.
88.   See Genesis 10:8. For more on the Hebrew term gibbor and its use in the
      accounts of Enoch and Noah, see Bradshaw and Larsen, Enoch, Noah,
      and the Tower, 41, 203.
89.   Note that JST Genesis 10:9 modifies the King James Version description
      of Nimrod as “a mighty hunter before the Lord” (Genesis 10:9) to read
      “a mighty hunter in the land,” thus eliminating any intimation of divine
      sanction for Nimrod’s activities. Cf. Ether 2:1: “the mighty hunter.”
90.   For sources and a brief summary of literary analyses of the tower story
      that highlight it as a brilliant example of Hebrew storytelling, full of
      irony and satire, see Bradshaw and Larsen, Enoch, Noah, and the Tower,
      387–88. With specific reference to Nimrod, Kawashima writes:

        It should be noted that postbiblical lore [invested] Nimrod with
        giant status and associated him with the building of the Tower of
        Babel in Genesis 11:1–5 (probably due to Nimrod’s association with
        Shinar). Furthermore, the Greek translation of gibbor as “Giant”
        in Genesis 10:8–9 attests to what may have been a popular, and
        not altogether illogical, interpretation that Nimrod’s stock as a
        giant somehow was passed through Noah, thus manifesting the
        hubris with which giants are often associated in his act of founding
        several cities and inciting the Tower of Babel project. (“Sources and
        Redaction,” 59n33)

91. The phrase “from the east” in Genesis 11:2 can be just as easily read
    as “to the east” or “eastward” (e.g., Hendel, “Genesis,” p. 19, note b).
    LaCocque writes:

        In Genesis 11:2 humanity is going eastward, prolonging the initial
        migration since the exit from Eden. To them, Shinar and hence
        Babylon is in the east, that is, farther removed from the original
        Garden. Their settlement in the east is already in and of itself a
        token of their rebellion against God. (Captivity of Innocence, 44)

92. See Genesis 11:4. For more on the motif of making a name, see Bradshaw
    and Larsen, Enoch, Noah, and the Tower, 386, 388–90, 393–97, 414–15.
93. See Moses 6:31; 8:27.
94. Grossman, “Who Are the Sons of God?,” 16.
95. Stuckenbruck, Myth of Rebellious Angels, 19.
96. “Marriage Superstitions,” 549; Burne, Shropshire Folk-Lore, 646.
    Though the first known published sources of the phrase are Victorian,
    the tradition may be older. The longer version of the proverb adds:
    “and a [silver] sixpence in your shoe.” Compare the French wedding
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                         1209

     proverb, “Mariage plus vieux, mariage heureux,” signaling that a
     marriage undertaken at maturity is likelier to result in happiness than
     one that is contracted in the first blush of youth. Whether inadvertently
     or deliberately, the original phrase is often misunderstood as “Mariage
     pluvieux, mariage heureux,” signaling that marriage on a rainy day is
     a sign of good luck.
97. Bradshaw, Bowen, and Dahle, “Where Did the Names Mahaway and
     Mahujah Come From?”
98. This is how the name is rendered in the neo-Assyrian version of
     the epic, as opposed to Ḥuwawa in the Old Babylonian version (see
     Stuckenbruck, 20n56).
99. See Milik and Black, Books of Enoch, p. 427, s.v. “Ahya”; Nickelsburg,
     “Bible Rewritten,” 96; Stuckenbruck, “Giant Mythology,” 322. Cf.
     Stuckenbruck, Myth of Rebellious Angels, 41.
100. See Russell, “Hārūt and Mārūt.” ʾOhyah reappears in later sources as
     Og of Bashan or Ogias (Henning, “Book of the Giants,” 54).
101. Going beyond the example of the two brothers with their two dreams,
     Stuckenbruck sees “the repeated use of the number two” as a broad
     indicator of a “way in which the Qumran Book of Giants was structured”
     (Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 20).
102. Russell, “Hārūt and Mārūt.” Nibley cites Laman and Lemuel with
     ʾOhyah and Hahyah (= Hārūt and Mārūt) as examples of what some
     scholars have called “pendant names”:

        The most striking thing about the names of Laman and Lemuel is
        the way they go together; as we saw above it has been suggested that
        the former is but a corruption of the latter. Whether that is so or
        not, the musical pair certainly belong together and are a beautiful
        illustration of the old desert custom of naming the first two sons in
        a family with rhyming twin names, “a pair of pendant names,” as
        Spiegel puts it, “like Eldad and Medad, Hillek and Billek, or Jannes
        and Jambres. The Arabs particularly seem to enjoy putting together
        such assonant names Yagug and Magug for Gog and Magog, Harun
        and Karun for Aaron and Korah, Habil and Kabil for Abel and
        Cain, Hillit and Millit for the first dwellers in hell.” Speigel is here
        discussing the names Heyya and Abeyya, and might well have
        included in his parallels the recently discovered romance of Sul and
        Shummul. Harut and Marut were the first two angels to fall from
        grace, like Laman and Lemuel, according to Arab tradition of great
        antiquity. These names never go in threes or fours but only in pairs,
        designating just the first two sons of a family with no reference to
        the rest. This “Dioscuric” practice has a ritual significance which
        has been discussed by Rendel Harris, but of the actual practice
        itself, especially among the desert people, there can be no doubt, for
        we read in an ancient inscription: “N. built this tomb for his sons
1210       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

       Hatibat and Hamilat.” One could not ask for a better illustration of
       this little-known and, until recently, unsuspected practice than we
       find in the Book of Mormon where Lehi names his first two sons
       Laman and Lemuel. (Approach, 291–92)

103. Copie de la fresque de la grotte 25 : l’arbre de vie. Iacovlev Alexandre
     (1887–1938), Iakovleff (aka). Paris, musée Guimet (musée national des
     Arts asiatiques), 00-000530/MG24341. Photo copyright RMN-Grand
     Palais (MNAAG, Paris)/Thiérry Ollivier. https://www.photo.rmn.fr/
     CS.aspx?VP3=SearchResult&VBID=2CMFCI865EDV&SMLS=1&RW
     =1560&RH=1630 (accessed January 27, 2020)
104. This scholarly consensus (see, e.g., Klimkeit, Manichaean Art, 31–32),
     based on a faulty attribution of citations of Severus of Antioch to the
     Book of Giants in his critique of Manichaeism, was refuted in Reeves,
     Jewish Lore, 165–74—notwithstanding the fact that the painting was
     depicted on the cover of Reeves’ book (credited to the Musée Guimet).
     Later, Kósa advanced several new ideas about the interpretation of the
     mural, including a convincing argument that the three trunks in the
     painting were meant to evoke the Manichaean concept of the “three
     constancies” rather than Noah and his sons (“Peacocks”). Despite this
     new interpretation, no scholar disputes the strong connection between
     the Manichaean Book of Giants (well known to Manichaeans in the
     East) and the Qumran Book of Giants—only the idea that Severus was
     quoting the Book of Giants rather than another Manichaean source.
105. See Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q530, fragment 2, lines 1–3, p. 949. For an
     interpretation of this passage that stresses ʾOhyah’s deceit, see Goff,
     “Gilgamesh the Giant,” 249–52.
106. See, e.g., Sogdian Text C of the Book of Giants, where ʾOhyah attempts
     to pick a fatal fight with Mahaway (Henning, “Book of the Giants,” 66).
107. See, e.g., Reeves, Jewish Lore, 84–102.
108. See, e.g., Reeves, 93.
109. See Parry and Tov, DSSR, 6Q8, fragment 1, lines 2–6, p. 973. For
     interpretations of this passage, see Reeves, Jewish Lore, 107–9; Goff,
     “Gilgamesh the Giant,” 249–52.
110. Mozgovine, De Abdallah, 70.
111. See Reeves, “Midrash of Shemhazai and Azael.”
112. E.g., Qur’an 2:102.
113. See Stuckenbruck, Myth of Rebellious Angels, 43.
114. Langlois, “Shemihazah et compagnie(s),” 174. Alternatively, Russell
     suggests:

       The name sounds, as Shaked has suggested, as though it might
       be simply Hebrew ha-šēm ha-zeh, literally “this name,” maybe a
       cautious circumlocution. Pious Jews refer to God discreetly as
       Hashem, “The Name.” (“Hārūt and Mārūt,” n13).
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                    1211

         However, David Calabro strongly disagrees: “This suggestion seems
     extremely unlikely to me. The “h” in Shemih ̣azah is the h ̣eth, while that
     in ha-shem ha-zeh is just heh” (email message to author, May 18, 2020).
115. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, p. 179.
116. See Nickelsburg, p. 179.
117. Nickelsburg, p. 180. See Parry and Tov, DSSR, 6Q8, fragment 1, line 4,
     973.
         In the Doctrine and Covenants, the name of Enoch (Doctrine and
     Covenants 78, 82, 92, 96, 104) or Baraq’el was sometimes used as a code
     name for Joseph Smith (“Baurak Ale”; see Doctrine and Covenants 103,
     105). Note that Joseph Smith’s approach is simply to follow the lead
     of his Hebrew teacher, James Seixas, who seems to have transliterated
     both the Hebrew letters kaph and qoph with a k, so it is difficult to
     trace what original name he is transliterating (Whittaker, “Substituted
     Names,” 107). Nibley observes:

        That Baraq’el is interesting. . . because[, in the Book of Giants,]
        Baraq’el is supposed to have been the father of [Mahujah]. . . . A
        professor in Hebrew at the University of Utah said, “Well, Joseph
        Smith didn’t understand the word barak, meaning ‘to bless.’”
        William W. Phelps had previously suggested that “Baurak Ale”
        meant “God bless you.” [See Whittaker, “Substituted Names,” 107.]
        But “Baraq’el” means the “lightning of God” [see Nickelsburg, 1
        Enoch 1, p. 180]. The Doctrine and Covenants is right on target in
        that. (Teachings of the Pearl of Great Price, 268)

118. See Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 8:3, p. 188.
119. Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q203, fragment 8, line 5, p. 945.
120. See Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 52, 92; Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q530,
     fragment 14, line 2, p. 947.
121. “Since Baraq’el is composed from the name of ‘lightning’ followed
     by the theophoric suffix, [Mahujah/Mahaway, his son,] was given the
     Iranian equivalent Virogdad, ‘created by lightning’” (Caquot, “Les
     prodromes,” 50). Cf. Henning, who first recognized Virogdad as having
     affinities to Baraq’el (Milik and Black, Books of Enoch, 300, 311) in the
     Manichaean fragments of the Book of Giants (Reeves, Jewish Lore,
     147n202; 138n98). According to Jubilees 4:15, Baraq’el is also the father
     of Dinah, the wife of Enoch’s grandfather Mahalaleel (Wintermute,
     “Jubilees,” 4:15, p. 61; see also pp. 61–62, note g). If one assumed the
     descriptions in the relevant accounts were consistent (of course, a very
     far-fetched assumption), this would make the prophet Enoch a first
     cousin once removed to Mahujah.
         On the other hand, in Moses 5:43 the name of Mahuja-el’s father
     is given as Irad, a prominent member of the secret combination who
1212       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

     was killed later by his great-grandson Lamech when Irad revealed their
     secrets in violation of deadly oaths he had taken (see Moses 5:49–50).
122. Public Domain. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:The_Sons_of_God
     _Saw_the_Daughters_of_Men_That_They_Were_Fair,_by_Daniel
     _Chester_French,_modeled_by_1918,_carved_1923_-_Corcoran
     _Gallery_of_Art_-_DSC01065.JPG. (accessed June 3, 2021). Other
     famous statues by Chester include the Abraham Lincoln statue in
     the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, DC and “The Minute Man” in
     Concord, Massachusetts.
123. See Reeves, Jewish Lore, 93. See Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 6:7, p. 174;
     8:3, p. 188; Nickelsburg and VanderKam, 1 Enoch 2, 69:2, p. 297. Cf.
     Nickelsburg and VanderKam, 1 Enoch 2, 60:13–15, p. 224. See also
     Mopsik, Hénoch, 14:4, p. 109; 17:1, 3, pp. 110, 111.
124. See Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 6:7, p. 174; Nickelsburg and VanderKam,
     1 Enoch 2, 69:3, p. 297.
125. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 6:5, p. 174.
126. Nickelsburg, 6:1, p. 174.
127. See Nickelsburg, 8:3, p. 188.
128. See Nickelsburg and VanderKam, 1 Enoch 2, 60:13–15, p. 224; Mopsik,
     Hénoch, 14:4, p. 109; 17:1–3, pp. 110–11.
129. George, Gilgamesh, p. xxxi. For Nibley’s discussion of the Jaredites in
     the context of Gilgamesh, see Nibley, “Babylonian Background,” 358–
     65. For arguments that “ancient pseudo-histories may contain kernels
     of geographic truth,” see Graham, “Mythogeography,” 1.
130. George, Gilgamesh, p. xxxv.
131. See Stuckenbruck, Myth of Rebellious Angels, 49.
132. Mold of a seal, Indus Valley civilization (2500–1500 BCE), Chhatrapati
     Shivaji Maharaj Vastu Sangrahalaya (formerly Prince of Wales Museum).
     Mumbay, India. Public domain. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
     File:Yogi._Mold_of_Seal,_Indus_valley_civilization.jpg         (accessed
     January 29, 2021).
133. AO 6778, Department of Near Eastern Antiquities of the Louvre, room
     227, display case 6, Atlas database entry 24801. Photo courtesy of Rama.
     https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Head_of_Humbaba-AO_6778-
     IMG_0661-black.jpg (accessed January 29, 2021).
134. Stuckenbruck, 45; see also pp. 44–48; Reeves, Jewish Lore, 124–26.
135. Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q531, fragment 22, lines 3–9, p. 959.
136. See Moses 7:13–15.
137. See Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q531, fragment 2, column II, line 1, p. 949.
138. See Parry and Tov, 4Q530, fragment 22, line 12, p. 959.
139. See Stuckenbruck, Myth of Rebellious Angels, p. 45.
140. See Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q203, fragment 3, line 3, p. 943. See also
     Stuckenbruck, Myth of Rebellious Angels, 44–45.
141. See Goff, “Gilgamesh the Giant,” 253.
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                     1213

142. Stuckenbruck, Myth of Rebellious Angels, 46.
143. Stuckenbruck, Myth of Rebellious Angels, 54. The author is citing
     Reeves, Jewish Lore, 126.
144. Goff, “Gilgamesh the Giant,” 253.
145. See Bradshaw, Bowen, and Dahle, “Where Did the Names Mahaway
     and Mahujah Come From?”
146. Calabro, “Early Christian Context.”.
147. https://pages.uncc.edu/john-reeves/course-materials/rels-40005000-
     jewish-apocrypha-pseudepigrapha/course-syllabus/ (accessed April
     16, 2021).
148. Koehler and Baumgartner, Hebrew and Aramaic Lexicon, 1:334.
149. See 2 Chronicles 7:9.
150. Faulkner, Concise Dictionary, 173.
151. Faulkner, Concise Dictionary, 173.
152. Matthew L. Bowen, quoted in Bradshaw, Enoch and the Gathering of
     Zion.
153. See Orlov, Enoch-Metatron Tradition, 27.
154. E.g., VanderKam, Enoch, 6–8; Orlov, Enoch-Metatron Tradition, 23–39.
     VanderKam comments:

        What is of special note here is that Shamash and Adad brought
        Enmeduranki into their council or assembly. Hence, he had with
        them a closer association than humans could normally enjoy.
        (Enoch, 8)

155. Orlov, “Learned Savant,” 165. For an extensive discussion of the similar
     roles of Enoch and Enmeduranki, see Orlov, Enoch-Metatron Tradition,
     23–85.
156. See Parry and Tov, DSSR, 1Q24, fragment 27, line 2, p. 941; Stuckenbruck,
     Book of Giants, 27; Reeves, Jewish Lore, 93.
157. E.g., Milik and Black, Books of Enoch, p. 434, s.v. “Mahawai.”
158. E.g., Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q530, fragments 2 column II + 6 + 7
     column I + 8–11 + 12(?), line 21, p. 951.
159. See David Calabro, email message to auhor, May 18, 2020, with
     permission; Nibley, Hugh Nibley on the Book of Enoch.
160. Photograph of Book of Giants, 4QEnGiantsa ar (4Q203), fragment 7b,
     column ii, from plate 31, Milik and Black, Books of Enoch. Used with
     permission. Cf. 4QEnGiantsa ar (4Q203), fragment 7b, column ii.
         Milik translates lines 5–7 as follows: “[. . .] 5to you, Mah[awai . . .]
     6the two tablets [. . .] 7and the second has not been read up till now
     [. . .].” (Milik and Black, Books of Enoch, 314; brackets in original
     translation).
         Though only a small part of the H can be seen in the photograph
     of the manuscript reproduced here, Martínez, like Milik, reads the
     end of line 5 as “MH” (“MartínezBook of Giants (4Q203),” fragment
1214        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

     7, column II, lines 5–7, p. 260). By way of contrast, Stuckenbruck and
     Reeves see only “M” and not “MH” in this particular fragment (Book of
     Giants, 84; Jewish Lore, 110). Attesting to the complexity of interpreting
     these fragments is a later transcription by Stuckenbruck in which he
     interprets the last nearly complete letter of line 7 as a Hebrew B rather
     than an M (see Parry and Tov, DSSR, p. 945). Despite the ambiguities
     in this particular photograph, scholars agree that Mahaway’s full name
     appears in other, more complete and readable fragments from the Book
     of Giants.
161. See Moses 6:40.
162. See Moses 7:2.
163. Nibley, Enoch the Prophet, 277–79.
164. The use of two variations of the same name in one statement is not
     uncommon in the Hebrew Bible. In this case, the Masoretic text of
     Genesis 4:18 includes both spellings of the name (Mehuja-el and
     Mehija-el) one right after the other, and in a context that leaves no
     doubt that the two occurrences refer to the same individual (see, e.g.,
     Bandstra, Genesis 1–11, 268). Hendel attributes this phenomenon
     either to a graphic confusion of “Y” and “W” (Text, 47–48; cf. Nibley,
     Enoch the Prophet, 278; Nibley, “Churches in the Wilderness” [1989]
     290) or to linguistic modernization of what seems to be the older form
     (Mehuja-el). Note that instead of featuring two different forms of the
     name in succession as in the Masoretic text, some other texts render the
     names consistently. For example, the Cairo Geniza manuscript gives
     Mehuja-el twice, while the Samaritan version has Mahi-el (cf. Mehijael)
     twice (see Shoulson, Torah, Genesis 4:18, p. 11; Tsedaka and Sullivan,
     Israelite Samaritan, Genesis 4:18, p. 12).
165. Stuckenbruck, “Giant Mythology,” 322. Cf. Stuckenbruck, Myth of
     Rebellious Angels, 41. In “Giant Mythology,” 324, Stuckenbruck briefly
     repeats his previous suggestion for MHWY in connection with possible
     explanations for the names ʾOhyah and Hahyah. I will discuss the two
     latter names in a later section of the present article.
166. See Stuckenbruck, “Giant Mythology,” 324.
167. Stuckenbruck, Myth of Rebellious Angels, 41.
168. Richard Hess, in Freedman, Anchor Bible Dictionary, s.v. “Mehujael,”
     4:681.
169. Hess, in Freedman, Anchor Bible Dictionary, 4:681.
170. See Hendel, Text, 47–48.
171. See Sarna, Genesis, 36.
172. See Hess, Studies, 41.
173. See Cassuto, Adam to Noah, 232.
174. Cassuto, Adam to Noah, 232. For more about their role and function,
     see Oppenheim, Ancient Mesopotamia, 221. Cf. Heimpel, Letters to
     the King, s.v. “ecstatic,” p. 578. Matthew Bowen further comments on
           Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                     1215

     Cassuto’s analysis and other possible Mesopotamian etymologies for
     these names as follows:

       Methusael may or may not constitute a Hebraization of the widely
       accepted, but still (as yet) theoretical and unattested Akkadian
       form, mutu ša ili (“man of god”). Nevertheless, Mesopotamia
       seems to be a good place to look in terms of obtaining more precise
       etymologies for the names in the Genesis genealogies.
           Since Umberto Cassuto opens the door to considering
       Akkadian maḫḫû (“ecstatic, prophet” [Black, George, and
       Postgate, Concise Dictionary of Akkadian, 190]) as the source
       of the first element in Mehujael, we can also consider the word
       maḫḫû (“great”) as a possible source. The latter term derives from
       Sumerian MAḪ (adj. “high, exalted, supreme, great, lofty, foremost,
       sublime” [Halloran, Sumerian Lexicon, 168]). If Cassuto is right
       that Lamech can be connected to Akkadian lumakku, we would
       do well to note that lumakku or lumaḫḫû (which can also mean
       “chief, ruler” [Black, George, and Postgate, Concise Dictionary of
       Akkadian, 185]) also appears to derive from Sumerian MAḪ (LÚ.
       MAḪ = “great man”). This may have some further bearing on the
       etymology of the Book of Moses name “Mahan” (Moses 5:31, 49
       [spelled “Mahon” in OT1 of the Joseph Smith Translation (Faulring,
       Jackson, and Matthews, Original Manuscripts, p. 10 of OT1, p. 94)]).
       I think the point that lmk does not occur in West Semitic is more
       important than it may seem at a glance. (Bowen, email message to
       author, March 18, 2020)

175. Cassuto, Adam to Noah, 233.
176. See Cassuto, Adam to Noah, 233. Cf. Hess, Studies, 46.
177. See Hess, Studies, 46.
178. Stuckenbruck, “Book of Giants among the Dead Sea Scrolls,” 134–35.
179. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 106:7, p. 536.
180. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 33:2, p. 329.
181. Enoch’s “similarity to, and perhaps derivation from, the [Mesopotamian]
     figure of Enmeduranki is widely accepted” (Wyatt, Space, 101; see
     also Orlov, Enoch-Metatron Tradition, 23–29; VanderKam, Enoch,
     6–14; Annus, “On the Origin of Watchers”; Drawnel, “Mesopotamian
     Background”; Day, “Enochs of Genesis 4 and 5”). For an excerpt with
     commentary of a Mesopotamian account of the ascent of Enmeduranki,
     see Wyatt, Space, 195–96.
182. Jens Wilkens observes that “only Enoch’s voice is mentioned”
     (“Remarks,” 224, 225). In explaining this state of affairs, Wilkens
     mentions a Uyghur fragment of the Book of Giants in which a speaker
     (likely Mahaway referring to Enoch) says, “But I did not see him in
     person” (cited in Wilkens, 224).
183. Wilkens, “Remarks,” 225–26.
1216       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

184. I.e., a Sogdian fragment M8005 (expedition code: T iii 282; see
     Henning, “Book of the Giants,” text E, p. 66, which states that some of
     the wicked “are glad at seeing the apostle,” “who is obviously Enoch”
     (according to Wilkens, “Remarks,” 225), while others are afraid of him.
     Also, the Middle Persian fragment M101, frg. l (Henning, “Book of the
     Giants,” 61), addressed, according to Wilkens, “to the Watchers and
     their children, the [gibborim],” states: “[The judgment on you is] that
     you shall be bound for the sins you have committed. You shall see the
     destruction of your children.”
185. See, e.g., Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 91, 199, 200. For more on the
     role of Mahaway as a messenger, see Wilkens, “Remarks”; Morano,
     “Some New Sogdian Fragments,” 190, 194.
186. See Bradshaw, Bowen, and Dahle, “Where Did the Names Mahaway
     and Mahujah Come From?”
187. Calabro, “Early Christian Context.”
188. Stuckenbruck, Myth of Rebellious Angels, 39.
189. Elsewhere, Stuckenbruck writes: “As no other extant early Jewish
     writing, BG focuses most exclusively and elaborately on the giants. The
     interest at the outset in cataloguing their misdeeds (instead of those
     of, e.g., the Watchers) corresponds to the detail devoted to them . . .
     throughout the story” (Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 144).
190. Writing generally about the ancient use of the term apocrypha, Nibley
     explained:

       The Apocrypha originally got their name of “hidden” writings
       from the fact that they were considered too sacred to be divulged to
       the general public. The name does not designate, as it later came to,
       books of dubious authenticity, but rather scripture of very special
       importance and holiness. (Approach, 483n1)

         For example, a controversial letter purportedly written by Clement
     and discovered by Morton Smith mentions certain “secret” doings and
     writings that were part of the “hierophantic teaching of the Lord [that
     would] lead the hearers into the innermost sanctuary of that truth” but
     that were “most carefully guarded, being read only to those who are
     being initiated into the great mysteries” (purported letter of Clement
     to Theodore, published in M. Smith, Secret Gospel, 14). Though some
     scholars dispute the nature of the “Secret Gospel of Mark” cited in the
     latter and some of Smith’s interpretations, most accept that the letter is
     an excellent match to the style of Clement. Hugh Nibley cites the work
     without qualification in Message, 515. For a summary of the debate on
     the nature and authenticity of this document, see, e.g., Ehrman, Lost
     Christianities, 67–89; M. Smith, Secret Gospel, xi, 139–50. Further
     associating the Gospel of Mark with ritual is the research of Whitney
     Shiner, who “has suggested that the Gospel of Mark was designed to be
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                     1217

     recited at the water’s edge after an all-night vigil as part of a baptismal
     service, so that the reading of the resurrection scene would dramatically
     coincide with the break of dawn” (Calabro, “Early Christian Context.”
     See Shiner, Proclaiming the Gospel, 51–52.
         With respect to esoteric teachings at Qumran, Michael E. Stone
     mentions the fact that “Josephus stresses transmission of written
     documents, when he says explicitly that the Essene initiates swear not to
     reveal ‘books belonging to their sect’ (BJ 2:142)” (Secret Groups, 38). On
     the other hand, and perhaps of relevance to the seemingly widespread
     transmission of the Manichaean Book of Giants fragments, an
     “abundance of insider documentation is an outcome of the Manichaean
     attitudes to their teachings, which they disseminated vigorously. This
     situation is the reverse of what [is] observed in the Hellenistic–Roman
     mystery cults” (Stone, 51).
         Consistent with the idea that different levels of initiation in groups
     such as the Qumran covenanters corresponded to differential access to
     written (and most likely oral) teachings is Stone’s conclusion that “not
     only were . . . writings [containing special knowledge (e.g., Nickelsburg,
     “Nature and Function”) revealed in stages, but also steps were taken
     to ensure that those not yet admitted into the appropriate rank could
     not read them” (Stone, Secret Groups, 71). Those at the highest levels of
     initiation were thought to have knowledge reserved for the angels (e.g.,
     “1 Enoch says, in praise of its hero, that Enoch heard and understood all
     the words of the Watchers, the highest class of angels (1:2)” [Stone, 102]).
     Here and elsewhere in Watchers and Similitudes of Enoch, “it becomes
     clear that the subjects taught by the Watchers are negative aspects of
     subjects apprehended by Enoch is his angelified state. Thus, the status
     of the revealer determines what can be revealed” (Stone, “Enoch and
     the Fall of the Angels,” 342).
         The need for graded secrecy seems to have led naturally to the need
     for different works or different versions of the same work for different
     settings. As Stone observed, “Some, but not all, of [the secret subjects
     listed or alluded to in the most sacred teachings of the apocalypses]
     were not actually revealed in narratives of the apocalypses [themselves,]
     but are repeated in different works” (Stone, Secret Groups, 100). In
     some cases, sacred things were not to be written. Compare analogous
     statements made with reference to Latter-day Saint temple rituals (e.g.,
     Flake, “Oral Canon”).
191. See Bradshaw, Enoch and the Gathering of Zion; Bradshaw, The First
     Days and the Last Days; Bradshaw et al., God’s Image 2.
192. Zinner, “Underemphasized Parallels.”
193. See Andersen, “2 (Slavonic Apocalypse of) Enoch,” 10:4 (shorter
     recension), p. 119; Alexander, “3 (Hebrew Apocalypse of) Enoch,” 2:2,
     p. 357; 3:2, p. 257; 4:1, p. 258; 4:10, p. 259; and Mopsik, Hénoch, 48D 1,
1218       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

     p. 156 (97). For the Ginza, see Migne, “Livre d’Adam,” chap. 21, p. 167;
     Lidzbarski, Ginza, Ginza Right 11, lines 20–27, p. 264. A mention of
     “Enoch the Younger (who is Idris)” in a late Islamic source is no doubt
     derived from the same tradition (al-Kisa’i, Tales, 75).
194. See Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 1:2, p. 137. Cf. Doctrine and Covenants
     110:1: “The eyes of our understanding were opened.”
195. See Andersen, “2 (Slavonic Apocalypse of) Enoch,” 25:1 [J], p. 144; 64:5
     [J], p. 190.
196. See Migne, “Livre d’Adam,” 21, p. 169, English translation by author.
     Compare the English translation of Migne given by Nibley, Enoch the
     Prophet, 210. Migne’s original reads:

       La Vie [souveraine] lui répondit : Lève-toi, prends ta course vers la
       source de l’eau, détournes-en le cours, et que cette eau vive et subtile,
       tombant dans l’eau profonde, en adoucisse l’amertume en s’y mêlant,
       et que les hommes qui la boivent deviennent semblables à la Vie
       souveraine.
           A ce commandement Tavril détourna en effet le cours de l’eau
       subtile, et la dirigeant dans l’eau amère, il en adoucit l’amertume, en
       sorte que les hommes se réjouissaient en la buvant.

        Cf. Lidzbarski, Ginza, Ginza Right 11, pp. 266–67:

       Da sprach das große Leben zu Mandä dHaije: „Mache du dich auf,
       geh an der Spitze des Wassers hin und ziehe einen dünnen Zug
       lebenden Wassers hin. Es soll hingehen, in das trübe Wasser fallen,
       und das Wasser werde schmackhaft, auf daß die Menschenkinder es
       trinken und dem großen Leben gleich werden.“
           Da sprach er zu Taurel-Uthra, dieser machte sich ans Werk,
       er zog einen dünnen Zug Wassers hin, es fiel in die Tibil, in das
       Wasser, das nicht schmackhaft war, und das Wasser der Tibil wurde
       schmackhaft, daß die Menschenkinder es trinken und es ihnen
       schmecke.

         The account of Enoch in the Book of Moses does not give a clear
     purpose for the turning of the waters from their course. Perhaps
     there is a longer version of the story in which this detail is explained.
     However, the Mandaean angel’s promise to deliver Enosh/Enoch from
     the “flood that will rise up on [his] head” provides a tantalizing hint
     of one possibility. In the Ginza, the incident is incorporated into the
     Mandaean mythology relating to baptism. Specifically, the turning of
     the water’s course is made necessary by the requirement for “living
     water” to become available for Mandaean baptism, which includes
     immersion, drinking of the water, and a series of sacred handshakes.
     The first phase of the rite is described by Jorunn Jacobsen Buckley as
     follows:
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                       1219

        The priest submerges the person three times and uses his wet finger
        to draw a line three times across the person’s forehead, from the
        right to the left ear. Again thrice, the person in the water receives
        a palm full of water to drink. The sacred handshake, the kushta,
        takes place between the two. (Mandaeans, 82)

      Erik Langkjer further elaborates:

        Tauriel is the old god “El, the bull,” tr il, acc. to the Ugarit texts
        having his throne by the double offspring of the water-brooks in the
        mountain Lel. In the Mandaean baptismal ritual any river used for
        baptism is called Jordan (Jardna) and baptism can only be done in
        running water (not in “cut off water” in a font or basin). Lidzbarski
        thinks that this reflects an old belief in the Jordan as the paradise-
        river from Hermon, the mountain of the sons of God in the North
        (“as no other river in Asia it runs in a straight direction north-
        south” [Lidzbarski, Ginza, Einleitung, p. v, 13–15]). Lidzbarski does
        not mention Psalm 133:3: The unction on the head of the high priest
        is “like the dew of Hermon falling on the mountains of Zion. There
        the Lord sends down blessing, Life eternal,” in Temple Theology the
        dew in the morning and the unction is identified with the “Water
        of Life” from the mountain of the sons of God. (“From 1 Enoch”)

197. It is important to note that, of the Aramaic fragments of 1 Enoch found
     at Qumran, none of those identified preserve any of the Parables. But
     even so, according to the consensus of scholarship, this segment is
     pre-Christian.
198. See Brown and Bradshaw, “Man and Son of Man.”
199. It seems at Qumran that knowledge classed as eschatological—
     including, among other things, “the secrets that relate to ‘him,’ that is the
     Righteous One (or the Lord of Spirits)” (Nickelsburg and VanderKam,
     1 Enoch 2, p. 102, commenting on 1 Enoch 38:3)—was reserved for the
     righteous at Judgment Day and, it seems in some cases, also for initiates
     at Qumran in the form of unwritten teachings (see, e.g., Stone, Secret
     Groups, 79–80). See, more generally, Stone, 78–87, 132–34.
200. Orlov, Enoch-Metatron Tradition, 102. Cf. H. Odeberg, 3 Enoch, part 2,
     p. 30, note 11:1: “According to v. 5 of the preceding chapter the angel(s)
     called the Prince of Wisdom and Prince of Understanding are the
     instructors of Enoch-Metatron. Here it is the Holy One who reveals
     secrets to him. An important parallel to this is found in 2 Enoch 23:24.
     In chapter 23 the angel Vretil tells Enoch of ‘all the works of heaven
     and earth, etc. etc.,’ in chapter 24 again it is God Himself who reveals
     to Enoch ‘the secrets of Creation.’ The reason of the change is there to
     be seen in the explicit statement that these latter secrets are not even
     revealed to the angels and could therefore be handed over to Enoch only
1220        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

     by God Himself.” Cf. Andersen, “2 (Slavonic Apocalypse of) Enoch,”
     pp. 141ff.; Alexander, “3 (Hebrew Apocalypse of) Enoch,” pp. 264ff.
201. Andersen, “2 (Slavonic Apocalypse of) Enoch,” 22:8 [J], p. 138. See also
     Bradshaw and Larsen, Enoch, Noah, and the Tower, 104. For additional
     parallels to this theme in the ancient Enoch literature, see Nibley,
     Enoch the Prophet, 228–32. Relevant biblical references include Exodus
     34:29; 2 Chronicles 6:41; Psalm 93:1; 104:1; 132:9; Isaiah 61:10; Luke
     9:26; 21:36; 1 Corinthians 15:19; 2 Corinthians 5:2–4, taking “house”
     to refer to “celestial glory”; Revelation 1:7; 3:5, 18; 4:4; 7:9; and Doctrine
     and Covenants 28:3.
202. See Alexander, “3 (Hebrew Apocalypse of) Enoch,” 16:2–3, p. 268.
203. Moses 7:59. Cf. Alexander, “3 (Hebrew Apocalypse of) Enoch,” 10:1, p.
     263: “The Holy One, blessed be He, made me a throne like the throne
     of glory.”
204. Is it possible that the absence of detailed descriptions corresponding to
     Enoch’s grand vision in Moses 7 in BG might help explain the pointed
     efforts in so much of the rest of the primary Enoch literature (1 Enoch,
     2 Enoch, 3 Enoch) to remedy this significant omission through the
     invention of substitute narratives, no doubt drawing in some instances
     on traditions of genuine apocalyptic visions that are known to have
     circulated in the ancient world? Such efforts recall the sort of gap filling
     Nibley described in his account of how the later Christian Gnostics
     pined after the true gnosis of the early Christians—a lost gnosis about
     which they could only speculate and fabricate while falsely claiming
     to possess the real article. In Nibley’s inimitable style, he provides the
     following analogy:

        It is as if various parties called upon to describe the nature of a
        bucket were to submit careful chemical analyses of all substances
        carried in buckets: there would be a milk school, a water school,
        a bran school, etc., each defining buckets in terms of a particular
        content. The important thing about the Gnostics is not that they
        adopted doctrines and practices from Iran or from Alexandria, but
        that they showed a desperate eagerness to latch on to anything that
        looked promising no matter where it came from. (World and the
        Prophets, 67)

        In a similar way, we might, in a speculative mood, conjecture that
     the anxious efforts of later mystics to supply detailed accounts of what
     Enoch saw on his heavenly journey witnesses more than anything else
     their conviction that there somewhere existed a true account of that
     journey that could no longer be had. Commendably, the authors of
     BG, in contrast to later compilers of Enoch traditions, did not attempt
     to replicate by their own invention the heavenly visions of Enoch.
     Instead, for the purposes of their parody, they seem to have thought
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                    1221

     it sufficient to substitute the fictional dreams and comical antics of the
     twin brothers for the authentic visions of Enoch.
205. For an analogue to Enoch’s experience in the life of Moses, see, e.g.,
     Smoot, “‘I Am a Son of God,’” in this proceedings; Bradshaw, Larsen,
     and Whitlock, “Twin Sons of Different Mothers.”
206. E.g., Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 20; Stuckenbruck, “Book of Giants
     among the Dead Sea Scrolls,” 133.
207. See Bradshaw, Larsen, and Whitlock, “Twin Sons of Different Mothers.”.
208. See Stuckenbruck, “Apocalypse of John.” I have also drawn inspiration
     from George W. E. Nickelsburg’s ongoing project comparing passages
     that might indicate influence of 1 Enoch on the Petrine corpus. His
     2001 study concluded by saying, “The cumulative evidence, unless
     coincidental, indicates that Enochic traditions were known in Petrine
     circles” (Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, p. 104). Nickelsburg notes the presence
     of fifteen significant parallels between 1 Peter and chapter 108 of 1 Enoch
     alone (p. 560). See also Nickelsburg, “Enoch, Levi, and Peter.” Kelley
     Coblentz Bautch, who further clarified what is meant by “Enochic”
     and “Petrine” traditions, extended Nickelsburg’s research in a study to
     include the Apocalypse of Peter (see “Peter and the Patriarchs”).
209. Stuckenbruck, “Apocalypse of John,” 324.
210. Stuckenbruck, “Apocalypse of John,” 325.
211. My analysis differs from Stuckenbruck’s in one major respect. Since
     his corpus was based on parallels proposed by other authors in the
     literature rather than his own selections, he performed a prior analysis
     as to whether the parallels had been “shown to participate alongside
     other writings in developments of apocalyptic tradition that can be
     observed in other early Jewish writings” (Stuckenbruck, 322). In other
     words, were the parallels relatively specific to the two texts being
     considered, or were they themes common to many Jewish texts? Here,
     however, the selection of passages has already been confined to those
     considered useful for comparison. Though, admittedly, some of the
     parallel features occur in other Jewish texts (including, more often than
     not, other Enoch texts), the fact that the Book of Moses resembles to
     an astonishing degree any one of these texts is remarkable. And that
     there are many specific resemblances in particular to BG, in content
     and sequence of events, is striking.
212. Of course, the opposite course could have been taken—comparing
     Moses 6–7 against the narrative structure of BG. However, I concur
     with Jared Ludlow that extracanonical traditions should be measured
     against canonical versions of the standard works, not vice versa. “This
     comparison may appear to be a circular argument,” attempting to
     “prove” modern scripture by analyzing ancient traditions against it,
     “but the truthfulness of [modern scripture] will certainly not be proved
     by . . . any . . . intellectual endeavor,” though such analysis “may help
1222        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

     eliminate some possible explanations (like Joseph Smith’s having made
     up these stories ex nihilo). If one has a testimony of [works of modern
     scripture], however, one can then use [them] as standards against which
     other traditions can be measured (Ludlow, “Vision,” 73n60).
213. Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 11–24.
214. Stuckenbruck, “Book of Giants among the Dead Sea Scrolls.”
215. Stuckenbruck, “Book of Giants among the Dead Sea Scrolls,” 133.
216. See Wilkens, “Remarks,” 219–20, 221–22.
217. Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 18–19.
218. Wilkens, “Remarks,” 221.
219. For example, Kósa observed that although the idea of repenting
     “demons” that is found in BG would have been “complete nonsense”
     within the “extreme ontological dualism of Manichaeism,” the motif
     somehow survived in a Manichaean depiction of the story “due to the
     influence of the BG tradition” (“Book of Giants Tradition,” 175). The
     implication is that, in this instance and perhaps in others, the perception
     of the importance of the motif in the “original” BG story seems to have
     precluded any attempt to modify what would have ordinarily been seen
     as a doctrinally impossible episode in order to provide a better fit to
     Manichaean theology.
220. E.g., Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 20; Stuckenbruck, “Book of Giants
     among the Dead Sea Scrolls,” 133.
221. Gulácsi, Mani’s Pictures, 437, 439.
222. Gulácsi, 485–89; Kósa, “Book of Giants Tradition.”
223. Copyright Japanese private collection. Details of the Cosmology
     Painting are reproduced and discussed in Gulácsi, Mani’s Pictures,
     436–89.
224. Gulácsi, Mani’s Pictures, 470.
225. See Gulácsi, 470; cf. Kósa, “Book of Giants Tradition,” plate 2, p. 182.
     See the description of the eight layers of the universe in Manichaeism
     represented in this and another image in Gulácsi, Mani’s Pictures, 468–
     69, 472–77.
226. See Kósa, “Book of Giants Tradition,” 173–74.
227. See Kósa, 162–63, 168–69.
228. See Kósa, 169. For visual details, see fig. 2a, p. 183.
229. See Kósa, fig. 2a, p. 183. See also pp. 155–57.
230. See Kósa, fig. 3, p. 186. See also pp. 164–67, 169–71, 178.
231. Welburn, Mani, 205.
232. As Nickelsburg describes it, the Genesis 6:4 description of events
     is made “without comment and with no explicit connection to what
     follows” (1 Enoch 1, p. 167).
233. For example, the well-known Genesis scholar Ronald Hendel translates
     Genesis 6:4 in a way that equates the nephilim to the gibborim:
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                     1223

        The Nephilim were on the earth in those days—and also afterward—
        when the sons of God went in to the daughters of humans, who bore
        children to them. These were the heroes that were of old, warriors
        of renown. (Attridge et al., HarperCollins Study Bible, Genesis 6:4,
        p. 15)

         By way of contrast, Nickelsburg understands such descriptions as
     depicting two distinct groups (1 Enoch 1, p. 185).
234. Ephrem the Syrian, “Paradise,” 1:11, pp. 81–82. See also Malan, Adam
     and Eve, 3:4, p. 147; Nibley, Enoch the Prophet, 178–93. See also Reeves,
     Jewish Lore, 68–69.
235. See Bradshaw and Larsen, Enoch, Noah, and the Tower, 203, 225–30.
236. Nibley, “Gifts,” 93–94. See also Nibley, “Deny Not,” 128; “What Kind of
     Work?,” 256, 276; and “Law of Consecration,” 436–37.
237. Nibley, “Intellectual Autobiography,” 45.
238. Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q203, frg. 3, l. 4, p. 943.
239. Nibley, “Intellectual Autobiography,”40. As Nibley points out, this
     question is not unrelated to John Dewey’s golden question: “What is
     there in it for me?” (Nibley, “Educating the Saints,” 338).
240. Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 50.
241. Henning, “Book of the Giants,” frg. i, 103–10, p. 62.
242. While Wise and Cook translate the key term as “secrets,” Martínez
     translates the term as “mysteries” (Martínez, “Book of Giants (1Q23),”
     9 + 14 + 15:2, p. 291). Cf. Beyer’s reconstruction as “mysteries” that is
     reported in Reeves, Jewish Lore, 74. Stuckenbruck (who provided the
     translation of Parry and Tov, DSSR , 939) is more cautious: “Not enough
     is visible on 1Q23 14 to verify this reading” (Stuckenbruck, Book of
     Giants, 58).
243. Wise, Abegg, and Cook, Dead Sea Scrolls, 1Q23, 9 + 14 + 15:2–4, p. 291.
244. Henning “Book of the Giants,” text A, frg. j, p. 60. The phrases in
     brackets are my suggestions.
245. Wise, Abegg, and Cook, Dead Sea Scrolls, 1QapGen, 1:2, p. 91. Cf.
     Martínez, “Genesis Apocryphon,” 1:2, p. 230; Fitzmyer, Genesis
     Apocryphon, 1:2, p. 67: “mystery of evil.” See also 2 Thessalonians
     2:7 (Fitzmyer, Genesis Apocryphon, p. 120, note 1:2). For an extended
     discussion, see Thomas, “Mysteries,” 180–82.
246. See Bradshaw, God’s Image 1, 727nE-105.
247. al-Tha’labi, “Lives,” 88; cf. Chanoch Albeck, Midrash, p. 587; see English
     translation in Reeves, “Midrash of Shemhazai and Azael.”
248. Nibley, “Return to the Temple,” 63; cf. Genesis 6:4–6; Bradshaw, God’s
     Image 1, 398n5:53-a.
249. See Bradshaw, God’s Image 2, 96nM6–19. Because of differences in
     Hebrew spelling, some have questioned whether a connection can be
     made between Mahijah/Mahujah (in the Book of Moses), Mahaway
1224        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

     (in the Qumran Book of Giants), and Mehuja-el (in Genesis 4:18). For
     a detailed response on this issue, see Bradshaw, Bowen, and Dahle,
     “Where Did the Names Mahaway and Mahujah Come From?”
250. See Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 6:5, p. 174.
251. Nickelsburg and VanderKam, 1 Enoch 2, 69:13–14, p. 304.
252. Moses 5:29. For more on the uses of such oaths within and outside of
     scripture, see Bradshaw, God’s Image 1, Moses 5:29-b, c, d, pp. 377–78;
     Bradshaw and Head, “Investiture Panel,” 33–34.
253. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 6:5, p. 174.
254. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 6:1, p. 174.
255. Moses 5:44. See Bradshaw, God’s Image 1, p. 392, note 5:44-a: “The
     wording ‘took unto himself’ is paralleled in the description of the illicit
     relationships of the wicked husbands in the days of Noah (Moses 8:14,
     21).” Wright observes that “there is no indication . . . that a marriage
     actually took place, but rather [the phrase] could be translated and
     understood as ‘Lamech took to himself two women’” (Evil Spirits,
     135–36).
256. See Moses 5:47–55. See also Bradshaw, God’s Image 1, pp. 395–99, notes
     5:47a–54c.
257. Moses 5:53: “Lamech had spoken the secret unto his wives, and they
     rebelled against him, and declared these things abroad, and had not
     compassion.”
258. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 8:3, p. 188. For an extensive discussion of this
     topic, see Lesses, “They Revealed Secrets.”
259. Courtesy of hadrian6. https://hadrian6.tumblr.com/post/96633448657/
     samson-smiting-a-philistine-with-the-jawbone-of-an (accessed April
     16, 2021).
260. See Genesis 16:12.
261. Jeremiah 2:24.
262. Sarna, Genesis, 121n12: “a wild ass of a man.”
263. George, Gilgamesh, tablet 8, line 51, p. 65.
264. Mitchell, Gilgamesh, book 8, p. 153.
265. See Bradshaw, Enoch and the Gathering of Zion.
266. Moses 8:14; emphasis added.
267. See Moses 8:20.
268. See Moses 8:13–14.
269. Moses 8:21; emphasis added.
270. Moses 8:21; emphasis added.
271. Moses 8:13; emphasis added. For more on this episode, see Bradshaw
     and Larsen, Enoch, Noah, and the Tower, 84, 203, 225; Bradshaw,
     Temple Themes, 53–65. Cf. Nibley, Enoch the Prophet, 180.
272. Alma 31:5. Note that the word “virtue” is a term whose older meaning
     connotes strength, especially strength in battle. It comes from the Latin
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                    1225

     nominative virtus (= valor, merit, moral perfection), which derives
     from the root vir (= man).
273. Mobley, Empty Men, 2.
274. Alter, Hebrew Bible, Hosea 10:13, 2:1230–31.
275. Alter, 2 Kings 23:25, 2:606.
276. Alter, Proverbs 24:5, 3:426.
277. Mobley uses the phrase “more the geber” (Empty Men, 3).
278. Mobley, Empty Men, 4.
279. See Angel, “Humbling,” 67–68.
280. Edward Cook, “4Q531 (4QEnGiants(c) ar),” 22:3–8, in Parry and Tov,
     DSSR, 3:495.
281. Angel, “Humbling,” 68. Angel continues:

        The portrayal of Gilgamesh roaming like a wild man after the
        death of Enkidu is a well-known image from the Mesopotamian
        epic. And, as Matthias Henze has pointed out, Daniel’s portrait of
        Nebuchadnezzar as [having become] a wild man is best understood
        as a polemical reversal of Enkidu’s metamorphosis portrayed in
        Gilgamesh.

282. See Angel, “Humbling,” 68.
283. Stuckenbruck, “Book of Giants among the Dead Sea Scrolls,” 133.
284. Cassuto, Adam to Noah, 232. For more about their role and function,
     see Oppenheim, Ancient Mesopotamia, 221. Cf. Heimpel, Letters to the
     King, 578, s.v. “ecstatic.”
285. See Heimpel, Letters to the King, 26 220, p. 262; 26 221, p. 263.
286. Wilkens, “Remarks,” 227.
287. Nibley, Enoch the Prophet, 278. Noting the possibility of wordplay,
     Nibley conjectures that “what the Ma- [in Mahijah] most strongly
     suggests is certainly the all-but-universal ancient interrogative, Ma
     (“who?” or “what?”), so that the names Mahujah and Mahijah both
     sound to the student of Semitics like questions” (“Churches in the
     Wilderness,” [1989], 290).
288. See, e.g., Henning, “Book of the Giants,” text E, p. 66; Reeves, Jewish
     Lore, 117. On the identification of Enoch with the title “apostle,” see
     Wilkens, “Remarks,” 225.
289. Bauer, Greek-English Lexicon, 122.
290. See Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 74–76.
291. E.g., they prostrated and wept bef[ore (Parry et al., DSSR, 4Q203 4, p.
     943; cf. Martínez, “Book of Giants (4Q203),” 4, 6, p. 260: “they bowed
     down and wept in front of [Enoch]”; “when] they saw the apostle [i.e.,
     Enoch], . . . before the apostle . . . those demons [i.e., the gibborim, in
     this context] that were [timid], were very, very glad at seeing the apostle
     [i.e., Enoch]. All of them assembled before him” (Henning, “Book of the
     Giants,” text E, p. 66).
1226         Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

292. Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q530, 2 II + 6 + 7 I + 8–11 + 12(?), 22–23, p. 951.
     In providing consistency with Manichaean BG fragments describing
     Enoch’s preaching mission, the Book of Moses also sheds light on the
     scholarly controversy as to whether the visit of Mahaway to Enoch in
     heaven later on is his first or second encounter with Enoch (see, e.g.,
     Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 126–27; Reeves, Jewish Lore, 94, 105;
     Wilkens, “Remarks,” 219–20, 221–22). The most common answer to
     this question is that it was his second encounter with Enoch. The fact
     that it was Mahaway’s second encounter with Enoch is implied by the
     reference in the BG passages shown in the table above that refers to a
     “second time” (Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q530, fragment 7, column II,
     lines 6–7, p. 951) and a “first [time]” (Parry et al., DSSR, 4Q530, 2 II + 6 +
     7 I + 8–11 + 12(?), 22–23, p. 951; cf. Vermes, Complete, 550: “Previously
     you listened to his [Enoch’s] voice”). Because of the frequent doubling
     of various motifs in BG, the idea of Mahaway being involved in two
     journeys rather than one seems probable—and the Book of Moses idea
     of Mahijah’s earthly encounter with Enoch (Moses 6:40), followed by
     a heavenly encounter with him (Moses 7:2), fits the expected narrative
     structure perfectly.
293. Wilkens, “Remarks,” 226–27.
294. For a survey of the examples of the concept of the “ends of the earth” in
     the ancient Near East, see Wyatt, Space, 113–120.
295. Wilkens, “Remarks,” 225.
296. See Bradshaw, Larsen, and Whitlock, “Moses 1 and the Apocalypse of
     Abraham,” (journal), 194.
297. See, e.g., Reeves, Jewish Lore, 93.
298. Nibley, Teachings of the Pearl of Great Price, 268. In Nibley’s interpreta-
     tion, the relevant discussion among the gibborim referring to the selec-
     tion of Mahaway leads directly to the question raised by Mahijah in the
     Book of Moses during his first visit: “Tell us plainly who thou art, and
     from whence thou comest?” (Moses 6:40). However, I take the discus-
     sion that leads to the selection of Mahaway as the envoy as occurring
     prior to his second visit to Enoch.
299. This is in line with Stuckenbruck’s conclusion that the addressees of the
     message in this passage are the “‘demons’ (= giants),” (Book of Giants,
     86, 200), i.e., the gibborim.
300. Moses 6:46. Cf. Moses 6:5.
301. In Jewish tradition, several types of “heavenly books” are distinguished
     (Baynes, Heavenly Book, 7–8):

       •   The Book of Life, in which the names of the righteous are written.
           In some accounts, there is a corresponding Book of Death in which
           the names of the wicked are recorded. This book is “by far the
           Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                    1227

         most common” type of heavenly book mentioned, and references
         to it are found both in the Old and New Testaments.
     •   The Book of Fate “records what will happen in advance, either to
         an individual or to a larger community.” It appears “only rarely
         in the Hebrew scriptures but much more frequently in the Dead
         Sea Scrolls and other Second Temple literature, and especially in
         Jubilees.”
     •   The Book of Deeds, a “heavenly accounting of people’s works,
         good or evil,” which “regulates entrance into eternal happiness.”
         Like the Book of Fate, this type of heavenly book predominates in
         Isaiah, Daniel, and in the pseudepigrapha.

302. Museum of History, Sanok, Poland. Public domain. https://en.m.wiki
     pedia.org/wiki/File:MHS_Eliasz_i_Enoch_XVII_w_p.jpg (accessed
     May 1, 2021). For more on this painting, see Bradshaw and Larsen,
     Enoch, Noah, and the Tower, fig. M6–2, p. 34.
303. For example, the Zohar teaches that Enoch had a copy of the “book of
     the generations of Adam” from the same heavenly source that revealed
     it to Adam (Zohar 1:37b [ed. Vilna Gaon—aka Elijah ben Solomon
     Zalman], as cited in Reeves and Reed, Sources from Judaism, 87): “They
     brought down to Adam the protoplast (from heaven) an actual book.
     . . . Enoch also had a book and that book was from the (same) place as
     the ‘book of the generations of Adam’ (Genesis 5:1).” Cf. Matt, Zohar,
     Bereshit 1:37b, pp. 237–38. The Testament of Abraham identifies Enoch
     as the heavenly scribe who records the righteousness or wickedness of
     the souls of the dead (Sanders, “Testament of Abraham,” recension B,
     11:3–10, p. 900; Ludlow, Abraham Meets Death, 136–37).
           The book of remembrance mentioned in the Book of Moses appears
     to have been passed down to the righteous descendants of Adam. For
     example, Moses 6:3–5 prefaces its description of the keeping of “a
     book of remembrance . . . in the language of Adam” with a mention of
     the births of Seth and Enos, who called “upon the name of the Lord,”
     and “it was given unto as many as called upon God to write by the
     spirit of inspiration.” This passage recalls a fragmentary text from
     Qumran that has been given the title “The Secret of the Way Things
     Are” (4Q415–18, 1Q26, 4Q423). It likewise preserves a tradition that a
     “book of remembrance” was successively bequeathed to Seth and Enos
     “with a spiritual people” (Wise, Abegg, and Cook, Dead Sea Scrolls,
     4Q417, fragment 1, column I, lines 13–17, p. 484). Though Jewish
     pseudepigrapha, Josephus, and Christian gnostic writings all mention
     Seth in connection with this tradition, it is rarer to find it associated
     with both Seth and Enosh. Thanks to David Snell for pointing out this
     reference (see “New Find”).
304. Baynes, Heavenly Book, 8. This type of heavenly book predominates in
     Isaiah, Daniel, and in the pseudepigrapha.
1228        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

305. Sundermann, “Ein weiteres Fragment,” M 7800/II, fragment L, I recto
     1–9, pp. 495–96, translated in Reeves, Jewish Lore, 109. For additional
     discussion of the mention of two tablets, see Reeves, 64, 78–79, 110n6,
     111, 153nn291–92, 154n306. Cf. 4Q203, frg. 7b, col. ii, l. 1–3, frg. 8,
     l. 1–12, in Parry and Tov et al., DSSR, p. 945. Milik and Black cite a
     fragment of the Middle Persian Kawân (M 101, frg. j, p. 60) and a small
     fragment from Qumran (2Q26) for more detail about the tablets (Books
     of Enoch, 334–335). The first tablet, made of wood, is washed by the
     wicked in order to efface its writing. It “symbolizes the generation of
     the Flood” who will be “submerged by the waters of the Flood. . . . The
     tablet of line 3 seems to be a second or third one, since it is the ‘board’
     of salvation, the ark of Noah and his three sons.”
306. Nibley, Enoch the Prophet, 214. See Martínez, “Book of Giants (4Q203),”
     8:1–11, p. 260–61.
307. See Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 90–91; Reeves, Jewish Lore, 154n304.
308. Wilkens, “Remarks,” 225.
309. See Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 74–76.
310. Reeves acknowledges that 4Q203 “of very fragmentary pieces whose
     precise position in the narrative sequence of BG is impossible to
     determine” (Reeves, Jewish Lore, 124).
311. Martínez, “Book of Giants (4Q203),” 4, 6, p. 260, emphasis mine.
312. Milik and Black, Books of Enoch, 312.
313. Wilkens, “Remarks,” 225.
314. Henning, “Book of the Giants,” Sogdian text E, 66.
315. Nibley, Enoch the Prophet, 216: “a Hypomnemata, or memorial.”
316. Nickelsburg says:

        Abel-Main is the Aramaic form of Abel-Maim . . . (cf. 1 Kings 15:20
        and its parallel in 2 Chronicles 16:4). It is modern Tel Abil, situated
        approximately seven kilometers west-northwest of “the waters of
        Dan,” at the mouth of the valley between the Lebanon range to
        the west and Mount Hermon, here called Senir, one of its biblical
        names (Deuteronomy 3:8–9; cf. Song of Solomon 4:8; Ezekiel 27:5).
        (1 Enoch 1, p. 250, notes 9–10)

        For more on the history of the sacred geography of this region, see
     Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 238–47.
317. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 13:3–5, 8–9, pp. 234, 237. See Nibley, Enoch the
     Prophet, 214.
318. Nibley, “Churches in the Wilderness” (1978), 159.
319. In Stuckenbruck’s view, the group to whom the possibility of
     repentance was held out were the gibborim, to whom the first tablet
     of Enoch was read—see Book of the Giants, 86–87, 200. This proposal
     accords generally with the suggestion of Goff that while the Watchers
     were beyond repentance, the gibborim, the “sons of the Watchers,” were
      Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                         1229

capable of reform (Sons of the Watchers,” 124–127. See also Kósa, “Book
of Giants Tradition,” 173–75.
    According to Kósa, within the Manichaean adaptation of the BG
account, “the Watchers . . . were not angelic beings anymore, but were
[instead] conceived as [rebellious] demons [who had figured in the
Manichaean system in the first major battle prior to the establishment
of the universe (see 147ff.)]. Given the Manichaean notion of two
independent and ontologically radically opposing principles, [this
transformation of identity from Watchers to demons] was an inevitable
step, since the Watchers’ misdeeds did not allow them to be part of the
Realm of Light” (Kósa, “Book of Giants Tradition,” 148 and 148–49n24).
    Kósa explains why the survival of this feature of the BG account in
the Manichaean text is surprising:

  This act of repentance, which was definitely an integral part of
  the BG tradition, and which is perhaps depicted in [MCP], is a
  strange phenomenon if see in the context of Manichaeism. Given
  the extreme ontological dualism of Manichaeism, the motif of
  repenting demons, be they Watchers or giants [gibborim], is
  complete nonsense. It contradicts the essence of Manichaeism.
  Neither can the Light principle, or any representatives thereof, turn
  into the Dark principle, nor can the representatives of the Kingdom
  of Darkness repent and correct their way. In the Manichaean world,
  there is no chance for any representative of the dark principle to
  change its essential nature. Thus, seen in this perspective, the motif
  of kneeling and apparently repenting demons in the [MCP] shows
  the influence of the BG tradition, since it is only the latter one where
  repenting demons might, and emphatically do, occur (175).

    With respect to the term “demon,” Drawnel observed that “early
Christian tradition (2nd century CE) unequivocally identified the
children of the Watchers [i.e., the gibborim] as demons” (Drawnel,
“Mesopotamian Background,” 19n16. See Justin Martyr, “Second
Apology,” 5, p. 190). Reed, Fallen Angels, 163, wrote that Justin invoked
“the Greco-Roman concept of the daimon as an intermediary figure
who is neither as divine as the gods nor as lowly as humans,” but use
of the Greek term in Justin (which is consistent with New Testament
usage), is different from “the mening in Greek culture and religion (god,
one’s daemon or genius, or in Hesiod the souls of men of the golden age,
forming the link between gods and men). The English term “demon”
properly connotes the evil and violent character of the spiritual beings
under consideration. For general readings on demons and demonology
in the ancient world, see Petersen, “Notion of Demon”; Reed, Demons.
Blair, De-Demonising provides a much-needed critique of previous
studies that have sometimes applied evidence from the ancient Near
1230        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

     East in questionable ways, sometimes erroneously concluding that
     “biblical authors had demythologized the Hebrew texts in order to
     ‘cover up’ the presence of some ‘demons’” (Blair, De-Demonising, 216).
320. Wilkens, “Remarks,” 225.
321. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 12:5, p. 234. Cf. the conclusion by Stuckenbruck
     that the Watchers are beyond repentances (Stuckenbruck, Book of
     Giants, p. 93).
322. Parry and Tov, DSSR, 947. Martínez reads the sense of this phrase as
     “Now, then, unfasten your chains [of sin] . . . and pray” (Martínez,
     “Book of Giants (4Q203),” frg. 8, l. 14–15, p. 261). Cf. Milik and Black,
     Books of Enoch, pp. 315, 316, note L. 12: “And now, loosen your bonds
     which tie [you] up [. . .] and begin to pray,” in a less-likely interpretation
     written prior to the discovery of the MCP depiction, Milik and Black
     explain the text as being addressed solely to the Watchers who are seen
     as wearing physical rather that spiritual chains: “The Watchers seem to
     be already chained up by the angels; in order to be able to pray, to lift
     their arms in the gesture of suppliants, they have to have their bonds
     loosened” (p. 316, note L. 14). See also Wise and Cook, Dead Sea Scrolls,
     4Q203, 8:14–15: “But now, loosen the bonds [. . .] and pray.”
          Because Stuckenbruck argues that this passage from this second
     tablet of Enoch occurs in the context of a reading made exclusively to
     the Watchers, who are beyond repentance (vs. the reading of the first
     tablet, which he takes as having been directed toward the gibborim,
     who are capable of repentance), he cannot interpret the “summons to
     pray” as meaning that “the possibility of forgiveness is being left open
     [to the addressees of the second tablet]. . . . Rather, as in the Book of
     Watchers, their praying is a sign of defeat signaling a contrast with the
     ultimate lot of the earth’s victims . . . [whose] cries have been heeded”
     (Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 93). Goff differs with Stuckenbruck’s
     interpretation that the command to pray was an “ironic request,”
     merely highlighting the impossibility for God to save them (“Sons of the
     Watchers,” 124). He highlights the 4Q203, frg. 9 (Parry and Tov, DSSR,
     947) as “remnants of what appears to be a prayer … in which a speaker
     tells God that ‘nothing has defeated you.’ This could be uttered by a
     giant [gibbor] who follows Enoch’s recommendation and acknowledges
     in prayer the power and superiority of God (l. 4; cf. 4Q203 7b i 5)”
     (“Sons of the Watchers,” 124). Though it is true that the second tablet is
     explicitly addressed to the Watchers (Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q203, frg.
     8, l. 5, p. 947), it also explicitly describes the activities of the gibborim in
     association with the wickedness of the Watchers (Parry and Tov, DSSR,
     4Q203, frg. 8, l. 8, p. 947), making it clear that the message of the tablet
     is relevant for both groups.
323. Parry and Tov, DSSR, 947.
324. Wilkens, “Remarks,” 225.
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                       1231

325. Henning, “Book of the Giants,” Sogdian text E, p. 66.
326. See Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q530, fragment 7, column ii, line 3: “how
     long the giants [i.e., gibborim] have to live.” Translated more literally by
     Reeves, Jewish Lore, 103, as “span of the giants” and by Stuckenbruck,
     Book of Giants, 126, as “life-span of the giants.” Alternatively, this
     phrase is translated by Martínez as “the evidence of the Giants” (“Book
     of Giants (4Q530),” p. 261).
327. Reeves, Jewish Lore, 103. Reeves appeals to Etheridge, Onkelos, Genesis
     6:3, p. 47, which uses the same noun translated as “span” in the context
     of a probationary period for the gibborim: “A span of 120 years I will
     grant them (to see) if they repent.”
328. Widengren, Ascension, 38n2.
329. Widengren, Ascension, 38n2. The idea continues today in what has
     come to be called the Yamim Noraim (“Days of Awe”) or Aseret Yemei
     Teshuvah (“Ten Days of Repentance/Return”). The tradition draws on
     Isaiah 55:6, which says, “Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call
     ye upon his name while he is near.” Maimonides formulated the most
     cited passages associated with this period. He wrote:

        Even though repentance and crying out to God are always timely,
        during the ten days from Rosh Hashanah to Yom Kippur it is
        exceedingly appropriate, and accepted immediately [on high].
        (Touger, Rambam’s Mishneh Torah, Laws of Teshuvah, 2:6)

         According to Rich:

        One of the ongoing themes of the Days of Awe is the concept that
        God has “books” that he writes our names in, writing down who
        will live and who will die, who will have a good life and who will
        have a bad life, for the next year. These books are written in on Rosh
        Hashana, but our actions during the Days of Awe can alter G[o]d’s
        decree. The actions that change the decree are “teshuvah, tefilah,
        and tzedakah,” repentance, prayer, good deeds (usually, charity).
        These “books” are sealed on Yom Kippur. This concept of writing
        in books is the source of the common greeting during this time:
        “May you be inscribed and sealed for a good year.” (“Days of Awe”)

330. Draper, Brown, and Rhodes, Commentary, 103.
331. Nibley, “Churches in the Wilderness” (1978), 160.
332. Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 4Q203, frg. 8 ll. 6–9, p. 90. Cf. Milik and
     Black, Books of Enoch, 315: “Let it be known to you that [you] n[ot . . .]
     and your works and those of your wives [. . .] themselves [and their]
     children and the wives of [their children . . .] by your prostitution on the
     earth”; Martínez, “Book of Giants (4Q203),” frg. 8 ll. 6–9, p. 260: “Know
     that [. . .] not your deeds and those of your wives [. . .] they and their
1232        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

     sons and the wives of [their sons . . .] for your prostitution in the land.”
     Cf. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 10:9, p. 215.
333. See Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q403, 8:6–9, p. 945. Cf. Reeves, Jewish Lore,
     114n9. Compare Kee, “Testaments,” Dan 5:6, p. 809: “I read in the Book
     of Enoch the Righteous . . . that all the spirits of sexual promiscuity
     . . . cause [the sons of Levi] to commit sin before the Lord”; Kee, Simeon
     5:4, p. 786: “For I have seen in a copy of the book of Enoch that your sons
     will be ruined by promiscuity”; Kee, Naphtali 4:1, p. 812: “I have read
     in the writing of holy Enoch that you will stray from the Lord, living
     in accord with every wickedness of the gentiles and committing every
     lawlessness of Sodom”; Kee, Benjamin 9:1, p. 827: “From the words of
     Enoch the Righteous I tell you that you will be sexually promiscuous
     like the promiscuity of the Sodomites.”
           In al-Kisa’i’s version of the Islamic tales of the prophets, we are
     given further detail on the people’s wickedness:

        When [Enoch] was forty years old, God made him a messenger to
        the sons of Cain, who were giants on the earth and so preoccupied
        with frivolity, singing and playing musical instruments that none
        of them was on guard. They would gather about a woman and
        fornicate with her, and the devils would make their action seem
        good to them. They fornicated with others, daughters, and sisters,
        and mingled together. (Tales, 88; cf. Reeves and Reed, Sources from
        Judaism, 137–38)

334. Wood engraving from a Bible illustration of Revelation 14:6–7, ca. 1885.
     Image licensed from Alamy, ID: AJ8AKO or D965XN.
335. Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q530, fragment 7, column II, lines 3–5, p. 951.
336. Wilkens, “Remarks,” 216: “The fire is rising before the door [that lets
     the sun pass through] has opened. That being so, then whence does the
     fire emerge as we are told in the very first sentence? If we assume that
     the cosmology underlying the Manichaean Book of Giants is essentially
     Enochic [see Nickelsburg and VanderKam, 1 Enoch 2, 72:2–3, 7, p. 416],
     then we may assume that the flames come forth from one of the window
     openings located to the left and to the right of each gate.”
337. Wilkens, “Remarks” 215, 216: “The text probably wants to stress that
     the sun is revolving without any other cosmic force interfering. . . .
     Contrarily, in the Ethiopic Book of Enoch there is mention that the
     chariots of the sun and the moon are both driven by the wind. It is
     possible that in Mani’s work the force of the wind was deliberately
     minimized with regard to the ‘palace of the sun’ because of the high
     status the luminary is accorded in Manichaean doctrine. It is the
     residence of several divinities” but also a divinity in itself.
338. See Wilkens, “Remarks,” 219.
339. See Wilkens, “Remarks,” 217–20.
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                      1233

340. The sense is perhaps “too much like some of them”—i.e., in resembling
     their wickedness. Wilkens says: “Does the phrase ‘like some of them’
     allude to a distinction between the [gibborim]? We have evidence from
     other fragments that this seemingly was the case. Stuckenbruck has
     detected evidence for factions among the [gibborim] in two fragments
     from Qumran [Book of Giants, 107]” (Wilken, “Remarks,” 224).
341. Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q530, fragment 7, column II, lines 3–5, p. 951.
     The Paradise in the eastward location is designated in some conceptions
     as the “Paradise of Justice,” containing the Tree of Knowledge,
     presumably by way of contrast to the “Mountain of God” to the north,
     which contains the Tree of Life.
342. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, p. 290. See Bradshaw and Larsen, Enoch, Noah,
     and the Tower, endnote M6–20, p. 97.
343. For an overview and examples of the Egyptian concept of the horizon,
     see Wyatt, Space, 184–85, 187–92.
344. Second Enoch locates paradise “between the corruptible [earth] and
     the incorruptible [heaven]” (Andersen, “2 (Slavonic Apocalypse of)
     Enoch,” 8:5, pp. 116 and 116nl).
345. Wyatt discusses the “two seemingly opposed ideas . . . of the end of
     the world, often represented by the notion of a ‘cosmic ocean,’ and . . .
     the center of the world” in the ancient Near East (Space, 183–84). See
     Wyatt, 77–78, 83–84, 184–207 for examples from the ancient Near East
     of traversals of cosmic boundaries in heavenly ascent and of symbolic
     boundaries as part of ritual ascent in the temple.
          Specifically with respect to Manichaean thought, Severus of Antioch
     (fl. 512–18), similar to other anti-Manichaean sources, reported:

        And they [i.e., the Manichaeans] say: That which is Good, also
        named Light and the Tree of Life, possess those regions which lie to
        the east, west, and north; for those (regions) which lie to the south
        and to the meridian belong to the Tree of Death, which they call
        Hyle [i.e., Matter], being very wicked and uncreated. (As cited in
        Bennett, Iuxta unum, 69)

        However, Bennett clarifies that the interpretation of the cardinal
     direction might best be understood in light of an eastern rather than a
     western frame of reference:

        There are . . . some remarkable parallels for this teaching [about
        the primordial state] in both the Mandaean and Zoroastrian
        cosmogonies, suggesting that this teaching may have been
        formulated for an eastern audience who had the background beliefs
        necessary to comprehend and value it. The interpretation of the four
        cardinal directions as lines inscribed on a vertical plane (so that
        north and south are identified with above and below respectively)
1234        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

        is found in the Mandaean cosmogony. Several other features
        can be paralleled in Middle Persian accounts of the Zoroastrian
        cosmogony. (76–77)

346. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 33:2, p. 329.
347. Nickelsburg notes:

        Whatever the origin of the author’s knowledge of these animals,
        they are envisioned primarily in mythic terms. Evidence for such
        a mythic tradition appears at a number of points in the cartology
        of the ancient world. In the Babylonian Mappa Mundi of the fifth
        century BCE, the sixth island that lies east of the Bitter River is
        said to be the place where “a horned bull dwells and attacks the
        newcomer.” Much later maps from the Common Era depict sea
        monsters and other beasts lurking in the farthest recesses of land
        and sea. Doubtless these reflect a tradition much older than the
        charts on which they are found. (1 Enoch 1, 329–30n1)

348. See Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 33:1, p. 329.
349. Machiela, Dead Sea Genesis Apocryphon, 2:23, p. 37: “And [Methusaleh]
     went through the length of the land of Parvain, and there he found the
     end of [the] ea[rth.”
350. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 106:7, p. 536.
351. Goff, “Where’s Enoch?,” 488. Cf. Oh, “Circular World Maps,” 31, 32:
     “Mt. Yupa . . . is located in the East Sea, a great distance away or farthest
     from the center. . . . Given that pine trees are one of the ten traditional
     symbols of longevity, the trees in the [north, east, and west] of the
     [circular world maps] can be regarded as deeply related to [the] ‘Taoist
     idea of immortality.’”
         In medieval times, European biblical drama sometimes contained
     portrayals of Elijah and Enoch that had them situated in the Garden
     of Eden:

        As Christ leads the redeemed souls out of Hell . . . a few plays include
        the scene of their arrival in Earthly Paradise (usually escorted by
        Michael) where they meet Elijah and Enoch, who have not yet died
        and will return to earth to fight against Antichrist. (Muir, Biblical
        Drama, 139)

352. Scholars do not agree as to whether it is Mahaway’s first or second
     journey (See Wilkens, “Remarks,” 219–22, 224–25).
353. Wilkens, “Remarks,” 222.
354. For a survey of the examples of the concept of the “ends of the earth” in
     the ancient Near East, see Wyatt, Space, 113–20.
355. Wilkens, “Remarks,” 225.
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                   1235

356. Goff, “Where’s Enoch?,” 488: “Or as it says in 1 Enoch 17:6, ‘where
     no human walks’” (emphasis Goff’s). Cf. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 17:7,
     p. 276: “where no flesh walks.” See also Nickelsburg, 19:3, p. 276: “I,
     Enoch, alone saw the visions, the extremities of all things. And no one
     among humans has seen as I saw.”
357. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Flammarion.jpg (accessed May 25,
     2020). Public domain. Published in Camille Flammarion, L’Atmosphère:
     Météorologie Populaire (Paris: Librairie Hachette, 1888), 163, https://
     gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k408619m/f168.image.
358. Goff, “Where’s Enoch?,” 486–88.
359. Goff, “Where’s Enoch?,” 488.
360. Cirillo, “Joseph Smith,” 105. Looking for additional ideas besides the
     Book of Giants for what he takes to be a necessary manuscript source
     for ancient parallels to Joseph Smith’s Enoch, Cirillo argues: “This
     journey . . . is not unique to the [Book of Giants], it is also found (and
     likely based on) the journey of Methuselah in 1 Enoch [see The Birth
     of Noah, in Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 106:1–107:3, pp. 536–37]. . . . This
     format, for one person journeying to Enoch to question him, is evident
     once more in 1 Enoch [see The Apocalypse of Noah, in Nickelsburg and
     VanderKam, 1 Enoch 2, 65:1–68:1, pp. 273–74]” (105–6). However, a
     careful reading of the 1 Enoch accounts will show that evidence for a
     resemblance to the Book of Moses is strained. Especially significant is
     the fact that, unlike the Book of Giants, there is no mention in 1 Enoch
     of Mahijah or Mahujah.
361. Detail of Gulácsi, Mani’s Pictures, 470. This demon is depicted apart
     from the others, on a high mountain cliff, perhaps recalling the second
     journey of Mahaway to meet Enoch. The only comment I have found on
     this scene is from Gulácsi, 489:

        A third demon inhabits a mountaintop. This demon is shown
        kneeling atop the gold highland of a mountain, the sides of which
        are defined similarly to the sides of Mount Sumeru.

362. See Faulring, Jackson, and Matthews, Original Manuscripts, p. 15 of
     OT1, p. 103.
363. Non–Latter-day Saint scholar Salvatore Cirillo agrees with this reading
     (see “Joseph Smith,” 103).
           One problem with the OT1 with this reading is that afterward,
     Enoch went up to meet God alone (“I turned and went up on the mount;
     . . . I stood upon the mount” [Moses 7:3]). The only way to reconcile the
     absence of Mahujah in subsequent events would be if he did not follow
     Enoch to the mount as he had been commanded to do in Moses 7:2
     (taking the “Turn ye” to be plural).
           On the other hand, in a different reading, David Calabro points
     out that the phrase in Moses 7:2 “As I was journeying . . . and I cried”
1236        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

     “could be an example of the use of ‘and’ to introduce a main clause
     after a circumstantial clause, which is a Hebraism that is frequently
     found in the earliest Book of Mormon text” (email message to author,
     January 24, 2018). In this case, the “ye” in “Turn ye” would have to be
     interpreted as singular rather than plural.
364. See Faulring, Jackson, and Matthews, Original Manuscripts, p. 15 of
     Old Testament Manuscript 1, Plate 5. Cf. the transcription on p. 103.
365. Brown, Testimony of Luke, 1020. See Hebrews 9:12–15.
366. 366 Draper, Brown, and Rhodes, Commentary, 113n4, citing
     Brueggemann, “Costly Loss of Lament,” 106–7. See also Bradshaw and
     Larsen, Enoch, Noah, and the Tower, p. 128, note 7:2-e.
367. See Moses 7:45, 48, 50, 54, 58. Cf. the cry of Adam in Moses 6:64.
368. E.g., Exodus 22:22–27.
369. E.g., Psalm 107:4–22; Alma 33:4–11.
370. See, e.g., Zechariah 1:3; and Malachi 3:7. For additional discussion, see
     Bradshaw, God’s Image 1, 5:4-b, p. 357.
371. For an analysis of the likelihood of error in transcriptions of “Mahijah”
     and “Mahujah” in the earliest manuscripts of Moses 6–7, see Bradshaw,
     Bowen, and Dahle, “Textual Criticism,” 122–31.
372. See Genesis 17:5, 15; 32:28. On the tests and changes of name for
     Abram/Abraham and Sarai/Sarah, see, e.g., Clark, Blessings, 166–67.
     On the test and change of name for Jacob/Israel, see Hayward, Israel.
373. Wilkens, “Remarks,” 227.
374. Wilkens, “Remarks,” 226.
375. Wilkens, “Remarks,” Mainz 317 fragment, p. 228.
376. “‘Some of them’ in the fragment from BG obviously refers to the
     [gibborim]. . . . Does the phrase ‘like some of them’ allude to a distinction
     between the [gibborim]? We have evidence from other fragments that
     this seemingly was the case. Stuckenbruck has detected evidence
     for factions among the [gibborim] in two fragments from Qumran”
     (Wilkens, 224; see Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 107–8).
377. See Matthew 19:16–30; Mark 10:17–31; Luke 18:18–30.
378. The bracketed phrase substitutes for Reeves’ version the translation of
     Wilkens, “Remarks,” 227. Wilkens reads the entire phrase as “the great
     angel has slain that messenger whom they had,” differing with Reeves
     and Sundermann by reading “great angel” as the agent of the death of
     Mahaway rather than as a description of Mahaway.
379. Translation in Reeves, Jewish Lore, p. 123 of Sundermann, Mittel-
     persische, M5900, lines 1574–77, p. 78:

        Erschlagen, erschlagen hat
        der große Engel (?) jenen
        Boten, den (sie) hatten (?).
        Getötet wurden die Fleischverschlingenden.
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                      1237

380. See Jensen, Woodford, and Harper, Manuscript Revelation Books,
     facsimile ed., 48v, February 27, 1833, 508–9. For more on this revelation,
     see Williams, Life, 234–44; and Bradshaw and Larsen, Enoch, Noah,
     and the Tower, “The Song of Enoch,” 449–57.
381. If the name Mahujah relates to the idea of questioning (as proposed in
     Nibley, “Churches in the Wilderness” [1978], 157), it would provide a
     neat counterpart to the name of the mount Simeon (Hebrew Shim’on =
     “he has heard”), where Enoch was commanded to go in order to receive
     his answers. Note al-Tha’labi’s account of Adam and Eve being rejoined
     after their separation when “they recognized each other by questioning
     on a day of questioning. So the place was named ‘Arafat (= questions)
     and the day, ‘Irfah” (Lives, 291).
382. See also, e.g., Deuteronomy 6:4.
383. Moses 6:37; cf. Moses 6:38; 7:17.
384. Nibley, Teachings of the Pearl of Great Price, 22, p. 281.
385. jPhotograph DSC05265, 25 September 2012. © Jeffrey M. Bradshaw.
386. The event occurred during his near-fatal illness in Iowa. His journal
     records the following:

        My spirit seems to have left the world and introduced into that of
        Kolob. I heard a voice calling me by name, saying: “He is worthy,
        he is worthy, take away his filthy garments.” My clothes were then
        taken off piece by piece and a voice said: “Let him be clothed, let
        him be clothed.” Immediately, I found a celestial body gradually
        growing upon me until at length I found myself crowned with all
        its glory and power. The ecstasy of joy I now experienced no man
        can tell, pen cannot describe it. (Beecher, “Iowa,” 269; spelling and
        punctuation modernized)

387. See Jensen, Woodford, and Harper, Manuscript Revelation Books,
     facsimile ed., 48v, February 27, 1833, 508–9, as modernized in Williams,
     Life, table 1, p. 238, with my own slight alterations in punctuation.
388. Williams, Life, 243. See also Bradshaw and Larsen, Enoch, Noah, and
     the Tower, p. 128, note 7:2-e.
389. Illustration from the 1728 Figures de la Bible; illustrated by Gerard
     Hoet (1648–1733) and others, and published by P. de Hondt in
     The Hague; image courtesy Bizzell Bible Collection, University of
     Oklahoma Libraries. Public Domain. https://commons.wikimedia.
     org/wiki/File:Figures_God_took_Enoch.jpg (accessed June 7, 2021).
     The version used in this chapter is licensed by Getty Images, https://
     www.gettyimages.com/detail/illustration/god-took-enoch-genesis-5-
     royalty-free-illustration/483654474 (accessed June 7, 2021).
390. Enoch’s “similarity to, and perhaps derivation from, the [Mesopota-
     mian] figure of Enmeduranki is widely accepted” (Wyatt, Space, 101;
     see also Orlov, Enoch-Metatron Tradition, 23–29; VanderKam, Enoch,
1238        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

     6–14; Annus, “On the Origin of Watchers”; Drawnel, “Mesopotamian
     Background”; Day, “Enochs of Genesis 4 and 5”). For an excerpt with
     commentary of a Mesopotamian account of the ascent of Enmeduranki,
     see Wyatt, Space, 195–96.
391. Wilkens, “Remarks,” 224, 225.
392. Mainz 317 fragment, cited in Wilkens, “Remarks,” 224.
393. Wilkens, “Remarks,” 222.
394. Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q531, fragment 14, line 4, p. 957.
395. Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 4Q531, p. 155.
396. See Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 166–67.
397. “It is unclear whether the initial word gbr is to be understood as a verbal
     (‘he strengthened, prevailed’) or nominative (‘man,’ [‘gibbor’] form)”
     (Reeves, Jewish Lore, 118).
398. Cf. Morano, “Some New Sogdian Fragments,” 188, where the meaning
     of two lines in a new Sogdian fragment is conjectured (“red . . . great
     ocean” [So10701a [T I D] + So20193b, /R/5/ and /R/6/], p. 189): “The
     ocean appears to be red, possibly because of blood.”
399. On the number of two hundred demons, see Kósa, “Book of Giants
     Tradition,” 167.
400. The bracketed phrase substitutes for Reeves’ version the translation of
     Wilkens, “Remarks,” 227. Wilkens reads the entire phrase as “the great
     angel has slain that messenger whom they had,” differing with Reeves
     and Sundermann by reading “great angel” as the agent of the death of
     Mahaway rather than seeing it as a description of Mahaway.
401. Reeves, Jewish Lore, 118; emphasis in the original. Cf. Alma 30:17, where
     Korihor teaches that “every man conquered according to his strength;
     and whatsoever a man did was no crime.”
402. Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q531, fragment 7, lines 5–6, p. 955.
403. “Whereas none of the Qumran materials contain anything which
     actually narrates a battle . . . against heavenly angelic forces . . . , some of
     the Manichaean fragments preserve this motif. . . . The absence of such
     material among the Qumran fragments does not necessarily mean that
     it did not exist, but it is possible that the relative abundance of it among
     the Manichaean sources reflects a later interest which took expression
     in expansions of the tradition” (Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 19n82).
404. Henning, “Book of the Giants,” text G, p. 69.
405. Henning, 54; Kósa, “Book of Giants Tradition,” 155–57. See also
     Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 10:1–15, pp. 215–28: “Sariel, Raphael, Gabriel,
     and Michael.”
406. Kósa, “Book of Giants Tradition,” 163.
407. From Kósa, “Book of Giants Tradition,” fig. 2a, p. 183.
408. Kósa, “Book of Giants Tradition,” 162–63, 168–69.
409. Kósa, “Book of Giants Tradition,” 169. Kósa bases his speculation about
     the possibility that the divine figure behind the four archangels is
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                     1239

     Enoch on Henning 1943, text A, frg. i, p. 61 [and 62n4], which reads:
     “And the angels veiled (or covered, or: protected, or: moved out of sight)
     Enoch” (see Kósa, “Book of Giants Tradition,” 169n98).
410. Henning, “Book of the Giants,” text G, p. 69; text A, fragment I, p. 61.
411. Henning, text Q, p. 72.
412. Henning, text A, fragment I, p. 61. Compare this text from the
     Mandaean Ginza (Migne, “Livre d’Adam,” 21, p. 170), speaking of
     Enoch and those with him: “By fleeing and hiding the people on high
     have ascended higher than us. We have never known them. All the
     same, there they are, clothed with glory and splendors. . . . And now
     they are sheltered from our blows.”
413. Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 4Q531, 17:8, p. 164.
414. Martínez, “Book of Giants (4Q531),” 22:8, p. 262; emphasis added.
415. Milik and Black, Books of Enoch, 308; emphasis added.
416. Moses 7:13; emphasis added.
417. After describing how the category of “wildness” applied equally
     well to the “wild man” and “wild animal” in the mind of the ancient
     military man or hunter, Doak writes: “I conflate these potentially
     distinct categories of the ‘elite adversary’ and the ‘elite animal’ in
     order to highlight the correspondence between elite military victory
     against a prestige animal (lion) and the defeat of an Egyptian giant in
     1 Chronicles 11:22–23” (“Giant in a Thousand Years,” 24). On p. 25, he
     goes on to argue from another example by comparing 2 Samuel 23:20–
     23; 1 Chronicles 11:22–23; and 2 Chronicles 20:6.
         Julian Reade similarly writes:

        The close relationship of the two royal activities—killing animals
        which were dangerous like lions or merely wild, and killing people
        who were dangerous enemies or merely foreign—is implicit in
        several inscriptions of Assyrian kings, between the eleventh and
        ninth centuries. (“Assyrian Royal Hunt,” 56)

         Reade provides several examples of these activities being closely
     associated in art and inscriptions. One inscription from Tiglath-Pileser
     I (1115–1076 BCE),

        after giving extensive details of forty-two lands and rulers that
        the king has conquered, immediately proceeds to describe four
        extraordinarily strong, wild, virile bulls he has shot in the desert
        . . . in just the same way as he has brought enemy booty home;
        there were also ten elephants killed and four captured, and 120
        lions killed on foot and 800 lions killed from his chariot. (Reade,
        “Assyrian Royal Hunt,” 56)
1240       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

418. Daniel 6:22; “mouth” = Aramaic pum. Cf. Henze, “Additions to
     Daniel,” 31–40, pp. 138–39; Abegg, Flint, and Ulrich, Dead Sea Scrolls
     Bible, 494; Pietersma and Wright, Septuagint, 1011 (Greek stoma [OG,
     Theodotion]). Note the parallel in Daniel 6:17, when the king shut and
     sealed “the mouth [Aramaic pum] of the den” with a stone and his
     signet (emphasis added).
         John Collins (see Daniel, 267, 271) finds metaphorical parallels in
     Psalms 57:5 (“I lie in the midst of lions”); 22:14–29; 91:13; 1QH 5:5–
     7, and in a Babylonian poem: “It was Marduk who put a muzzle on
     the mouth of the lion that was devouring me” (Hallo and Younger,
     Context, Poem of the Righteous Sufferer (1.153), 1:491. Cf. Lambert,
     Babylonian Wisdom, 56). According to Lambert, “The first attestation
     the [Babylonian] poem receives is in the library of Ashurbanipal” (26).
         Louis Hartman and Alexander Di Lella caution as follows regarding
     the historical setting of this story:

       Whereas the keeping of lions in ancient Mesopotamia is well
       attested in the inscriptions and stone reliefs of the Assyrian kings,
       who used to let the lions out of their cage to hunt them down, there
       is no ancient evidence for the keeping of lions in underground
       pits, apart from the present story and perhaps its variant [Bel and
       the Dragon]. Perhaps one might compare, for a later period, the
       hypogeum of the Roman Colosseum, where animals were kept
       before being brought up to the arena. (Book of Daniel, 199)

         A temporary holding area for lions is also attested in an 1800 BCE
     letter from a senior official to a king of Mari in Old Babylon (Reade,
     “Assyrian Royal Hunt,” 54–55).
419. For the “power of language,” see Moses 7:13. For the “opening of the
     mouth,” see Bradshaw, Enoch and the Gathering of Zion.
420. Modified from the original illustration to show the Tree of Life at
     the very top of the mountain of the Lord. On the rationale for this
     modification, see Bradshaw, “Tree of Knowledge.” Original drawings
     published in Parry, “Garden,” 134–35. Used here courtesy of the Neal
     A. Maxwell Institute for Religious Scholarship. A similar visual concept
     was published earlier in Holzapfel and Seely, My Father’s House, 17–19.
     The concept and visualization was reused without attribution in Price,
     Rose Guide to the Temple, 7–9.
421. Goff, “Sons of the Watchers,” 226.
422. Wilkens, “Remarks,” 225.
423. Wilkens, 225. See Henning, “Book of the Giants,” Text E, p. 66 for the
     full citation.
424. Nibley, “Hierocentric,” 104. See Burrows, “Some Cosmological
     Patterns,” 46. Burrows further distinguishes “three cosmological pat-
     terns corresponding to three ways of imagining the relation between
           Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                   1241

     heaven and earth. The first pattern is formed when the interest is at the
     center, on earth; the second when it is at the periphery, in heaven; the
     third may be considered a synthesis. . . . One might almost formulate
     a law that in the ancient East contemporary cosmological doctrine is
     registered in the structure and theory of the temples” (Burrows, “Some
     Cosmological Patterns,” 45).
425. For an impressive collection of maps with detailed explanations from
     antiquity through the Renaissance, see http://www.myoldmaps.com
     (accessed May 27, 2021). For an excellent overview of later, medieval
     visual representations of the cosmos, see E. Edson et al., Cosmos.
426. Église Notre-Dame de K’rni (Nakhidjewan), vers 1670-1680. Papier
     occidental, 89 f., 26 × 18,5 cm Acquis en 1847. Bibliothèque Nationale
     de France, Manuscrits orientaux, arménien 149, f. 5 r°-5. See A.
     Vernay-Nouri, Livres, 44, https://books.openedition.org/editionsbnf/
     docannexe/image/1153/img-5.jpg [accessed May 26, 2021]).
427. Nibley, “Hierocentric,” 110. For a survey of beliefs in the ancient Near
     East regarding the cosmic mountain at the center of the world, see
     Wyatt, Space, 147–157.
428. See, e.g., Bradshaw, “Tree of Knowledge,” 50–52; Parry, “Garden”;
     Lundquist, “Reality”; Parry et al., “Temple in Heaven”; Stordalen,
     Echoes, 112-116, 308-309; Alexander, From Eden, 20-23; Beale, Temple,
     66–80; Wenham, “Sanctuary Symbolism”; Holzapfel and Seely, Father’s
     House, 17–19; Morrow, “Creation”; Seely et al., “Crown of Creation.”
429. See, e.g., Parry, “Garden,” 134–35; Holzapfel and Seely, My Father’s
     House, 17–19; Price, Rose Guide to the Temple, 7–9.
430. For more on the correspondence between the symbolism of the Tree
     of Knowledge and the temple veil, see Bradshaw, “Tree of Knowledge.”
431. In most depictions of Jewish temple architecture, the menorah is
     shown as being outside the veil—in contrast to the Tree of Life, which
     is at the holiest place in the Garden of Eden. However, Margaret Barker
     cites evidence that, in the first temple, a Tree of Life was symbolized
     within the Holy of Holies (e.g., Barker, Hidden, 6–7; Barker, Christmas,
     85–86, 140; Bradshaw, God’s Image 1, 366–367). Barker concludes that
     the Menorah (or perhaps a second, different, representation in arboreal
     form?) was both removed from the temple and diminished in stature in
     later Jewish literature as the result of a “very ancient feud” concerning
     its significance (Barker, Older, 221; see 221–232). Mandaean scripture
     describes a Tree of Life within the heavenly sanctuary as follows: “They
     . . . lifted the great veil of safety upward before him, introduced him,
     and showed him that Vine,” meaning the Tree of Life (Lidzbarski,
     Ginza, GL 1:1, p. 429:3–20; cf. Drower, Prayerbook, 49, pp. 45–46).
432. Image copyright Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana. From a 12th-century
     illuminated version of the Homilies of James of Kokkinobaphos from
     Byzantium (Vat. gr. 1162, fol. 35v.). Published in Eastmond, Narratives,
1242        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

     plate 14. http://digi.vatlib.it/view/MSS_Vat.gr.1162 (accessed January
     31, 2017). No known copyright restrictions. This work may be in the
     public domain in the United States.
         For a comparison of this painting to rabbinic conceptions of
     the paradisiacal state of the Israelites as well as to similar Christian
     iconography comparing disciples of Jesus to the new Israel, see Ri,
     Commentaire de la Caverne, 254–55; Bradshaw and Bowen, “By the
     Blood Ye Are Sanctified,” 105–7.
433. See Parry, “Garden,” 135.
434. Parry, “Garden,” 135.
435. Bartholomew of Bologna, the author of the work, was a Dominican
     missionary to Armenia who was made bishop in Maragha and Nachidiewan
     (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bartholomew_of_Bologna_(mis
     sionary) ).
436. About the symbolic geography of the sacred mountain and of the
     mountain where the Watchers made their oath, and the various place
     names associated with them, see Ri, Commentaire de la Caverne,
     252. For wordplay on the name of Mount Hermon in 1 Enoch 6:6, see
     Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 177–178, 238–247.
437. See, e.g., Bradshaw, God’s Image 1, 143.
438. Eastmond, Narratives, 22.
439. Nes, Uncreated Light, 90.
440. Eastmond, Narratives, 22.
441. Anderson et al., Synopsis, 30(5):3, p. 34E; cf. Barker, Christmas, 119;
     Nes, Uncreated Light, 90.
442. For a Jewish account of Seth’s cave, containing a “vault of gold” that
     held a book of knowledge and “precious spices,” see Savedow, Rezial,
     4. For a corresponding Christian account, see Ri, Commentaire de la
     Caverne, 178–179.
443. See, e.g., Barker, Christmas, 120, 138–139; Ri, Commentaire de la
     Caverne, 252.
444. Ri, Commentaire de la Caverne, 179.
445. Moses 5:41.
446. Sebastian Brock in Ephrem the Syrian, Paradise, p. 189 n. 1:11.
447. Cf. Moses 7:17.
448. Ephrem the Syrian, Paradise, 1:11, pp. 81–82. See Malan, Adam and
     Eve, 3:4, p, 147; Nibley, Enoch, 178–193; Bradshaw, God’s Image 1, 5:41b,
     388; Bradshaw and Larsen, God’s Image 2, 203; Ri, Commentaire de
     la Caverne, 225–26. Ri observes: “The fall of humanity at the time of
     Jared is a very ancient tradition that is found in the books of Enoch
     and Jubilees” (Ri, Commentaire de la Caverne., 255, my translation).
     See, e.g., Wintermute, “Jubilees,” 4:15, p. 62; Kugel, “Jubilees,” 4:15, p.
     302; Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 6:6, p. 174; 106:13, p. 536; Machiela, Dead
           Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                       1243

     Sea Genesis Apocryphon, 3:3–4, pp. 37–38; Parry et al., DSSR (2013),
     1QapGen, 3:3–4, p. 517.
449. For an account of Jared’s descent, see, e.g., Budge, Cave, 84–86.
450. Hess, Studies, 69–70. On the possible connection of Jared to the place
     names of Arad, Eridu, etc. and related etymological and interpretive
     issues, see Westermann, Genesis 1-11, 4:18, p. 328; 5:15–17, p. 357;
     Wenham, Genesis 1-15, 111–112; Cassuto, Adam to Noah, 229–232;
451. Genesis 6:4; Numbers 13:33, possibly to be equated with the “giants” in
     Moses 7:15; 8:18. In contrast to some others (van Wolde, “Sons of God,”
     65–67), Hamilton, Genesis 1–17, 269–270 sees this group “as being
     distinct from the mighty men” (i.e., gibborim).
452. Dorofeeva-Lichtmann, “‘Inversed Cosmographs’ in Late East Asian
     Cartography and the Atlas Production,” 159.
453. Dorofeeva-Lichtmann writes that the Korean circular maps “have
     obvious typological similarity with such classical examples of
     mappaemundi as the Babylonia Disc (ca. 7th century BC) … and the
     medieval T–O mappaemundi centered on Jerusalem and oriented to
     the East, the location of Paradise. These maps, however, had long been
     out of circulation when the circular world maps became so popular in
     Korea” (Dorofeeva-Lichtmann, “Inverted Cosmographs,” 159).
454. Lewis, Construction, 285.
455. For cogent summaries of the mythology of the mountain paradise of
     K’un-lun, see Birrell, Mythology, 183–185; Loewe, Ways, 110–112. For
     traditions surrounding the primeval couple, Fu Xi and Nü Gua, whose
     stories are intertwined with K’un-lun, the Creation, and other temple
     themes, see Bradshaw, God’s Image 1, 654–657.
         With respect to the placement of K’un-lun on the map, Major,
     Heaven, 155 explains how physical and mythological geography
     became inextricably intertwined in Chinese thought:

       K’un-lun has two closely related aspects: First, it is the world-
       mountain or axis mundi, pillar that at once separates and connects
       heaven and earth. As such it is the highest of mountains, the
       terrestrial plane’s closest approach, and stepping-stone, to the
       celestial vault. . . . Second, K’un-lun is a paradise, a magical and
       beautiful land that is the home and kingdom of Xiwangmu, the
       Queen Mother of the West.
            One problem that immediately arises in dealing with these
       two aspects of K’un-lun is that the K’un-lun Mountains are, and
       from early times have been known to be, an entirely real and
       terrestrial mountain range on China’s northwestern frontier [“on
       the borderland of Xinjiang province and Tibet” (Allan, Turtle, 99)].
       . . . In fact it is not unusual for real but distant places to take on
       paradisiacal qualities; think of Serendip, or Shambala.
1244       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

          Thus in early China the name K’un-lun attached to a geogra-
       phical mountain and a mythical one, and the two were soon
       hopelessly conflated.

456. Moses 3:10.
457. https://www.bl.uk/collection-items/cheonhado-world-map (accessed
     April 14, 2020). British Library, Shelfmark: Maps C.27.f.14. Public
     Domain. The description on the website reads:

       This world map is from an atlas produced in Korea in around 1800.
       It is one of a group of maps known as “Cheonhado,”, meaning
       “Map of all under heaven.” The map shows a large inner continent
       surrounded by sea. This represents China and its surrounding
       lands. Beijing, the Yellow River and Great Wall of China are visible,
       with the sacred Mount Mēru at its center. The rest of the world
       appears as outer islands, with the Trees of Sun and Moon beyond.

         The concentric circle structure of the map and many of the
     mythological names come from the Chinese Shan Hai Jing (The Classic
     of Mountain and Seas), a text that was probably compiled from older
     texts in the first or second century BCE. For detailed background on
     these and similar maps, see Oh, “Circular World Maps.” Among other
     things, Oh establishes the fact that even though such maps are round,
     they do not depart from the traditional “square earth-round heaven”
     principle. The circular form of the map represents the round shape of
     heaven.
         For a general introduction to cartography and the cosmic ocean in
     the ancient Near East, see Wyatt, Space, 80–88, 113.
458. Among these mythical locations are the mountains and trees typically
     shown as sacred trees and mountains at the location of the rising and
     setting of the sun and moon (east and west) and at the north (Oh,
     “Circular World Maps,” 31, 32):

       To the east, where the sun and moon rise, Mt. Yupa and Busang tree
       are depicted. Mt. Bang and the Bangyeoksong pine tree are also
       depicted to the west, where the sun and moon met. . . . It is presumed
       that Mt. Yupa was chosen [from among the many mountains where
       the sun and moon were supposed to rise] because it is located in
       the East Sea, a great distance away or farthest from the center. . . .
            It would be . . . appropriate to believe that the maps tried to
       show where the sky and the earth meet. Circular world maps are
       still based on the traditional view that the heaven is round and the
       earth is square. As this differs from the theory of the round Earth,
       circular world maps have east and west poles, and the locations of
       sunrise and sunset, and moonrise and moonset visibly represent
       the poles.
           Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                        1245

        No tree in the south is shown on the map in this figure, and we do
     not currently have access to an interpretation of what is shown there.
     However, from another time and culture we have the report of Severus
     of Antioch (fl. 512–518) that avers, similar to other anti-Manichaean
     sources that “those (regions) which lie to the south and to the meridian
     belong to the Tree of Death, which they call Hyle [i.e., Matter], being
     very wicked and uncreated” (as cited in B. Bennett, Iuxta unum, 69).
     In Mandaean and Zoroastrian cosmogonies the north and south are
     associated with “above” and “below” (i.e., the underworld).
459. Oh, Circular World Map, 32–33.
460. In support of the possibility of such influence, Major, Heaven, 154–55
     writes:

       It is not clear how one was intended to visualize the nine-fold walls
       of K’un-lun, but the most obvious image is as a peak of tremendous
       height, rising in nine steps like a ziggurat. Such a nine-tiered heaven
       … makes little sense in terms of the overall gaitian cosmology of
       Huainanzi [an ancient Chinese work of cosmological geography]:
       might there be here a hint of weak and distant Indian influence to
       go along with the possible Indian origin of the Jupiter Cycle names
       in Huainanzi 3. XXXIII? Certainly tiered-roof pagodas in later
       Chinese Buddhism reflect the Indian nine-tiered cosmos; earlier
       influence of the same sort is unattested but hardly impossible. The
       Nine-fold Shade mountain … associated with the Torch Dragon,
       is suggestive of a multitiered parasol of state of the sort found
       ubiquitously in Indic civilizations; it too may hint at an Indian-style
       nine-fold heaven weakly impinging on early Chinese cosmology.

        Major, Heaven, 337n17 goes on to explicitly imply a common
     symbology in Mount K’un-lun and Mount Mēru:

       In the Indian tradition the link between architecture and cosmology
       is explicit. In Balinese Hinduism, for example, multitiered (often
       nine-tiered) temple towers are called mēru, imitative in name as
       well as in structure of the classical Indian nine-tiered axis mundi
       or cosmic mountain.

461. On the symbolism of eastward movement as distancing oneself from
     God and westward movement as approaching God, see Bradshaw, God’s
     Image 1, 3:8-b, pp. 160–61. The symbolism of east–west orientation
     and the symbolism of the sacred center are conjoined in the symbolic
     layout of the Israelite temple and the Garden of Eden (Bradshaw,
     Temple Themes, 57–58, 77, 88–89). The east-west, right-left layout also
     recalls the vertical bisecting of almost all Egyptian hypocephali and
     corresponding visions of the cosmos given to Jewish seers. Hugh Nibley
     describes this bisecting view of the cosmos in terms of “a graphic
1246       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

     representation of ‘the whole world [and] its circle,’ (Box, Apocalypse,
     12:8, p. 51) in which the human race, God’s people and the others
     (see Kulik, Apocalypse of Abraham, 22:5, p. 1471) confront each other
     beneath or within the circle of the starry heavens, on opposite halves of
     the picture” (Nibley, Abraham, 45). In terms that echo the vertical and
     horizontal divisions of the hypocephalus in Facsimile 2 of the Book of
     Abraham, Rubinkiewicz explains this feature in the cosmic vision of
     the Apocalypse of Abraham, a Jewish pseudepigraphon that has close
     affinities with Moses 1 (see Rubinkiewicz, L’Apocalypse d’Abraham,
     171. For more on affinities between the Apocalypse of Abraham, the
     Book of Abraham, and Moses 1, see Bradshaw, Larsen, and Whitlock,
     “Twin Sons of Different Mothers.”.
462. Moses 6:42.
463. Moses 6:41.
464. Moses 6:42.
465. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 13:7–8, 237.
466. 1 Enoch arguably identifies the “waters of Dan” as the sea of Galilee
     and the nearby sacred mountain of Hermon (see Bradshaw and
     Larsen, God’s Image 2, Endnote M6-21, p. 97). See also Nickelsburg,
     1 Enoch 1, 250 n. 9–10 on “Abel-Main” and, more generally, on the
     sacred geography of this region on pp. 238–47. While Latter-day Saint
     scripture teaches that Enoch’s ministry took place in the New World
     (Doctrine and Covenants 107:53–57), the general story line in ancient
     Enoch accounts is not inconsistent with the symbolic geography of the
     Book of Moses.
467. Milik and Black, Enoch, 39.
468. Milik and Black, Enoch, 39.
469. The map is adapted from Milik’s reconstruction (see Milik and Black,
     Enoch, 35–41), and published in Nibley et al., One Eternal Round, 364,
     Figure 43 and caption. See also pp. 363–365, 465–468.
470. Milik and Black, Enoch, 36.
471. See Milik and Black, Enoch, 39–40.
472. Gulácsi, Mani’s Pictures, 470.
473. http://www.myoldmaps.com/maps-from-antiquity-6200-bc/004
     -book-i-ancient-intro.pdf, pp. xlix–l (accessed May 27, 2021).
474. Moses 7:16, 19.
475. Henning, “Book of the Giants,” Text A, frg. i, p. 61 [and 62n4].
476. Henning, “Book of the Giants,” Text G (Sogdian), 69.
477. Some texts report thirty-six towns— see, e.g., comments in Henning,
     “Book of the Giants,” 55–56 comparing text S to Text G. Cf. Gardner,
     Kephalaia, chap. 45 (codex 117, lines 5-8), p. 123 which also speaks
     of thirty-six towns. See also Reeves, Jewish Lore, 160n386; Wilkens,
     “Remarks,” 220–221.
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                      1247

478. Gardner has summarized the view of Kephalaia that all those described
     in this passage were wicked (Gardner, Kephalaia, p. 122. Cf. Gulácsi,
     Mani’s Pictures, 273):

        The point of this chapter is the foreknowledge of the powers of light
        that has enabled them to prepare places to hold and contain various
        evil forces that arise during cosmic history. . . . a prison for the
        Watchers; cities for the giants of old.”

479. Cf. Reeves, Jewish Lore, 160n385:

        According to Indian tradition, Mount Mēru or Sumēru (“Good
        Mēru) was the great mountain which stood at the center of the
        earth. See Mahābhārata 1(5) 15.5ff.: . . . “The great mountain rises
        aloft to cover with its heights the vault of heaven.”

480. Goff, “Sons of the Watchers,” 125.
481. Henning, “Book of the Giants,” Text G (Sogdian), 69.
482. Tate Gallery Picture Library, with the assistance of Cressida Kocienski.
483. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 10:11–13, p. 215. See also Job 22:11, 15–16; 2
     Peter 2:4; and Jude 1:6. See Newington, “Greek Titans” for a comparison
     of the biblical giants to the Greek Titans.
484. Alighieri, Commedia, Inferno canto 31, 247–258.
485. Kósa, “Book of Giants Tradition,” fig. 3, p. 186.
486. Nibley, “Churches in the Wilderness” (1978), 161.
487. Parry and Tov, DSSR, 4Q203, fragment 7b, column i, line 5, p. 945.
     Compare Milik and Black, Books of Enoch, 313: “He has imprisoned us
     and you he has subdued”; Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 4Q203, 7b 1. 5,
     p. 83: “He has imprisoned us and defeated yo[u”; and Martínez, “Book
     of Giants (4Q203),” 7b l. 5, p. 260: “He has seized us and has captured
     you.” See also the parallel references to the fate of the Watchers in
     the Genesis Apocryphon (Fitzmyer, Genesis Apocryphon, 0:8, p. 65):
     “And now, look, we are prisoners” (cf. Wise and Cook, Dead Sea
     Scrolls, 1QapGen, 0:8, p. 91: “We are bound” and Martínez, “Genesis
     Apocryphon,” fragment 1, column i, line 4, p. 230: “I have oppressed
     the prisoners,” following Milik—see Fitzmyer, Genesis Apocryphon, p.
     118, note 0:8). See also Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 14:5, p. 251: “It has been
     decreed to bind you in bonds in the earth for all the days of eternity”;
     Nickelsburg, 10:11–13, p. 215: “Go, Michael, bind Shemihazah and the
     others with him, . . . bind them . . . in the valleys of the earth, until the
     day of their judgment. . . . Then they will be led away to the fiery abyss
     [cf. Nickelsburg, 221–22nn4–6, 225nn11–13], and to the torture, and to
     the prison where they will be confined forever.”
         Compare the Manichaean Kephalaia: “Again, before the watchers
     rebelled and came down from heaven, a prison was fashioned and
1248        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

     constructed for them in the depths of the earth, below the mountains”
     (Gardner, Kephalaia, chap. 45 [codex 117], lines 5–8, p. 123).
         For discussions of the theme of the imprisonment of the wicked
     at the time of Noah as it appears in the Bible, see Bradshaw, God’s
     Image 1, caption to fig. E24–1, p. 588; Davids, II Peter, 9–11, 69–70;
     Neyrey, 2 Peter, Jude, 202; Davids, Letters, 48–51, 225–26; Rowland
     and Morray-Jones, Mystery of God, 58–59; Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, p.
     560; VanderKam, Enoch, p. 172; Reed, Fallen, 104–7; and Achtemeier,
     1 Peter, 239–74.
488. Kósa writes that the possibility of repentance for one faction of the
     demons “is especially important, since it is conceivable only in the
     context of the BG traditions” (“Book of Giants Tradition,” 179). One
     anonymous reviewer asks this relevant and intriguing question:

        What are the chances that there is some mixing or cross borrowing
        between the stories of people who lived on earth in Enoch’s time
        and what may have been taught about the war in heaven in the
        pre-mortal existence? This might account for the differences in the
        eternal fate of the wicked in that those who lost their first estate
        have lost it forever but those who opposed Enoch in their second
        estate still have the potential to receive the gospel and inherit a
        kingdom of glory.

489. Moses 7:44.
490. Moses 7:37–38.
491. Moses 7:57. Compare 1 Peter 3:20.
492. Laurence, Book of Enoch, 45:3–5, pp. 49–50; 56:3, p. 64.
493. Laurence, Book of Enoch, 49:2, pp. 55–56. In 49:3–4, p. 54 he does,
     however, speak of “mercy” that will be shown to “others” who repent,
     but he is speaking of the living who choose to repent in the last day, not
     of the unrepentant who have already sealed their doom in death in the
     days of Enoch and Noah.
494. Woodworth, “Enoch,” 191–92, as cited in Bradshaw and Larsen, Enoch,
     Noah, and the Tower, 114.
495. See Stuckenbruck, Book of Giants, 86, 200, referring to Sundermann,
     “Ein weiteres Fragment,” fragment L, 1r, II.1–10, pp. 495–96; translated
     in Reeves, Jewish Lore, 109, 117. See also my discussion of Henning,
     “Book of the Giants,” text E, p. 66 in the section “H. Call to repentance.”
496. Martínez, “Book of Giants (4Q203),” 8:14–15, p. 261.
497. Emphasis added.
498. Goff, “Sons of the Watchers,” 126–27.
499. See Sanders, “Major Positions,” 312–16 for a discussion of postmortem
     evangelization, including a discussion of Latter-day Saint beliefs on p.
     315. Esplin, “Wondering” and Paulsen, “Redemption” give excellent
           Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                          1249

     summaries of Latter-day Saint doctrine and teachings relating to
     salvation for the unevangelized.
500. See, e.g., Paulsen, Cook, and Christensen, “Harrowing of Hell.”
501. See, e.g., Gabriel Fackre in Sanders, Never Heard, 81–85.
502. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, p. 86. Bautch further explores this connection:

       There are many reasons for suspecting that 1 Peter is familiar with
       Enochic traditions. . . . Also of interest is the reference in 1 Peter to
       Christ making a proclamation to spirits in prison (1 Peter 3:18–20).
       Many understand the imprisoned spirits to be the angels who are
       familiar from the Book of the Watchers; these mated with mortals,
       shared forbidden knowledge [see Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, chapters
       6–8, pp. 174–201], and were imprisoned in an abyss or pit prior to
       the final conflagration [see Nickelsburg, chapters 9–18, 21, pp. 202–
       89, 297–99]. Comparable to the setting in the Enochic narrative
       in the Book of the Watchers [see Nickelsburg, 10:1–3, p. 215], the
       Petrine author links the captive spirits at the time of the flood (1
       Peter 3:20). Jesus’ encounter with the imprisoned beings in 1 Peter
       3:19–20 is likened to Enoch’s viewing of places of punishment and
       intercession for the rebellious watchers. (Bautch, “Peter and the
       Patriarchs,” 20–21)

         Bautch also describes connections in other apocryphal texts
     attributed to Peter:

       Brief allusion is made to Jesus’ preaching to the dead in the Gospel
       of Peter [Elliott, Apocryphal, 39–42, pp. 156–157], but visits to
       the realm of the dead, a paradise, and places of post-mortem
       punishment are arguably the focus of the Apocalypse of Peter
       [Elliott, pp. 593–612]. . . . Similarly many of the early Enochic texts,
       especially chapters 17–36 of the Book of the Watchers, concern the
       patriarch’s visit to the realm of the dead and places associated with
       post-mortem punishment or eschatological blessing. (23)

503. See Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 10:20, pp. 216, 227–28:

       Cleanse the earth from all impurity and from all wrong
       And from all lawlessness and from all sin;
       And godlessness and all impurities that have come upon the earth,
       remove.

        Other allusions to 1 Enoch might also be cited—e.g., Nickelsburg,
     1 Enoch 1, 108:6, p. 551:

       And he said to me, “The place that you see—here are thrown the
       spirits of the sinners and blasphemers and those who do evil and
1250       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

       those who alter everything that the Lord has said by the mouth of
       the prophets [about] the things that will be done.

       Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 16:1, p. 267:

       The day of the consummation of the great judgment [i.e., the day
       when the spirits of the wicked giants will have no more power over
       humankind].

       Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 21:10, p. 297 (see also 21:6):

       And he said, This place is a prison for the angels. Here they will be
       confined forever.

      Additional allusions are found in the pseudepigraphic Odes of
   Solomon, probably a Jewish-Christian text from about AD 100. For
   example, Charlesworth, “Odes,” 17:9, p. 750:

       And from there he gave me the way of his paths,
       And I opened the doors which were closed.

       Charlesworth, “Odes,” 34:5, p. 757:

       And the chasms were opened and closed;
       And they were seeking the Lord as those who are about to give
       birth.

       Charlesworth, “Odes,” 42:10–20, p. 771:

       11. Sheol saw me and was shattered,
       And Death ejected me and many with me. . . .
       14. And I made a congregation of living among his dead;
       And I spoke with them by living lips;
       I order that my word may not fail.
       15. And those who had died ran toward me;
       And they cried out and said, “Son of God, have pity on us.
       16. And deal with us according to your kindness,
       And bring us out from the chains of darkness.
       17. And open for us the door
       By which we may go forth to you,
       For we perceive that our death does not approach you.
       18. May we also be saved with you,
       Because you are our Savior.”
       19. Then I heard their voice,
       And placed their faith in my heart.
       20. And I placed my name upon their head,
       Because they are free and they are mine.
           Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                      1251

504. Nibley, Enoch the Prophet, 192. The Prophet Joseph Smith gave a
     magnificent sermon on this topic, which I quote only in part here
     (“Baptism for the Dead,” Times and Seasons, April 15, 1842, 759–60; cf.
     J. Smith Jr., Teachings, 219–20):

       While one portion of the human race are judging and condemning
       the other without mercy, the great parent of the universe looks
       upon the whole of the human family with a fatherly care, and
       paternal regard; he views them as his offspring; and without any
       of those contracted feelings that influence the children of men,
       causes “his sun to rise on the evil and the good; and sends his rain
       on the just and unjust” [see Matthew 5:45]. He holds the reins of
       judgment in his hands [see Psalm 11:7; Doctrine and Covenants
       39:16, 18]; he is a wise lawgiver [see Isaiah 33:22; James 4:12;
       Doctrine and Covenants 38:22; 64:13], and will judge all men
       [Doctrine and Covenants 137:9], [not according to the narrow
       contracted notions of men, but] “according to the deeds done in
       the body whether they be good or evil” [see 2 Corinthians 5:10;
       Alma 5:15]; or whether these deeds were done in England, America,
       Spain, Turkey, India: he will judge them “not according to what
       they have not, but according to what they have;” those who have
       lived without law, will be judged without law [see Romans 2:12; 2
       Nephi 9:25–27; Alma 29:5; Doctrine and Covenants 29:49–50], and
       those who have a law, will be judged by that law [Alma 42:21–23];
       we need not doubt the wisdom and intelligence of the great Jehovah
       [see Moroni 10:34; Doctrine and Covenants 128:9], he will award
       judgment [see 2 Nephi 2:10] or mercy [see Zechariah 7:9; Matthew
       23:23; Alma 41:14; Doctrine and Covenants 43:25; 88:40; Moses
       6:61] to all nations according to their several deserts, their means
       of obtaining intelligence, the laws by which they are governed; the
       facilities afforded them of obtaining correct information; and his
       inscrutable designs [see Doctrine and Covenants 3:1] in relation
       to the human family: and when the designs of God shall be made
       manifest, and the curtain of futurity be withdrawn, we shall all of
       us eventually have to confess, that the Judge of all the earth has
       done right [see Genesis 18:25; Psalm 94:2].
           The situation of the Christian nations after death is a subject
       that has called forth all the wisdom, and talent of the philosopher,
       and the divine; and it is an opinion which is generally received,
       that the destiny of man is irretrievably fixed at his death; and that
       he is made either eternally happy, or eternally miserable’ [sic; see
       Alma 41:3–6] that if a man dies without a knowledge of God [see
       Hosea 4:1; 1 Corinthians 15:34; Words of Mormon 1:8; Doctrine
       and Covenants 137:7], he must be eternally damned [see Mark 3:29;
       Doctrine and Covenants 19:7; 29:44]; without any mitigation of
       his punishment, alleviation of his pain or the most latent hope of
1252       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

       a deliverance while endless ages shall roll along. However orthodox
       this principle may be, we shall find that it is at variance with the
       testimony of holy writ; for our Saviour says that all manner of
       sin, and blasphemy shall be forgiven men wherewith they shall
       blaspheme; but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be
       forgiven [see Mark 3:28–29], neither in this world, nor in the world
       to come [see Matthew 12:31–32]; evidently showing that there are
       sins which may be forgiven in the world to come; although the sin
       of blasphemy cannot be forgiven.
           Peter also in speaking concerning our Saviour says, that “he
       went and preached unto spirits in prison, which sometimes were
       disobedient, when once the long suffering of God waited in the
       days of Noah.” 1 Pet. iii, 19, 20. Here then we have an account of
       our Saviour preaching in prison [see Doctrine and Covenants
       138:18]; to spirits that had been imprisoned from the days of Noah
       [see Alma 10:22; Doctrine and Covenants 138:9, 28; Joseph Smith—
       Matthew 1:41]; and what did he preach to them? that they were to
       stay there? certainly not; let his own declaration testify; “he hath
       sent me to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the
       captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them
       that are bruised”—Luke iv, 18, Isaiah has it;—“To bring out the
       prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness from the
       prison house.” Is. xlii, 7. It is very evident from this that he not only
       went to preach to them, but to deliver, or bring them out of the
       prison house. Isaiah in testifying concerning the calamities that
       will overtake the inhabitants of the earth says, “The earth shall reel
       to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be removed like a cottage; and
       the transgressions thereof shall be heavy upon it; and it shall fall
       and not rise again. And it shall come to pass in that day; that the
       Lord shall punish the hosts of the high ones that are on high, and
       the kings of the earth upon the earth. And they shall be gathered
       together as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in
       prison, and after many days shall they be visited” [see Isaiah 24:20–
       22; Doctrine and Covenants 88:87]. Thus we find that God will deal
       with all the human family equally; and that as the antediluvians
       had their day of visitation [see Isaiah 10:3; 1 Peter 2:12; Mormon
       9:2; Doctrine and Covenants 56:1, 16; 124:8, 10]; so will those
       characters referred to by Isaiah, have their time of visitation, and
       deliverance, after having been many days in prison.

505. Moses 6:50ff.
506. Used with permission from Dant, “Polish,” 91. This sculpture is from
     former Latter-day Saint mission president Walter Whipple’s large
     collection of Polish folk art.
507. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 67:2, p. 273.
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                     1253

508. It also turns up in later texts—e.g., Mika’’el, “Mysteries,” 29: “Even the
     earth complained and uttered lamentations.”
509. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 7:4–6, p. 182; 8:4, p. 188; emphasis added.
510. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 9:2, 10, p. 202; emphasis added.
511. Or, more literally, “cries the voice of their cries” (Skinner, “Vindicated,”
     375).
512. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 87:1, p. 364; emphasis added.
513. Parry and Tov, DSSR, p. 945.
514. Or “licentiousness” in the translation of Wise, Abegg, and Cook, Dead
     Sea Scrolls, 4Q203, fragment 8, line 9, p. 294. Aramaic znwtkwn.
515. Skinner argues that “filthiness, immorality, and idolatry are closely
     associated with each other in Semitic-based biblical culture. See,
     for example, Ezra 6:21; 9:11; Ezekiel 16:36; 24:13; Revelation 17:4”
     (“Vindicated,” 377).
516. Skinner, “Vindicated,” 377.
517. Nickelsburg relates this accusation to Genesis 4:10–11 and cites “an
     Aramaic technical term for bringing suit in court” (Nickelsburg, 1
     Enoch 1, 187n6), recalling the context of Isaiah 1 discussed in Bradshaw,
     Enoch and the Gathering of Zion.
518. Moses 7:48.
519. Skinner, “Vindicated,” 377–78.
520. Cf., e.g., Job 21:17, 30; Proverbs 10:29; Joseph Smith—Matthew 1:4.
521. Gulácsi, Mani’s Pictures, 470.
522. Kósa, “Book of Giants Tradition,” 171.
523. Kósa, “Book of Giants Tradition,” 172.
524. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 25:2–4, p. 312.
525. Kósa, “Book of Giants Tradition,” 171–172; emphasis added. Kósa also
     has difficulty entertaining the thought that the repentant demons
     might be the inhabitants of the palaces because “they are evidently too
     small . . . to accommodate the relatively big demons kneeling on the
     right side of the foliage” (172).
526. Moses 7:69.
527. Church History Library, MS 2567. Original drawing prepared at
     the direction of Joseph Smith, Jr. in Kirtland, Ohio, in 1833 by
     Frederick G. William and mailed to Edward Partridge and others in
     Independence, Missouri, in June 1833. MS_2567_f0001-Plat_of_city_
     of_Zion__1833-ORIGINAL.pdf. https://catalog.churchofjesuschrist.
     org/record?id=c5d54bd0-bede-47cb-b636-3281f30b0d0a                 (accessed
     May 19, 2021). Elder Alvin R. Dyer observed that the dimensions of the
     drawing of the Prophet’s proposed temple structures for Zion were 61’0”
     x 87’0’, thus matching the dimensions of the Latter-day Saints Visitors
     Center, finished in 1981 and located on part of the Independence
     Temple Lot owned by the Church (Alvin R. Dyer, “Report of Meeting
     with President David O. McKay,” diary, March 10, 1967, accn. 1334, box
1254        Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

     46, f 6, cited in R. J. Addams, Past and Future of the Temple Lot (TMZ
     2020), 65).
528. See, e.g., Doctrine and Covenants 45:11–14.
529. Doctrine and Covenants 84:2; emphasis added.
530. Doctrine and Covenants 57:3.
531. E.g., Young, “Discourse,” 23 June 1874, 242.
532. Moses 7:69.
533. Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, p. 11.
534. Caquot, “Les prodromes,” 50.
535. Compare Andersen, “2 (Slavonic Apocalypse of) Enoch,” 1:3, pp. 106–7;
     41:1, pp. 166–67; and Cameron and Dewey, Cologne Mani Codex, 58, p.
     45 to Moses 7:49. See Reeves, Heralds, 185–90; and Philonenko, “Une
     citation manichéenne” for extensive discussions of the Codex Mani
     Codex passage and possible sources. For more on the general theme of
     the weeping of God, the heavens, and Enoch, see Bradshaw, Rennaker,
     and Larsen, “Revisiting”; Bradshaw, Enoch and the Gathering of Zion”;
     Bradshaw, Bowen, and Dahle, “Textual Criticism,” 104–22.
536. Compare Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 102:1–3, pp. 503–4 to Moses 7:13.
537. Compare Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 13:7–8, p. 237 to Moses 6:42.
538. Compare Alexander, “3 (Hebrew Apocalypse of) Enoch,” 10:1, p. 263
     to Moses 7:59.
539. Compare Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 67:2, p. 273 to Moses 7:43.
540. See Martínez, “Dead Sea Scrolls Translated,” 260–62. Note that com-
     pilations of the Dead Sea Scrolls in English translation include only
     the fragments found at Qumran, lacking the Henning fragments (the
     twenty-two translated fragments without notes comprise about eight
     single-spaced pages in publication) and the three short Sundermann
     fragments noted in the table of detailed comparisons.
         Of course, different translations differ in page size and
     comprehensiveness. The selected passages of BG occupy two pages in
     the translation of Geza Vermes (see Complete, 549–50) and six pages
     in the more complete translation of Michael Wise, Martin Abegg Jr.,
     and Edward Cook that includes an introduction and commentary
     (see Dead Sea Scrolls, 290‒95). The most complete publication of
     BG, including translations of many tiny fragments, some containing
     only a word or two, with both the Aramaic original and the English
     translation, runs thirty-six pages (see Parry and Tov, DSSR, 938‒74).
     However, even comparing Parry and Tov’s most extensive English
     version to Nickelsburg and VanderKam’s English translation of 1 Enoch
     reveals that BG is only about 12 percent the size of 1 Enoch (see 1 Enoch,
     19‒170), whereas the briefer translations contained in the Martínez and
     Vermes editions are about 2 percent of the size of the corresponding 1
     Enoch edition. No commentary is included in this 1 Enoch translation,
     though the pages are in a smaller format than that of Parry and Tov.
            Bradshaw, Moses 6–7 and the Book of Giants                   1255

541. In practical terms, if we take 2 percent as a low approximation (Martínez
     and Vermes editions) and 12 percent as a high approximation (Parry
     and Tov edition) of relative page count, this means that one would
     expect significant resemblances to Moses 6‒7 in 1 Enoch to be roughly
     eight to fifty times more numerous than in BG.
542. Though my search has not been exhaustive, the only unique and
     significant resemblances between 1 Enoch and Moses 6–7 that I have
     been able to locate so far are the mention that a vision took place near
     a body of water Enoch passed on his journey (Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1,
     13:7–8, p. 237; cf. Moses 6:42); a prophecy in 1 Enoch that “the earth
     will be shaken and will tremble” (Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 102:1–3, pp.
     503–4) that loosely corresponds to a mention that “the earth trembled,
     and the mountains fled” during the battle of the wicked against Enoch
     (Moses 7:13); and the motif of Enoch’s visions of the great flood that
     occurs in multiple places in 1 Enoch (e.g., Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, chap.
     83, p. 345; cf. Moses 7:43). In addition, perhaps the most striking unique
     parallel with 1 Enoch is when God says, “I will put my hand upon [the
     ark] and protect it” (Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 67:2, p. 273), which can be
     compared to Moses 7:43: “Enoch saw that Noah built an ark; and that
     the Lord smiled upon it, and held it in his own hand.”
         Apart from these few unique resemblances with the Book of Moses
     (and, in addition, the ones in the Book of Similitudes relating to the
     “Son of Man” theme), every other 1 Enoch resemblance is paralleled
     in BG, arguably the older of the two texts. And, as results indicate, BG
     contains additional close and unique likenesses in vocabulary, names,
     and themes besides.
         As a final note on this topic, Bruno, “Congruence and Concatena-
     tion,” 2 lists additional parallels of the Book of Moses with 1 Enoch,
     some of which are so loose as to be almost nonsensical. For example, in
     1 Enoch 10:4–5 an account of Asael’s binding (which Bruno describes
     as an instance of “foreknowledge and prophetic warning of the
     destruction of the world”) is compared with Moses 7:41–67. In another
     instance, an account of the Flood and Final Judgment in 1 Enoch 60
     (which Bruno describes as “a revolutionary social order”) is compared
     with Moses 7:18–19.
543. See Brown and Bradshaw, “Man and Son of Man.”.
544. Stuckenbruck, “Apocalypse of John,” 322.
545. Stuckenbruck, “Apocalypse of John,” 322.
546. Stuckenbruck, “Apocalypse of John,” 323.
547. Stuckenbruck, “Apocalypse of John,” 325.
548. Stuckenbruck, “Apocalypse of John,” 324.
549. See 2 Nephi 31:3; Doctrine and Covenants 1:24.
550. Calabro, “Early Christian Context.”.
551. Bradshaw, “Book of Moses as a Temple Text,” in this proceedings.g
1256       Tracing Ancient Threads in the Book of Moses

552. Nibley, “Expanding Gospel.”
553. See 1 Corinthians 13:12.
554. Nibley, “Expanding Gospel,” 204.
555. E.g., Kimball, Teachings, 587–89; Bednar, “To Sweep”; Nelson,
     Teachings, 220; Taylor, “Elder Uchtdorf’s Devotional on Technology.”
556. Gary P. Gillum, “Hugh Winder Nibley: The Man, the Scholar, the
     Legacy,” in Bradshaw, Ricks, and Whitlock, Hugh Nibley Observed, 735,
     citing Nibley, “New Look,” Improvement Era, May 1970, 91.
557. Draper, Brown, and Rhodes, Commentary.
558. https://interpreterfoundation.org/book-of-moses-essays-bibliography
     / (alphabetically sorted by author); https://interpreterfoundation.org
     /book-of-moses-essays-topical-bibliography/ (organized by topic).
559. Russell M. Nelson, cited in Jones, “Especially Noble Calling.”
560. Hafen and Hafen, “Adam, Eve, the Book of Moses,” in this proceedings.
561. Lewis wrote:

       It is a good rule, after reading a new book, never to allow yourself
       another new one till you have read an old one in between. If that
       is too much for you, you should at least read one old one to three
       new ones.
            Every age has its own outlook. It is specially good at seeing
       certain truths and specially liable to make certain mistakes. We
       all, therefore, need the books that will correct the characteristic
       mistakes of our own period (“On the Reading,” 202).

       We need intimate knowledge of the past. Not that the past has
       any magic about it, but because we cannot study the future, and
       yet need something to set against the present, to remind us that
       periods and that much which seems certain to the uneducated is
       merely temporary fashion.
           A man who has lived in many places is not likely to be deceived
       by the local errors of his native village: the scholar has lived in
       many times and is therefore in some degree immune from the great
       cataract of nonsense that pours from the press and the microphone
       of his own age (“Learning,” 58–59).
