   THE DIVINE COUNCIL IN LATE CANONICAL AND

NON-CANONICAL SECOND TEMPLE JEWISH LITERATURE




                            by

                    Michael S. Heiser




     A dissertation submitted in partial fulfillment of

           The requirements for the degree of




                   Doctor of Philosophy

              (Hebrew and Semitic Studies)




                          at the

         UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN-MADISON

                           2004
 Copyright by Michael S. Heiser 2004
         All Rights Reserved
                       THE DIVINE COUNCIL IN LATE CANONICAL AND
                       NON-CANONICAL SECOND TEMPLE JEWISH LITERATURE


                                                     Table of Contents

Abstract

Abbreviations

Chapter One: Introduction to the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

  1.1       Previous Divine Council Scholarship and the Need for This Study
  1.2       Divine Plurality in Late Canonical Texts and Assumptions About Israelite
            Monotheism
  1.3       The Problem of Divine Plurality in Second Temple Non-Canonical Jewish
            Literature
  1.4       Comments on Metaphor and Divine Imagery
  1.5       Overview of Ensuing Chapters

Chapter Two: The Divine Council of Pre-Exilic Israelite Religion as the
Backdrop for Divine Plurality in Late Canonical and Non-Canonical Texts . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

  2.1       Terminology for the Divine Council
  2.2       The Meeting Place of the Divine Council
  2.3       The Members of the Divine Council
  2.4       The Structure and Operation of the Divine Council’s Bureaucracy
  2.5       The Status and Role of the Vice-Regent
  2.6       Interpretation of Divine Hypostases and the Vice-Regent in Second Temple
            Texts

Chapter Three: Assumptions of Exilic Redaction and the Progression From Polytheism
to Monotheism: The Argument from Deuteronomy 32 and Psalm 82 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68

  3.1       Text-Historical Assumptions and Late Israelite Religion
  3.2       The Argument for Exilic Alteration or Elimination of the Divine Council
  3.3       Psalm 82: Yahweh-El or Yahweh and El?
  3.4       The Relationship of Deuteronomy 32:8-9 to Psalm 82
  3.5       Summation

Chapter Four: The Divine Council and Monolatry in Deuteronomy and
Deutero-Isaiah . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90

  4.1       Deuteronomy: Monotheism or Monolatry?
  4.2       Deutero-Isaiah: Monotheism or Monolatry?
  4.3       Summation

Chapter Five: The Divine Council in Exilic and Early Post-Exilic Canonical
Texts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122

  5.1       Divine Plurality and Divine Council Motifs in Late Psalms
  5.2       Divine Plurality and Council Activity in the Book of Job
  5.3       The Divine Council Scene of Zechariah 3:1-7
  5.4       Divine Council Terms and Motifs Elsewhere in Zechariah
  5.5       Summation
Chapter Six: The Divine Council in the Book of Daniel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152

  6.1      Preview and Approach
  6.2      The Divine Council Meeting in Daniel 7
  6.3      Divine Plurality, the “Princes” of Daniel, and Yahweh’s Vice-Regent
  6.4      Summation

Chapter Seven: The Divine Council in the Qumran Sectarian Literature . . . . . . . . . . . 183

  7.1      Terminology for the Divine Council
  7.2      The Meeting Place of the Divine Council
  7.3      The Members of the Divine Council
  7.4      The Divine Vice-Regent of the Council
  7.5      Summation

Chapter Eight: The Divine Council in Non-Sectarian Literature from
Qumran and Other Non-Canonical Second Temple Period Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225

  8.1      Overview of the Primary Issues
  8.2      The Divine Council and Second Tier Council Members
  8.3      References to the Divine Council and the Worldview of Deuteronomy 4 and 32
  8.4      Evidence for an Exalted Divine Vice Regent
  8.5      Jewish Speculations on the Identity of the Divine Vice Regent
  8.6      Summation

Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   258

Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 260

Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 285
                                             ABSTRACT

                     THE DIVINE COUNCIL IN LATE CANONICAL AND
                  NON-CANONICAL SECOND TEMPLE JEWISH LITERATURE

                                          Michael S. Heiser

                         Under the supervision of Professor Michael V. Fox

                               At the University of Wisconsin-Madison


       Biblical scholarship has reached a consensus with respect to the presence of a divine

assembly of gods in Israel’s faith. Prior to the sixth century B.C.E., Israelite religion underwent

an evolution from an initial polytheism to a firm monolatry, where the other gods of the divine

council were tolerated but not worshipped. The religious crisis of Israel’s early sixth century

B.C.E. exile prompted the scribes to obscure the council in the canonical texts and compose new

material declaring that Yahweh had punished Israel for her sins, brought her out of bondage, and

put the other gods to death. This historical turnabout and its literary response marked the birth

of true monotheism in Israel, where no other gods existed except Yahweh.

       This reconstruction is plagued by numerous difficulties. There are hundreds of references

to other gods in a divine council in exilic and post-exilic canonical texts and the non-canonical

writings of Judaism’s Second Temple period. The context for these references disallows the

conclusion that the writers are speaking of idols or of the beliefs of pagans. Rather, they reflect

the worldview of late Israelite religion and Second Temple Judaism. This worldview included the

belief in a deified vice-regent who ruled the gods at the behest of the high God. So transparent

was this divine vice regency that Second Temple Jewish authors wrote of a deified second power

in heaven. The rhetoric of Deuteronomy and Deutero-Isaiah that there are no other gods besides

Yahweh fails as proof of the consensus view, since the same language is used in monolatrous pre-

exilic texts and fails to account for the plethora of references to other gods in late Jewish writings.

       This dissertation calls the consensus view of the development of monotheism in Israel into

question by demonstrating that belief in a divine council survived the exile. As a result, this

dissertation posits that the survival of Israel’s pre-exilic divine council has greater explanatory
power than the consensus view of the development of monotheism with respect to divine plurality

in late canonical and non-canonical Second Temple period texts.
                         Abbreviations
ABD       Anchor Bible Dictionary
AGJU      Arbeiten zur Geschichte des antiken Judentums und des Urchristentums
AnOr      Analecta Orientalia
ANRW      Aufstieg und Niedergang der Romischen Welt
AOAT      Alter Orient und Altes Testament
BASOR     Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research
BEATAJ    Beitrage zur Erforschun des Alten Testaments und des antiken Judentum
BETL      Bibliotheca ephemeridum Theologicarum Lovaniensium
Bib       Biblica
BibOr     Biblica et orientalia
BJRL      Bulletin of the John Rylands Library
BRev      Bible Review
BZNW      Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
CBQ       Catholic Biblical Quarterly
CBQMS     Catholic Biblical Quarterly Monograph Series
ConBNT    Coniectanea Biblica: New Testament Series
ConBOT    Coniectanea biblica: Old Testament Series
COS       The Context of Scripture
DDD       Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible
DJD       Discoveries in the Judean Desert
DULAT     Dictionary of the Ugaritic Language in the Alphabetic Tradition
ER        Encyclopedia of Religion
ETL       Ephemeridum Theologicarum Lovaniensium
FAT       Forschungen zum Alten Testament
FOTL      Forms of the Old Testament Literature
HALOT     The Hebrew and Aramaic Lexicon of the Old Testament
HAT       Handbuch zum Alten Testament
HO        Handbuch der Orientalistik
HSM       Harvard Semitic Monographs
HTR       Harvard Theological Review
HUCA      Hebrew Union College Annual
IEJ       Israel Exploration Journal
JBL       Journal of Biblical Literature
JJS       Journal of Jewish Studies
JNES      Journal of Near Eastern Studies
JR        Journal of Religion
JSJ       Journal for the Study of Judaism
JSJSup    Journal for the Study of Judaism Supplements
JSNTSup   Journal for the Study of the New Testament Supplement Series
JSOT      Journal for the Study of the Old Testament
JSOTSup   Journal for the Study of the Old Testament Supplement Series
JSPSup    Journal for the Study of the Pseudepigrapha Supplement Series
JSS       Journal of Semitic Studies
JTS       Journal of Theological Studies
KAI       Kanaanaische und aramaische Inschriften
KTU       The Cuneiform Alphabetic Texts from Ugarit, Ras Ibn Hani and Other Places (KTU2)
NovT      Novum Testamentum
NTS       New Testament Studies
OBO       Orbis biblicus et orientalis
OLP       Orientalia lovaniensia periodica
Or        Orientalia
OTP       Old Testament Pseudepigrapha (Charlesworth)
OTS       Old Testament Studies
OtSt      Oudtestamentische Studien
PTMS     Pittsburgh Theological Monograph Series
RB       Revue Biblique
RevQ     Revue de Qumran
SBLDS    Society of Biblical Literature Dissertation Series
SBLMS    Society of Biblical Literature Monograph Series
SBLSCS   Society of Biblical Literature Septuagint and Cognate Studies
SBLSP    Society of Biblical Literature Seminar Papers
SEL      Studi epigrafici e linguistici
SJLA     Studies in the Judaism of Late Antiquity
SJT      Southwestern Journal of Theology
SNTSMS   Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series
TGUOS    Transactions of the Glasgow University Oriental Society
TSAJ     Texte und Studien zum Antiken Judentum
UBL      Ugaritisch-biblische Literatur
UF       Ugarit Forschungen
VT       Vetus Testamentum
VTSup    Vetus Testamentum Supplements
WBC      Word Biblical Commentary
WUNT     Wissenschaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament
ZAW      Zeitschrift für die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft
ZTK      Zeitschrift fürTheologie und Kirche
                                                       Chapter One


                                            Introduction to the Study

1.1 Previous Divine Council Scholarship and the Parameters of this Study

         The discovery of the tablets of ancient Ugarit in 1929 and their subsequent translation marked a

watershed in the study of the religious worldview of the Hebrew Bible. One of the most significant revelations

produced by the comparative investigation of the religion of ancient Israel and Ugarit was that the Hebrew Bible

contained tantalizing hints of a pantheon. The "divine assembly" or "divine council" soon became a focus of

biblical scholars, beginning in 1939 with J. Morgenstern’s lengthy article on Psalm 82, likely the clearest

biblical attestation to an Israelite divine assembly.1 During the 1940s and 1950s, prominent studies emerged

examining the striking and unmistakable correspondences between the god of Israel and two of Ugarit's most

important deities, El and Baal.2 The seminal work on the divine council as a motif throughout the Hebrew

Bible, however, was a 1944 article by H. Wheeler Robinson.3 Robinson's early study was followed in the next

two decades by detailed analyses of the council and its members by a number of scholars.4 The first book-length

study of the divine council was published in 1980,5 and was followed by significant works detailing various




1
  J. Morgenstern, "The Mythological Background of Psalm 82," HUCA 14 (1939): 29-126.
2
  For example, Marvin Pope, El in the Ugaritic Texts (VTSup 2; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1955); A. S. Kapelrud, Baal in the Ras Shamra Texts
(Copenhagen: G. E. C. Gad, 1952); J. Obermann, Ugaritic Mythology (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1948); M. Dahood, "Ancient
Semitic Deities in Syria and Palestine," in Le Antiche Divinita Semitiche (ed. S. Moscati; Studi Semitici 1; Rome: Centro di Studi
Semitici, 1958), 65-94; O. Eissfeldt, "El and Yahweh," JSS 1 (1956): 25-37.
3
  H. Wheeler Robinson, "The Council of Yahweh," JTS 45 (1944): 151-157.
4
  Gerald Cooke, "The Sons of (the) God(s)," ZAW 76 (1964): 22-47; Edwin C. Kingsbury, "The Prophets and the Council of Yahweh,"
JBL 83 (1964): 279-286; J. Gray, The Legacy of Canaan (2d ed.; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1965); James S. Ackerman, "An Exegetical Study of
Psalm 82" (Th.D. diss., Harvard University, 1966); Patrick D. Miller, "The Divine Council and the Prophetic Call to War," VT 18 (1968):
100-107; idem, The Divine Warrior in Early Israel (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1973); W. F. Albright, Yahweh and the Gods
of Canaan: An Historical Analysis of Two Conflicting Faiths (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1968); Matitiahu Tsevat, "God and the
Gods in Assembly," HUCA 40-41 (1969-1970): 123-137; Richard J. Clifford, "The Tent of El and the Israelite Tent of Meeting," CBQ
33 (1971): 221-227; idem, The Cosmic Mountain in Canaan and the Old Testament, (HSM 4; Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1972); Frank Moore Cross, Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973); Conrad L'Heureux, Rank
Among the Canaanite Gods (HSM 21; Missoula: MT: Scholars Press, 1979); David Noel Freedman, “Who is Like Thee Among the
Gods? The Religion of Early Israel,” in Ancient Israelite Religion: Essays in Honor of Frank Moore Cross (ed. Patrick D. Miller, et al.;
Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1987), 315-336; Mark S. Smith, The Early History of God: Yahweh and Other Deities in Ancient Israel (2d
ed.; Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 2002).
5
  E. Theodore Mullen, The Divine Council in Canaanite and Early Hebrew Literature (HSM 24; Scholars Press, 1980).
aspects of the divine council throughout the extant literature of Canaan.6 Most recently, an important book by

Mark S. Smith has brought scholarship on the divine council up to date.7

         All the scholarship to date on the divine council has focused on Israel’s religion prior to the sixth

century B.C.E., since it is commonly believed that after Israel emerged from exile, the idea of a pantheon of

gods headed by Yahweh had been abandoned in favor of an intolerant monotheism. This dissertation challenges

this consensus view of the development of monotheism in Israelite religion and Judaism by examining late

canonical texts of the Hebrew Bible and non-canonical Second Temple period literature to discern whether or

not the belief in a divine council that included other gods continued after the exile.8 This task also necessarily

involves interaction with several broad issues addressed in the scholarly study of Israelite religion and Second

Temple period Judaism and the related academic literature. The result encompasses a new orientation with

respect to the texts and the issue of monotheism in Israel and the creation of new conceptual bridges connecting

the religions of pre-exilic Canaan, Israel and Second Temple Judaism. Hence, this study suggests new

perspectives on certain issues involving these areas and proposes an alternative paradigm for understanding their

connections.

         Due to the sweeping religious questions and voluminous scholarly literature dealing with ancient

religions of Canaan, Israel, and first century Judaism, boundaries must be placed on such a study. Since the

religions of Canaan and pre-exilic Israel are foundational to what follows, the Second Temple period more

conveniently lends itself to limitations for the sake of this study. For this reason the terminus ad quem of this

study is Jewish literature prior to 70 C.E. This effectively excludes the New Testament, but the study lays the

foundation for future inquiry into the presence and religious role of the divine council in the New Testament.

The number of areas of New Testament study related to the divine council is extensive. An examination of the

New Testament in light of the divine council paradigm proposed by this study would necessitate consideration




6
  Marjo Christina Annette Korpel, A Rift in the Clouds: Ugaritic and Hebrew Descriptions of the Divine (Münster: Ugarit Verlag, 1990);
Lowell K. Handy, Among the Host of Heaven: The Syro-Palestinian Pantheon as Bureaucracy (Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns, 1994); H. R.
Page, The Myth of Cosmic Rebellion: A Study of its Reflexes in Ugaritic and Biblical Literature (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1996).
7
  Mark S. Smith, The Origins of Biblical Monotheism: Israel’s Polytheistic Background and the Ugaritic Texts (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2001).
8
  The Second Temple period is dated from the construction of Israel’s second temple, ca. 516 B.C.E. to its destruction in 70 C.E.
of angel Christology, angelomorphic Christology, and Christian soteriology;9 the question of monotheism and

Christology in the “Pauline Shema” of I Cor 8:5-6;10 the matter of Wisdom Christology;11 the relationship of

Michael and Christ traditions;12 Johannine and Pauline theology of divine sonship, adoption, and glorification

(apotheosis);13 Paul’s use of Yahweh texts from the Old Testament;14 New Testament terminology for the

heavenly host, namely “principalities” and “powers”;15 the divine council scene of Revelation 4-5;16 the thorny

“Son of Man” problem for New Testament studies;17 and the relationship of 1 Enoch to the New Testament.18

1.2 Introducing the Problems of the Consensus View of the Development of Israelite Monotheism

         Insuperable difficulties arise when scholars attempt to explain the textual realities of Second Temple

period writings according to the consensus viewpoint on the origins of Israelite monotheism. For example,

several of the most eloquent witnesses to a divine assembly in the Hebrew Bible are found in exilic and post-

9
  Angel Christology deals with the question of whether Jesus was an angel, while angelomorphic Christology is the idea that Jesus
appeared as an angel. See Charles Gieschen, Angelomorphic Christology: Antecedents and Early Evidence (AGJU 42; Leiden: E. J.
Brill, 1998), 28. See also Crispin H. T. Fletcher-Louis, Luke-Acts: Angels, Christology, and Soteriology (Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck,
1997); Richard Bauckham, “The Throne of God and the Worship of Jesus,” in The Jewish Roots of Christological Monotheism: Papers
from the St. Andrews Conference on the Historical Origins of the Worship of Jesus (ed. Carey C. Newman, James R. Davila, and Gladys
S. Lewis; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999), 43-69.
10
   Paul Rainbow, “Monotheism and Christology in 1 Corinthians 8:4-6” (D. Phil. diss., Oxford University, 1987); James D. G. Dunn,
“Was Christianity a Monotheistic Faith From the Beginning?” SJT 35 (1982): 303-336.
11
   Crispin H. T. Fletcher-Louis, “Wisdom Christology and the Parting of the Ways Between Judaism and Christianity,” in Christian-
Jewish Relations Through the Centuries (ed. Stanley E. Porter and Brook W. R. Pearson; JSNTSup 192; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic
Press, 2000), 52-68.
12
   Darrell D. Hannah, Michael and Christ: Michael Traditions and Angel Christology in Early Christianity (WUNT 109; Tübingen:
Mohr-Siebeck, 1999).
13
   B. Byrne, “Sons of God”—“Seed of Abraham”: A Study of the Idea of the Sonship of God of All Christians in Paul Against the Jewish
Background (AnBib 83; Rome: Pontifical Institute Press, 1979); Olle Christofferson, The Earnest Expectation of the Creature: The
Flood Tradition as the Matrix of Romans 8:18-27 (ConBNT 32; Uppsala: Almqvist & Wiksell International, 1990); Harold Riesenfeld,
“Sons of God and Ecclesia: An Intertestamental Analysis,” in Renewing the Judeo-Christian Wellsprings (New York: Crossroad
Publishing, 1987), 89-104; James Tabor, “Firstborn of Many Brothers: A Pauline Notion of Apotheosis,” SBL Seminar Papers, 1984 (ed.
Kent Richards; SBLSP 21; Chico: Calif.: Scholars Press, 1984), 295-303.
14
   David B. Capes, Old Testament Yahweh Texts in Paul’s Christology (Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 1992).
15
   Wesley Carr, Angels and Principalities: The Background, Meaning, and Development of the Pauline Phrase hai archai kai hai exousiai
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981); Clinton Arnold, Ephesians: Power and Magic (SNTSMS 63; Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1989); idem, Powers of Darkness: Principalities and Powers in Paul’s Letters (Downer’s Grove, Ill.: Intervarsity,
1992); Andrew Chester, “Jewish Messianic Expectations and Mediatorial Figures and Pauline Christology,” in Paulus und antike
Judentum: Tübingen-Durham Symposium im Gedenken an den 50. Todestag Adolf Schlatters (ed. Martin Hengel and Ulrich Heckel;
WUNT 58; Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 1991), 17-89.
16
   Loren T. Stuckenbruck, “An Angelic Refusal of Worship: The Tradition and Its Function in the Apocalypse of John,” SBL Seminar
Papers, 1994 (ed. Eugene H. Lovering, Jr.; SBLSP 33; Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1994), 679-696; Margaret Barker, “Enthronement and
Apotheosis: The Vision in Revelation 4-5,” in New Heaven and New Earth Prophecy and the Millennium: Studies in Honour of Anthony
Gelston (ed. P. J. Harland and C. T. R. Hayward; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999), 217-227; Cameron Afzal, “Wheels of Time: Merkavah
Exegesis in Revelation 4,” SBL Seminar Papers, 1998 (2 vols.; SBLSP 37; Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1998), 1: 465-482; Peter R. Carrell,
Jesus and the Angels: Angelology and the Christology of the Apocalypse of John (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997);
Matthew Black, “The Throne Theophany Prophetic Commission and the Son of Man: A Study in Tradition History,” in Jews, Greeks,
and Christians: Religious Culture in Late Antiquity (ed. R. G. Hamerton-Kelly and R. Scroggs; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1976), 57-73.
17
   John J. Collins, “The Son of Man in First Century Judaism,” NTS 38 (1992): 448-466.
18
   James C. VanderKam, “1 Enoch, Enochic Motifs, and Enoch in Early Christian Literature,” in The Jewish Apocalyptic Heritage in
Early Christianity (ed. James C. VanderKam and William Adler; CRINT 3.4; Assen/Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1996), 33-101;
Lawrence VanBeek, “1 Enoch Among Jews and Christians: A Fringe Connection?” in Christian-Jewish Relations Through the Centuries
exilic material (cf. Job 1-2; Ps 82). No study to date has sought to explain indications of a pre-exilic worldview

that affirmed a divine council in these late canonical texts without presupposing that such references cannot be

taken at face value. It is common for scholars to argue that indications of divine plurality were expunged from

the text during and after the exile by zealous scribes enforcing the monotheistic innovation, yet this hardly

explains the unambiguous references noted above which must have been overlooked by this alleged campaign.

Other scholars have consequently suggested that these scribes deliberately used polytheistic ideas as an

apologetic for monotheism.19 This hermeneutic is both confusing and unnecessary, and given the rise of the

belief in divine plurality in the Second Temple era, counter-productive. Still others have argued that, in Psalm

82 at least, Yahweh assumes a new role of sovereign god over the nations by sentencing the other gods to

death.20 This approach assumes that Israelite religion before the exile did not contain the idea that Yahweh was

king over all the earth. However, the belief of Yahweh’s kingship over the nations is a prominent feature in

early Israelite poetry. 21 The linguistic connection between phrases in Ps 24: 7,10

(   dAbK'h; %l,m, aAby"w> ~l'A[ yxet.Pi Waf.N"hiw> ~k,yvear' ~yri['v. Waf.; “O gates, lift up your heads! Be
lifted up, you everlasting doors, so the king of glory may come in!”) and lines in the divine council scene of the

Baal Cycle22 has prompted scholars to note the theme of cosmic rule and posit that the psalm may date to either

the 12th or 10th century B.C.E.23 In like manner, Exod 15:18, a well known example of the earliest Hebrew

poetry, contains the line     d[,w" ~l'[ol. %l{m.yI hw"hy> (“Yahweh will reign forever and ever!”), a declaration of
Yahweh’s sovereignty.24 As F.M. Cross notes, “The kingship of the gods is a common theme in early




(ed. Stanley E. Porter and Brook W. R. Pearson; JSNTSup 192; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 2000), 93-115.
19
   This latter method of interpretation can be found in Simon B. Parker, "The Beginning of the Reign of God – Psalm 82 as Myth and
Liturgy," RB 102 (1995): 532-559.
20
   Mark S. Smith, Origins, 48-49.
21
   Patrick D. Miller, “Israelite Religion,” in Israelite Religion and Biblical Theology: Collected Essays (ed. Patrick D. Miller; JSOTSup
267; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 2000), 166.
22
   KTU 1.2.i:20-30.
23
   Cross, Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic, 90-93; Freedman, “Who is Like Thee Among the Gods?,” 317. Likewise the sevenfold
voice of Yahweh in the psalm calls attention to its antiquity. See N. Wyatt, Religious Texts (2d ed.; London: Sheffield Academic Press,
2002), 296, n. 205; and John Day, “Echoes of Baal's Seven Thunders and Lightnings in Psalm 29 and Hab 3:9 and the Identity of the
Seraphim in Isaiah 6,” VT 29:2 (1979): 143-151.
24
   One could argue that this sovereignty need not be global, but then one would be pressed to produce evidence from the Hebrew Bible
that could identify exactly which parts of the known world over which Yahweh was not considered to reign in Israelite thought.
Mesopotamian and Canaanite epics. The common scholarly position that the concept of Yahweh as reigning or

king is a relatively late development in Israelite thought seems untenable.”25

            A second example of the failings of the consensus approach is the presence of pre-exilic terms for

divine plurality and the divine council in Second Temple literature, especially from Qumran.26 One frequently

finds scholars arguing that while terms such as Myhl), Myl) and Myk)lm in pre-exilic biblical texts describe

distinct classes of heavenly beings, thereby distinguishing the council gods from angels, the same terms are not

distinct in late canonical and Second Temple texts, so as to eliminate the gods from any belief in a heavenly

council.27 It is difficult to discern what else guides such a conclusion other than the preconception of a certain

trajectory toward intolerant monotheism. Such reasoning unfortunately assumes what it seeks to prove: the

word Myl) in texts composed after the exile, the point at which Israel’s intolerant monotheism emerged, cannot

actually express a belief in the pre-exilic divine council, because that would result in henotheism or polytheism.

Rather, the word must mean "angels," because that would not be henotheism or polytheism.28

          As a third and final example, Second Temple literature exemplifies to a pervasive belief in exalted

divine mediators, including a second enthroned “man” in heaven, often treated as a hypostasis of the God of

Israel.29 Divine plurality and hypostasized vice regency are features of the pre-exilic divine council.30 No study


25
    Frank Moore Cross and David Noel Freedman, Studies in Ancient Yahwistic Poetry (Missoula, MT: Scholars Press, 1975; repr. Grand
Rapids: William. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1997), 45, n. 59.
26
    There are approximately 175 references to plural Myhl) / Myl) (ynb) in the Dead Sea Scrolls, frequently in the context of the divine
council. See Chapter Seven of this study.
27
    This interpretive decision proceeds from two assumptions: (1) the Israelite council, like that of Ugarit, did indeed distinguish the plural
Myhl) / Myl) (ynb) from the Myk)lm; and (2) the erasure of the gods of the council due to the advent of monotheism left only God
and the angels for a divine council after the exile. See Chapters Two and Three for discussion of this question and its importance to this
study.
28
    See the ensuing discussion for citations of scholars who employ this reasoning.
29
    Michael Fishbane, “Some Forms of Divine Appearance in Ancient Jewish Thought,” in From Ancient Israel to Modern Judaism
(Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1989), 261-270; James H. Charlesworth, “The Jewish Roots of Christology: The Discovery of the Hypostatic
Voice,” SJT 39 (1986): 19-41.
30
    The subject of a divine hypostasis and the controversy over hypostasis nomenclature is dealt with at length in several sources already
cited in footnotes (see especially Gieschen, Angelomorphic Christology, 36-45). Gieschen notes (p. 36) that the relationship of the
hwhy K)lm and God in particular “brought the term hypostasis into use for the past century.” He also notes that resistance to the term
by scholars has resulted in preference for terminology like “personified divine attributes,” but this language is “inadequate to describe the
independent identity of divine attributes which is present in many texts and also in later exegesis of those texts” (p. 36). In ancient
philosophical discourse the term originally meant “individual reality” but eventually came to mean “individual person.” The term was
placed into the scholarly discussion of Israelite religion by Helmer Ringgren, who accepted a qualified “personhood” meaning when he
noted that, “in many cases, what we are dealing with here is merely a stylistic device, a substitue for the divine name and God’s activity .
. . however, the abstract concept becomes semi-autonomous, appearing as an almost independent entity, half personified . . . This process
is called hypostatization” (Helmer Ringgren, Israelite Religion [trans. D. Green; London: SPCK, 1966], 309). Gieschen notes that the
understanding of hypostasis as independent person has become “a prominent part of the vocabulary of several scholars researching
mediator figures in Israelite religion, Samaritanism, early Christianity, and Rabbinism.” He specifically references the work of his adviser
of the divine council to date has explored these late Jewish references to divine plurality and the second divine

being who acts as God’s hypostasized vice-regent. Neither has any study considered this material and insisted

that the criteria for monotheism that disqualify pre-exilic Israelite religion from that categorization be applied to

Second Temple Judaism.

          This dissertation fills these voids. Against the backdrop of the lack of theological unanimity within

Second Temple Judaism,31 it can coherently be argued that the prevalence of a divine council in the Jewish

literature of the period suggests that, for some strands of Judaism, the pre-exilic view of God and his heavenly

host had changed very little by the first century C.E.

          All of these subjects merit more specific attention to adequately contextualize this study. The remainder

of this chapter is devoted to preparing the reader for the major issues that justify not only the conclusion that

belief in the divine council survived into the Common Era, but that the divine council provides explanatory

power for some vexing questions related to Israelite religion and later Jewish theology.


1.3 Divine Plurality in Late Canonical Texts and Assumptions About Israelite Monotheism

          Scholarship on the divine council has resulted in several points of broad agreement. With respect to

Ugarit, contrary to early studies, it is now widely agreed that the primacy of El was not compromised by the rise

of Baal to kingship. The vast majority of Ugaritic scholars view Baal’s kingship as operating under the

authority of El as El’s vizier or co-regent.32 Scholars have put forth a convincing co-regent model operating


J. E. Fossum, The Name of God and the Angel of the Lord: Samaritan and Jewish Concepts of Intermediation and the Origin of
Gnosticism (WUNT 36; Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 1985) and Alan Segal, whose work is of great relevance for this study (Alan F. Segal,
Two Powers in Heaven. Early Rabbinic Reports about Christianity and Gnosticism (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1977). Recent critics of
hypostasis language include Arthur Gibson (Biblical Semantic Logic: A Preliminary Analysis [Oxford: Blackwell, 1981], 92-96) and
James Barr (“Hypostatization of Linguistic Phenomena in Modern Theological Interpretation,” JSS 7 [1962]: 85-92), but both object only
to hypostatization of linguistic phenomena, not attributes given the proper context. For the sake of this study, it is recognized (with
Gibson and Barr) that hypostasis is a legitimate category for divine discussion that needs close attention to linguistic context, but also that
relegating hypostasis to mere figurative, literary descriptions of God’s immanent activity is often exegetically inadequate. This study
uses “hypostasis” to refer to “an aspect of deity that is depicted with independent personhood of varying degrees” (cf. Gieschen,
Angelomorphic Christology, 45).
31
   There was considerable variation in Second Temple Judaism. See Gabriele Boccaccini, “Multiple Judaisms: A New Understanding of
the Context of Earliest Christianity,” BR 11 (F 1995): 38-41, 46; idem, Beyond the Essene Hypothesis: The Parting of the Ways Between
Qumran and Enochic Judaism (Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 1998); E. P. Sanders, The Dead Sea Sect and Other Jews:
Commonalities, Overlaps and Differences,” in Dead Sea Scrolls in Their Historical Context (Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 2000), 7-43; Gary
G. Porton, “Diversity in Postbiblical Judaism,” in Early Judaism and Its Modern Interpreters (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1986), 57-80;
N. J. McEleney, “Orthodoxy in Judaism of the First Christian Century,” JSJ 4 (1973): 19-42; idem, “Orthodoxy in Judaism in the First
Christian Century,” JSJ 9 (1978): 83-88; David E. Aune, “Orthodoxy in First Century Judaism. A Response to N. J. McEleney,” JSJ 7
(1976): 1-10; L. L. Grabbe, “Orthodoxy in First Century Judaism. What Are the Issues?” JSJ 8 (1977): 149-153.
32
   See especially L'Heureux, Rank Among the Canaanite Gods, 10-25, and J. C. L. Gibson, "The Theology of the Ugaritic Baal Cycle,"
Or 53 (1984): 202-219 (esp. 207ff.). Chapter Two of the present study discusses the evidence for Baal’s role as vice-regent.
between the two. Baal can be called “king” (mlk)33 and can declare, “I alone it is who will rule over the gods”

()ah[dy d ymlk (l )ilm ),34 yet Ugaritic religion also references El as “king” (mlk).35 Baal, not El, is called “Most

High” ((ly)36 at Ugarit, yet Baal is “begotten” by El and it is El’s prerogative to appoint successors to the

kingship position when it is unoccupied.37 Despite his exalted status, Baal does not have a house like other

gods, and El’s permission must be solicited for one to be constructed.38 In fact, the Baal Cycle describes El as

having had other elevated co-regents, so that Baal’s kingship could be viewed as one of several successive

occupations of a contested position.39

          Further, it is the consensus of scholars that the Ugaritic (and larger Canaanite) council was the

conceptual precursor to the Israelite version of the divine council.40 As such, Israel’s council is thought to

reflect a pre-exilic polytheistic bureaucracy that included the notion that the gods (or “sons of El/God”)

exercised territorial control over the nations of the earth (Deut 32:8-9).41 In this perspective, Yahweh and El


33
   KTU 1.3.V: 32; 1.4.IV: 43. Unless otherwise indicated, translations of Ugaritic texts come from Wyatt, Religious Texts.
34
   Wyatt, Religious Texts, 111. KTU 1.4.vii:50.
35
   KTU 1.3.v:35-36.
36
   N. Wyatt, “The Titles of the Ugaritic Storm God,” UF 24 (1992): 419.
37
   KTU 1.3.v:35-36; 1.4.iv:44-47; 1.6.i:45-65. El also appointed Yamm king prior to Baal’s victory (KTU 1.1.iv:13-32).
38
   KTU 1.4.iv-vi.
39
   KTU 1.1.iv:10-20. For example, tells us that Yamm was El’s son and was appointed by El as co-regent (tgr). See Wyatt, Religious
Texts, 48, n. 49. Wyatt notes that KTU 1.1.iv:24-25 suggests that prior to Baal’s rise to kingship, it may be that Baal had a prior claim to
the position and had been passed over in favor of Yamm, whom he eventually replaces (Wyatt, Religious Texts, 49, n. 55).
40
   All of the studies on the divine council noted earlier take this view, but see especially Mark S. Smith, Origins, 3-77; idem, The Early
History of God, 145, n. 143; Simon B. Parker, "Sons of (the) God(s)," DDD, 794-798; idem, “Council,” DDD, 204-208; John Day,
Yahweh and the Gods and Goddesses of Canaan (JSOTSup 265; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 2000), 13-67.
41
   Reading Deut 32:8-9 with the LXX and Qumran material. Controversy over the text of this verse concerns the last phrase, “according
to the number of the sons of Israel,” which reflects the reading of the Masoretic Text of the Hebrew Bible (hereafter, MT), l)r#oy ynb.
The MT reading is also reflected in several later revisions of the LXX: a manuscript of Aquila (Codex X), Symmachus (also Codex X),
and Theodotion (See Fridericus Field, ed., Origenis Hexaplorum, Tomus I: Prolegomena, Genesis-Esther (Hildesheim: Georg Olms
Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1964), 320, n. 12). Most witnesses to the LXX in verse 8, however, read a1ggelw=n qeou=, which is interpretive.
See John William Wevers, ed., Septuaginta: Vetus Testamentum Graecum, Auctoritate Academiae Scientiarum Göttingensis Editum, vol.
III,2: Deuteronomium (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1977), 347 (hereafter, Göttingen Septuagint); idem, Notes on the Greek
Text of Deuteronomy (Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1995, 513). Wevers refers to this majority reading as "clearly a later attempt to avoid any
notion of lesser deities in favor of God's messengers" (Notes on the Greek Text of Deuteronomy, 513). Several LXX texts also read
ui9w=n qeou= (see Chapter Eight of this study for comments on the LXX in important divine council passages). This latter Greek
rendering presupposes a Hebrew text of either Myhl) ynb or Myl) ynb. The Hebrew phrases underlying a1ggelw=n qeou= and
ui9w=n qeou= are attested in two manuscripts from Qumran (4QDtj and 4QDtq) and by one (conflated) manuscript of Aquila (Göttingen
Septuagint, 347; Origenis Hexaplorum, Tomus I: Prolegomena, Genesis-Esther, 320. The manuscript of Aquila is Codex 85). l) ynb
is not an option for what was behind the LXX reading, as the Qumran support for Hebrew text underlying the unrevised LXX
                             q                                                                                     j
demonstrates. First, 4QDt has spaces for additional letters following the l of its [ ]l) ynb. Second, 4QDt clearly reads
Myhwl) ynb. See P. Sanders, The Provenance of Deuteronomy 32 (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1996), 156; Emanuel Tov, Textual Criticism of
the Hebrew Bible (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1992), 269; J. Tigay, Deuteronomy, The JPS Torah Commentary (Philadelphia: Jewish
Publication Society, 1996), 514-518; P. W. Skehan, “A Fragment of the ‘Song of Moses’ (Deut 32) from Qumran,” BASOR 136 (1954)
12-15; idem, “Qumran and the Present State of Old Testament Text Studies: The Masoretic Text,” JBL 78 (1959) 21; Julie Duncan, “A
                                                                                 b        e      h        j       b        k       l
Critical Edition of Deuteronomy Manuscripts from Qumran, Cave IV. 4QDt , 4QDt , 4QDt , 4QDt , 4QDt , 4QDt , 4QDt ,” (Ph.D.
were separate deities in Israelite religion, the former being the son of the latter.42 The members of the divine

council under El each ruled a specific region of the earth, and Yahweh, in this view, was given the nation of

Israel as his domain. Eventually, according to most scholars of the subject, El and Yahweh were fused (along

with Baal), and the divine council disappeared as Israelite religion achieved the breakthrough to monotheism.

An alleged editorial agenda driven by monotheistic priests and scribes during and after the exile enforced and

assured this religious transition via their work on the final redaction of the Hebrew Bible as it stood by that

time.43

          In speaking of a breakthrough to monotheism, scholars are expressing either the culmination of an

evolutionary process that moved Israel away from polytheism, or a sudden innovation that accomplished the

same.44 But while scholars agree that pre-exilic Israelite religion was not monotheistic, there has been

considerable debate over how to best characterize the nature of this early religion. On the one hand it might

seem that the obvious alternative is polytheism, since the existence of other gods is assumed in the concept of

the divine council and therefore embedded in early Israelite canonical literature.45 The archaeological record

provides abundant evidence that other gods were worshipped in Israel, and some scholars consider the

controversial finds from Kuntillet (Ajru,d and Khirbet el-Qo,m as evidence that Yahwistic religion in Israel

included a consort.46


diss., Harvard University, 1989); Eugene Ulrich et al., eds., Qumran Cave 4.IX: Deuteronomy to Kings (DJD XIV; Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1995), 75-79.
42
   Two current examples of this perspective are Mark S. Smith, Origins of Biblical Monotheism, 48-49, 156 and Parker, "The Beginning
of the Reign of God," 532-559. Smith in fact had identified El and Yahweh in Deut 32:8-9 and Psalm 82 in his first edition of The Early
History of God. He changed his position in the second edition. According to my research, a small minority of scholars disagree with this
dichotomy. See Chapters Two and Three of the present study.
43
   Robert Karl Gnuse, No Other Gods: Emergent Monotheism in Israel (JSOTSup 241; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1997), 201-
205.
44
   The history of the scholarship on Israel’s religion is sketched and summarized by Gnuse, No Other Gods, 5-150 and by Patrick D.
Miller, “Israelite Religion,” 142-181; idem, “God and the Gods: History of Religion as an Approach and Context for Bible and
Theology,” in Israelite Religion and Biblical Theology: Collected Essays (ed. Patrick D. Miller; JSOTSup 267; Sheffield: Sheffield
Academic Press, 2000), 365-396.
45
   For example, Exod 15:11; 20:1-6; Jdg 11:23-24; Ps 29:1. See Freedman, “Who is Like Thee Among the Gods?” 315-336; Mark S.
Smith, The Early History of God, 1-60; Michael David Coogan, “Canaanite Origins and Lineage: Reflections on the Religion of Ancient
Israel,” in Ancient Israelite Religion: Essays in Honor of Frank Moore Cross (ed. Patrick D. Miller, et al.; Philadelphia: Fortress Press,
1987), 115-124; Norbert Lohfink, “The Cult Reform of Josiah of Judah: 2 Kings 22-23 as a Source for the History of Israelite Religion,”
in Ancient Israelite Religion: Essays in Honor of Frank Moore Cross (ed. Patrick D. Miller, et al.; Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1987),
459-476.
46
   P. Kyle McCarter, “Aspects of the Religion of the Israelite Monarchy: Biblical and Epigraphic Data,” in Ancient Israelite Religion:
Essays in Honor of Frank Moore Cross (ed. Patrick D. Miller, et al.; Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1987), 137-156; William G. Dever,
“The Contribution of Archaeology to the Study of Canaanite and Early Israelite Literature,” in Ancient Israelite Religion: Essays in
Honor of Frank Moore Cross (ed. Patrick D. Miller, et al.; Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1987), 209-248; Mark S. Smith, The Early
History of God, 108-181.
         On the other hand, pre-exilic declarations of Yahweh’s incomparability among the gods (e.g., Exod

15:11) and various prohibitions against worshipping these gods have prompted many scholars to see pre-exilic

Israelite religion as henotheistic or monolatrous. Henotheism, defined succinctly, is the belief in many gods

alongside the “belief in one god, presiding over the other, no longer supreme gods.”47 Monolatry is intolerant

henotheism, where the acceptance of one supreme god turns to the insistence that only the supreme god be

worshipped.48 Monotheism is in turn defined as the exclusion of other gods; that is, “[it] differs from those

views that accept a plurality of divine beings.”49 Monotheism, then, amounts to the denial of the existence of

other gods. As Mark S. Smith states: “Monotheistic exclusivity is not simply a matter of cultic observance, as

in the First Commandment’s prohibition against ‘no other gods before me’ in Exod 20:3 and Deut 5:7. It

extends further to an understanding of deities in the cosmos (no other gods, period). . . . Statements of

incomparability are not included; such hyperbole is known also in Mesopotamian texts.”50 Smith’s statement

succinctly distinguishes the differences between henotheism, monolatry, and monotheism. It is also an

acknowledgement that statements of incomparability do not constitute monotheism, as he correctly points out

that polytheistic religions contain such language. But by this very definition and its qualifications, should post-

exilic Judaism be categorized as monotheistic?

         As noted above, the vast majority of scholars, in agreement with Smith, posit that monotheism in Israel

was initially hinted at in Deuteronomy, dated to the time of Josiah (ca. 640-609 B.C.E.). After the destruction of

Jerusalem and the beginning of the exile of Israel in Babylon (586 B.C.E.), a religious revolution occurred.

According to the dominant view of the monotheistic emergence, “the exile provoked a crisis in Israelite

Yahwistic religion” that led to its reformulation.51 In view of the defeat of Israel by pagan nations and their

gods, it is thought that Israel’s religious leaders were forced to deny the existence of other gods, so as to

attribute their situation to the judgment of Yahweh alone—in denial of the notion that Yahweh had been

defeated by another nation’s deity. Deutero-Isaiah, composed on the cusp of the release from exile (539 B.C.E.)


47
   Michiko Yusa, “Henotheism,” ER 6:266.
48
   Ibid.
49
   Theodore M. Ludwig, “Monotheism,” ER 10: 69; Yusa, “Henotheism,” ER 6:266.
50
   Mark S. Smith, Origins, 151, 279, n. 20.
51
   Bob Becking, “Continuity and Discontinuity After the Exile,” in The Crisis of Israelite Religion: Transformation of Religious
Tradition in Exilic and Post-Exilic Times (ed. Bob Becking and Marjo C.A. Korpel; OtSt 42; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999), 4.
reflects this shift in thinking most lucidly, according to the majority construct. The biblical books of Joshua

through 2 Kings, also composed in the days preceding and during the exile, were wedded to Deuteronomy to

form the Deuteronomistic History.52 This material also contains hints of opposition to other gods. Taken

collectively, it is in this literature that scholars detect what are considered denials of the existence of other

gods—statements that “there is no other god besides Yahweh”—and so a development toward exclusivistic

monotheism appears intelligible.

         There are a number of problems with this reconstruction and its assumptions. Since scholarship on the

divine council began, all scholars who have discussed the subject at length have noted that the most explicit

references to a divine assembly in the Hebrew Bible are found in late canonical texts such as Psalm 82, Job 1

and 2, and Zech 3:1-7. These texts, dating to the exile or afterward, are also regarded as the most transparent

parallels to the Ugaritic council.53 For sake of clarity, I am not speaking here of the passages in late canonical

texts that describe enduring polytheistic practices in Israel.54 The reference is to those texts that reflect a

worldview held by the exilic and post-exilic writer-redactor(s) that is consistent with pre-exilic affirmation of

the divine council and divine plurality. Given the assumed emergence of monotheism and the editorial

campaign conducted by those in power to ensure the sacred literature would reflect monotheism, these

descriptions of a council of gods are quite out of place.

         Second, scholars have frequently noted that in both the Dtr and Deuteronomy there are no categorical

denials of the existence of all other deities, the issue in both literary works being the centralization of the cult in

Jerusalem as a link to the promise to David.55 The Dtr’s account of Elijah’s reforms and Jehu’s rebellion

informs the reader that the priests of Asherah were not killed with those who served Baal, nor were the golden

calves, asherim, and other objects removed.56 Even the Shema( need not be construed as a declaration of

monotheism.57


52
   Hereafter, both “Deuteronomist” and “Deuteronomistic” are abbreviated as Dtr.
53
   See Chapters Three and Five for discussion of these texts and others.
54
   Susan Ackerman, Under Every Green Tree: Popular Religion in Sixth Century Judah (HSM 46; Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1992).
55
   Norbert Lohfink, “The Cult Reform of Josiah of Judah,” 468; Gnuse, No Other Gods, 206.
56
   Ibid., 202.
57
   See Nathan MacDonald, Deuteronomy and the Meaning of ‘Monotheism’ (FAT, Reihe 2; Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 2003), 60-75; C.
L. Labuschagne, The Incomparability of Yahweh in the Old Testament (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1966), 138-141. Labuschagne comments on
the Shema: “We may conclude that the exclusiveness of the confession, dx) hwhy, is not the result of monotheistic thought, but the
          In Deut 4:19-20 and 32:8-9 the issue goes beyond a lack of denial to the affirmation of the existence of

other gods.58 These two passages are not observations of fringe beliefs in Israel, but are important elements to

the larger theology of the Hebrew Bible’s articulation of the adversarial relationship between Israel and the

nations that consumes much of the Dtr. Taken together they describe the allotment of the “host of heaven” to

the other nations as their gods (4:19-20) and the placement of the nations under those gods (32:8-9).59

          Scholars have long noticed the vocabulary used in both texts overlaps considerably,60 and that Deut

32:8-9 is one of the most significant passages in the Hebrew Bible with respect to Israel’s early acceptance of

other gods.61 Some scholars resist seeing Deut 4:19-20 as evincing the same polytheistic (or monolatrous)

worldview, but Sanders’ comments are compelling:

          One of the clearest parallels of Deut 32:8-9 in the Hebrew Bible can be found in Deut 4:19-
          20, where Moses tells that YHWH once allotted (qlx; cf. Deut 32:9 and 29:25) “the host of
          heaven” (Mym#$h )bc) to the peoples (Mym() but kept the people of Israel as [an inheritance]
          hlxn for himself. It is absolutely clear that gods beside YHWH are meant by this heavenly
          host, consisting of the stars; cf. 29:25.62


          Sanders’ reference to Deut 29:25 (Hebrew) is noteworthy in that this text explicitly refers to Israel’s

crime of worshipping other gods that Yahweh had not allotted (qlx) to them: “They turned to the service of

other gods and worshipped them, gods whom they had not experienced and whom He [YHWH] had not allotted


result of Moses' work, as well as Israel's experience in history that Yahweh is incomparable . . . When Israel, therefore, confesses in the
Shema that Yahweh, 'our God', is the Single One, she expresses at the same time that she owes undivided loyalty to Him alone, for He is
the only One for her. The qualification of Yahweh as 'our God' in the confession is indispensable, for it witnesses the very personal
relation between Israel and Yahweh" (emphasis is the author’s). An understanding of the Shema in terms of Yahweh’s incomparability
among the gods rather than as a rejection of the other gods’ existence is consistent with Deuteronomy’s other statements that affirm a
worldview that contains other gods (4:19-20; 32:8-9,12). Cynthia L. Miller’s discussion of the verbless clause of Deut 6:4 briefly
describes five possible translations of the Shema, none of which produces a denial of the existence of other gods. See Cynthia L. Miller,
“Pivotal Issues in Analyzing the Verbless Clause,” in The Verbless Clause in Biblical Hebrew: Linguistic Approaches (ed. Cynthia L.
Miller and M. O’Connor; Linguistic Studies in Ancient West Semitic 1; Winona Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns, 1999), 3-5.
58
   See footnote 27 for the validation of the LXX and Qumran readings in Deut 32:8.
59
   Many scholars consider Deuteronomy 32 to be a composite. In the most recent (and exhaustive) study of this question, P. Sanders
concludes “. . . a pre-exilic date is extremely likely for a very large part of the song. In the rest of the song nothing appears to contradict
a pre-exilic dating . . . [w]e draw the conclusion that the song is a unity of composition dating from the pre-exilic period” (Sanders, The
Provenance of Deuteronomy 32, 429). Sanders spends two hundred pages analyzing the song’s colography, accentual patterns, and its
micro- and macro-structures. One of his resulting arguments is that if the verses for which a pre-exilic date has been denied by scholars
are removed from the song, the structure of the sub-cantos becomes quite irregular. For the purposes of this study, if the song is pre-
exilic, then scholars should have no trouble affirming that it describes a monolatrous worldview. If only part of it is pre-exilic with
subsequent additions, those who reworked the text to incorporate these additions had every opportunity to either remove the references to
other gods or utilize such references for some rhetorical purpose to prop up an intolerant monotheism. Neither option can be
demonstrated from the final form of the text.
60
   Sanders, The Provenance of Deuteronomy 32, 363-367.
61
   In addition to the noted items from Mark S. Smith and Simon B. Parker, see P. Sanders, The Provenance of Deuteronomy 32, 68-80,
426-430.
to them.”63 Deuteronomy 29’s indictment of Israel points to a violation of the religious and cosmic boundaries

drawn by Yahweh in Deut 4:19-20—the other gods, the host of heaven, are meant for the other nations, not

Israel. This establishes that the host of heaven in Deut 4:19-20 refers not just to celestial phenomena but to

other gods. This is in harmony with the scholarly studies of astronomical terminology in the Hebrew Bible that

Israelite religion, like other ancient religions of Canaan and the Near East, understood celestial bodies to be

divine beings.64 In fact, many canonical texts that identify stars as divine beings are late.65 It is also noteworthy

that this same “host of heaven” appears in a classic divine council scene in Dtr, 1 Kgs 22:17-23. If a redactional

campaign was waged during the exile in the name of intolerant monotheism, it was shockingly careless.

         Equally incongruous for the consensus reconstruction are the references to a divine council and its

members in Deutero-Isaiah.66 Scholars have long noted the council context of divine commands issued as plural

imperatives and Deutero-Isaiah’s use of divine council motifs.67 As B. Sommer has detailed in his work on

intertextuality, Deutero-Isaiah also makes use of Psalm 82 and its divine council scene.68 Although widely

considered the model of monotheistic expression in the Hebrew Bible, all the alleged denials of the existence of

other gods (e.g., “there is no god beside me”) in Deutero-Isaiah are expressed in the vocabulary and syntax of

Deuteronomy 4 and 32.69 If the juxtaposition of affirmations of the existence of other gods alongside

declarations that there are no gods beside Yahweh in Deuteronomy is considered by many scholars as indicating

a belief in Yahweh’s incomparability, on what ground do those same phrases constitute exclusivistic

monotheism in Deutero-Isaiah? In other words, the phrases themselves are not proof that the writer denies the


62
    P. Sanders, The Provenance of Deuteronomy 32, 363-364. Bracketed information is inserted by this writer.
63
    The translation is from the JPS Tanakh (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1999). Bracketed information is inserted by this
writer. For other comments on Deut 4:19-20 as the Hebrew Bible’s explanation for polytheism among the nations, see J. Tigay,
Deuteronomy, 433-436.
64
    See J. McKay, Religion in Judah Under the Assyrians (SBT, 2d Series, 26; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1973), 50-51; Korpel, A Rift in the
Clouds, 563-568; I. Zatelli, “Constellations,” DDD, 202-204; idem, “Astrology and the Worship of the Stars in the Bible,” ZAW 103
(1991): 86-99.
65
    See Job 38:7-8; 1 Kgs 22:19; Deut 17:3; Jer 8:2; 19:13; Dan 8:10-11; Neh 9:6. The idea survived into the first century C.E. as
witnessed by Second Temple literature (see Chapter Eight) and was known in the New Testament (Luke 2:13; Acts 7:42-43: Rev 1:20;
12:1-4). For the Ugaritic corollary texts, see KTU 1.10:3-5: bn )l (“sons of Ilu/El”) || ph}r kkbm (“assembly of the stars”)
|| dr dt s\mm (“race of heaven”); KTU 1.19.IV:23-25, 29-31: )lm (“gods”) || s\mym (“celestial ones”) || kbkbm (“stars”).
66
    For example, Isa 40:1-9. See Kingsbury, "The Prophets and the Council of Yahweh," 279-286; Christopher R. Seitz, “The Divine
Council: Temporal Transition and New Prophecy in the Book of Isaiah,” JBL 109:2 (1990): 229-247; M. E. Polley, “Hebrew Prophecy
Within the Council of Yahweh Examined in its Ancient Near Eastern Setting,” in Scripture in Context: Essays in the Comparative
Method. (ed. C. D. Evans, W.W. Hallo, and J.B. White; PTMS 34; Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh Theological Seminary, 1980), 141-156.
67
    Frank Moore Cross, “The Council of Yahweh in Second Isaiah,” JNES 12 (1953): 274-277
68
    Benjamin Sommer, A Prophet Reads Scripture: Allusion in Isaiah 40-66 (Stanford, Ca.: Stanford University Press, 1998).
69
    See Chapter Four of this study for treatment of this issue.
existence of other gods. It is simply not coherent to argue Deutero-Isaiah’s declarations reflect religious

innovation when the very same language is used in pre-exilic texts that are overwhelmingly regarded by biblical

scholars as not denying the existence of other gods.

         The tension between the common definition of monotheism and these data points is clear. If Smith’s

definition is on target, and it certainly represents the thinking of a majority of biblical scholars, it appears that

the final writer-redactors of Job, Psalm 82, Deuteronomy 4 and 32, and Deutero-Isaiah cannot be considered

monotheists. Indeed, one must either affirm that the relevant phrases in Deuteronomy actually denote

monotheism (but then what of the other gods?) or demonstrate conclusively that these same phrases in Deutero-

Isaiah cannot be statements of incomparability. One wonders on what basis such certainty could be achieved.

         When scholars have addressed this tension, terms like “inclusive monotheism” or “tolerant monolatry”

have been coined in an attempt to accurately classify Israelite religion in both pre- and post-exilic stages.70

These terms have not found acceptance among many scholars. The frustration over nomenclature is due to the

fact that “monotheism” is a modern term, appropriated and popularized by deists during the Enlightenment,

applied to the ancient Israelite belief system.71 As studies of the origin and development of the term show,

“monotheism” was initially not meant as an antonym to “polytheism” but to “atheism.”72 Such a distant

understanding would accommodate the phenomenon of the Israelite divine council. In the context of more

recent usage, reflected in Smith’s comments, a divine council of inferior gods subservient to the incomparable

Yahweh is understandably excluded.

         As the effort at coining new terms or modifiers for monotheism shows, scholars have attempted to

redefine or nuance the term in light of the features of late exilic and post-exilic texts. One might correctly object

that these texts consistently condemn worship of any other god, perhaps even a divine hypostasis, yet this is the

very definition of pre-exilic monolatry, where worship was reserved for Yahweh alone. Another problem with

this proposal is that acceptance—not just worship—of a divine hypostasis became the specific target of the

rabbis who wanted to censor the “two powers in heaven” idea.

70
   For these terms and their discussion, see Gnuse, No Other Gods, 5-128; Juha Pakkala, Intolerant Monotheism in the Deuteronomistic
History, (Publications of the Finnish Exegetical Society 76; Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1999), 1-20, 224-233; MacDonald,
Deuteronomy and the Meaning of ‘Monotheism’, 21-71.
71
   MacDonald, Deuteronomy and the Meaning of ‘Monotheism’, 1-21.
         Some scholars have argued for an “incipient monotheism” that could perhaps include the affirmation of

other gods who were inferior. There is precedent for this idea in the scholarly exchanges over henotheism,

monolatry, and Israelite religion. Historically, henotheism assumes all gods are species equals and the elevation

of one god is due to socio-political factors—not theological nuancing. Quoting Max Müller’s seminal work on

the subject, M. Yusa writes that henotheism was a technical term coined “to designate a peculiar form of

polytheism . . . [where] each god is, ‘at the time a real divinity, supreme and absolute’ not limited by the powers

of any other gods.”73 Müller called this idea “belief in single gods . . . a worship of one god after another.”74 T.

J. Meek referred to pre-exilic Israelite religion as both henotheistic and monolatrous,75 thereby equating the two,

based on the prohibition of worshipping other gods. H. H. Rowley, reacting to the work of Meek, articulated the

above idea of uniqueness. What distinguished Mosaic religion in his mind from that of other “henotheists” was

“not so much the teaching that Yahweh was to be the only God for Israel as the proclamation that Yahweh was

unique.”76 For Rowley, what distinguished pre-exilic religion from exclusivistic monotheism was universalism,

the belief that all should worship the one god. He acknowledged that Yahweh could act in foreign lands (cf. the

exodus), but referred to this only as “incipient universalism” and thus “incipient monotheism.”77

         Taking the idea of Yahweh’s uniqueness even further, it could perhaps be argued that assertions of

incomparability amount to the affirmation that other gods were ontologically inferior to a “species-unique”

being. Yahweh is distinguished as the creator of all other gods, the pre-existent One, making him ontologically

distinct. By virtue of ontological superiority, Yahweh alone is sovereign and thus deserving of worship. One

could object that the idea of “species uniqueness” is unintelligible with respect to divine beings, perhaps by

analogy to the human world. I am human, yet no other human is me, but all humans share the same species

status. Hence one can be unique in properties, which reflects the view of Rowley and others, but species

uniqueness is a fallacy. The analogy with humankind is flawed, however, since no such claim as pre-existence

72
   Ibid.
73
   Yusa, “Henotheism,” ER 6:266. Yusa is quoting from F. Max Müller, Selected Essays on Language, Mythology, and Religion, vol. 2
(1881; repr. New York: AMS Press, 1978), 136-137.
74
   Yusa, “Henotheism,” ER 6:266.
75
   T. J. Meek, “Monotheism and the Religion of Israel,” JBL 61 (1942): 21-43.
76
   H. H. Rowley, “Moses and Monotheism,” in From Moses to Qumran: Studies in the Old Testament (New York: Association Press,
1963), 45.
77
   Ibid., 60-61. Rowley does not interact with the early dating of Psalms 24 and 29, which speak of Yahweh’s global kingship. See
Chapter Three of this study.
before all humans is seriously offered. This is not the case with Israelite religion. To Israel, Yahweh was

unique. The claim that there was “none like Yahweh” was frequently made. In view of the fact that Yahweh is

credited with creating and commanding everything in heaven and earth—the “universe” in Israelite thought78—

it is plausible that Israelites believed that Yahweh is indeed an )elohim, but no other )elohim —whom Yahweh

created—are Yahweh. One can only have a single source of all else in heaven and earth that is. Interestingly,

species uniqueness is the basis for God’s distinction from the other gods in later Jewish writers.79 The outcome

of this particular attempt at redefining monotheism would be “mono-Yahwism,” but this is not monotheism by

modern definition since the existence of other gods is still assumed. It is, however, probably the closest term to

capturing pre-exilic Israelite belief about its incomparable god, Yahweh, who created the other gods.80

         Despite scholarly attempts to nuance the meaning of monotheism, none of these efforts can

accommodate both the meaning of this admittedly modern term and an affirmation of other gods in Israel’s

religion, whatever their level of inferiority to Yahweh. The only discernible difference between the terms

“monolatry” and “mono-Yahwism” is that the latter sees Yahweh as a species-unique being, while the former

does not. Both allow for a divine council of lesser gods under Yahweh. Since late canonical texts evince a

divine council congruent with pre-exilic Israelite religion, this study posits that Israelite religion after the exile

and into the Common Era was monolatry.81


1.4 The Problem of Divine Plurality in Second Temple Jewish Literature

         The preceding discussion makes clear that modern scholarship insists that the existence of more than

one “deity class” being rules out monotheism. Smith’s concise definition above certainly articulates this well.

Such a religion would either be classified as henotheism or monolatry, no matter how inferior the surrounding

deities or how consistently the worship of any lesser deity is forbidden. This discussion also raises an important

78
   Luis I. J. Stadelman, The Hebrew Conception of the World: A Philological and Literary Study (AnBib 39; Rome: Pontifical Institute
Press, 1970).
79
   For example, 2 (Slavonic) Enoch (J) 2:2 affirms that while other gods are feckless, they exist and are temporary: “And do not turn
away from the Lord, and worship vain gods, gods who did not create the heaven and the earth or any created thing; for they will perish,
and so will those who worship them.” The same book later has God inform Enoch that, “There is no adviser and no successor to my
creation. I am self-eternal and not made by hands” (33:4). Sibylline Oracles confess that “God is alone, unique, and supreme” since he
is “self-generated [and] unbegotten.” Yet in the same text one reads that, “if gods beget and yet remain immortal, there would have been
more gods born than men.” See John John J. Collins, “Sibylline Oracles, Fragments,” OTP 1:470 (the citations are from Fragment 1:16;
Fragment 2:1; Fragment 3:4).
80
   Pss 33:6; 148:1-5; Neh 9:6.
question: Should not the criteria that disqualify Israelite religion from monotheism be consistently applied to

later expressions of Judaism?

         Scholarship to date has established that the “two powers in heaven” controversy grew out of indications

of divine plurality in the Hebrew Bible. As Segal notes, “the basic heresy involved interpreting scripture to say

that a principal angelic or hypostatic manifestation in heaven was equivalent to God.”82 Other scholars have

made similar observations, namely that the rabbinic polemic of late antiquity against two powers in heaven

arose from "rabbinic unease about much material in the Hebrew Bible which seemed too close to paganism for

comfort."83

         Segal’s work details the texts in the Hebrew Bible that Second Temple writers understood as casting

Yahweh in human form, manifesting a hypostasis of Yahweh, or describing a “second divine man” ruling

alongside Yahweh. It is significant that pre-exilic, exilic, and post-exilic texts alike are among the most

frequently cited in defense of the idea of a “second power” in heaven: Gen 18; Exod 24:9ff.; Ezek 1:26; Dan

7:9ff. The point of the observation is that exilic and post-exilic material was not interpreted by Second Temple

writers in such a way as to discourage or disallow divine plurality or a divine council. To these writers, there

was a worldview continuity encompassing all these texts. The “antiquated” divine council of early Israel had

not been set aside. In point of fact, the second power in heaven was not considered heretical by Jewish

authorities until the second century C.E.84

         This study argues that the "unease" in the rabbinic Judaism of late antiquity stems from the assimilation

of divine council motifs from the Hebrew Bible into Second Temple Jewish religion. This study further argues

that the vice regency feature of the Israelite divine council—expressed in the Hebrew Bible as various

hypostases of Yahweh—is an adaptation of the co-regency of El and Baal. The co-regency of Yahweh and his

vice-regent in turn provides the context and rationale for the second power in heaven concept so pervasive in

Second Temple Jewish literature. This slight shift—that Yahweh’s vice-regent was an extension of His own



81
   This author understands this monolatry as the “mono-Yahwism” described above.
82
   Alan F. Segal, Two Powers in Heaven, x.
83
   Peter Hayman, "Monotheism - A Misused Word in Jewish Studies?" JJS 42:1 (Spring 1991): 12.
84
   One of the more important observations of recent scholarship on the “two powers in heaven” controversy is that the second power was
not an opposing power, as in Zoroastrianism, but a complementary power (A. Segal, Two Powers in Heaven, x, 260ff.).
essence—allowed for the Canaanite idea of a high God and a divine co-ruler to be retained without violation of

the Shema. This allowance was understood and sustained well into the Common Era.

        Scholars of Second Temple Judaism generally agree that Second Temple Judaism is only

comprehensible given such a construct. It is apparent from the data that Jews of this era saw no contradiction or

insurmountable difficulty in reserving worship to one deity who had no species equal while accepting the divine

status of other heavenly beings, including a second enthroned ruling power in heaven. In the discussion above, I

have called this monolatry, or “mono-Yahwism” with a vice-regent. Many scholars of first century Judaism,

however, consider this species-unique “mono-Yahwism” to in fact be monotheism on ancient terms. L.

Hurtado's comments are representative:

        It is mistaken to assume that we can evaluate ancient Jewish texts and beliefs in terms of
        whether or how closely they meet our preconceived idea of 'pure' monotheism. Unless we
        proceed inductively, we almost unavoidably import a definition from the sphere of
        theological polemics in an attempt to do historical analysis. . . . If we are to avoid a priori
        definitions and the imposition of our own theological judgments, we have no choice but to
        accept as monotheism the religion of those who profess to be monotheists, however their
        religion varies and may seem 'complicated' with other beings in addition to the one God . . .
        [we must not] seek to answer the question almost entirely on the basis of semantic arguments
        about the meaning of honorific titles or phrases, without always studying adequately how
        Jews practised [sic] their faith. . . . The characteristic willingness of Graeco-Roman Jews to
        endure the opprobrium of non-Jews over their refusal to worship other deities, even to the
        point of martyrdom, seems to me to reflect a fairly 'strict monotheism' expressed in fairly
        powerful measures.85


        Hurtado’s comments point to the key issue which, for him and other scholars, justifies retaining the term

monotheism: first century Jews refused to worship any other deity but Yahweh. In this redefinition of the

modern understanding of monotheism, these scholars reflect the same wish to retain the term evident among

scholars of Israelite religion who take the points of dissonance in the data of that field seriously. While this

attempted redefinition is vulnerable to criticism since it is actually the definition of monolatry, Hurtado’s

observations are still important. Dealing with the data on their own terms is absolutely necessary.

        Unfortunately, relatively few scholars have allowed the data of Second Temple period texts to be

interpreted without imposing the grid of the accepted consensus view of the development of monotheism.

Finding scholars who raise the question asked above—whether Second Temple Judaism would meet the same
criteria for monotheism as pressed upon earlier Israelite religion—is rare. There is no shortage of examples

from which to illustrate how the consensus assumption of the evolution of monotheism influences the

interpretation of Second Temple material.

          Two illustrations demonstrate the legitimacy of this study’s insistence that the litmus tests for

monotheism be consistently applied.

          First, if the divine council had ceased to exist in Israelite religion by the end of the exile, how does one

account for the roughly 175 references in the Qumran material to multiple Myhl) and Myl) (ynb)? How are

explicit references to the “divine council / council of El” (l) td() and the “council of the gods” (Myhwl) /

Myl) td( or Myhwl) / Myl) dws) in these same texts to be understood? Why are these exact phrases

understood as referring to polytheistic leanings in pre-exilic canonical literature, but redefined after the exile?

Moreover, how can the presumed downgrading of the pre-exilic gods of the divine council to servant angels

account for a Second Temple heavenly hierarchy that retained the worldview of territorial control by divine

beings?86

          Mark S. Smith asserts that later Israelite monotheism, as represented by Second Isaiah, "reduced and

modified the sense of divinity attached to angels" so that words like Myl) in the Dead Sea Scrolls must refer to

mere angels or heavenly powers "rather than full-fledged deities."87 Whybray likewise feels compelled to note

that by the Second Temple era, "the heavenly council had reached its final stage of development," and that the

council members "are to all intents and purposes the angels of later Jewish literature."88 L. Handy also

confidently states that “by the time of the Dead Sea Scrolls . . . the word Myhl) was used even by




85
   Larry Hurtado, "First-Century Jewish Monotheism," JSNT 71 (1998): 5-6.
86
   The reference here is to Daniel 10, among other Second Temple passages. Specifically, scholars have recognized for some time that
the “princes” over the nations in Daniel and associated terminology (“Prince of the host”, “Prince of princes”) reflect the worldview of
Deut 32:8-9. Significantly, the latter titles are linked by parallelism to each other and Daniel 11 to the highest tier of the council, a tier
above the princes. As scholars have frequently noted, in Second Temple literature, the princes of Daniel were referred to as archangels.
However, the controversial but oft-repeated supposition that Michael is to be identified with the Prince of Princes / Prince of the host
lacks coherence since Michael is a member of the archangel (prince) class and is never placed in the highest tier of the council. This
oversight has led to a number of difficulties in Second Temple angelology. For interaction with the relevant texts and secondary
literature, see Chapters Six and Eight of the present study.
87
   Mark S. Smith, Origins, 47-51.
88
   R. N. Whybray, The Heavenly Counsellor in Isaiah XL 13-14: A Study of the Sources of the Theology of Second Isaiah (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1971), 82.
contemporary authors to mean 'messengers,' or what we call 'angels', when it was not used to refer to Yahweh . .

. these Myhl), previously understood as deities, had come to be understood as angels.”89

          Whence does this assurance emerge? How does one actually know that when a late-era Jewish writer

used the word Myl) he was not referencing a worldview consistent with that of pre-exilic Israelite religion? An

examination of the documentation offered by the above scholars reveals that these conclusions are drawn on the

basis of the work of Maxwell J. Davidson and Carol Newsom.90 While noting the quality of their work, such

conclusions are without foundation, since both authors assume a priori that the language of deity now refers to

angels and not a divine council of gods.

          This assumed shift in meaning lacks textual support. An analysis of Davidson’s terminological chart

(which utilizes Newsom’s study) at the end of his book demonstrates the validity of this contention and its

implications.91 A tagged computer search of the Dead Sea Scrolls database reveals there are no lines from any

Qumran text where a “deity class” term (Myhl) / Myl) [ynb]) for a member of the heavenly host overlaps with

the word Myk)lm. In fact, there are only eleven instances in the entire Qumran corpus where Myhwl) / Myl)

[ynb] and Myk)lm occur within fifty words of each other.92 Eight of these occurrences have Myhwl) as

referring to the singular God of Israel.93 The three instances that remain do not clearly evince a semantic

overlap of the terms due to their fragmentary or obscure nature. Given the data it would be difficult to argue on

the basis of textual evidence that a Jewish writer of the post-exilic or Second Temple period understood the

terms Myhl) / Myl) [ynb] and Myk)lm as being completely interchangeable, as scholars today regularly

assume.94


89
   Lowell K. Handy, “One Problem Involved in Translating to Meaning: An Example of Acknowledging Time and Tradition,” SJOT 10:1
(1996): 19.
90
   Maxwell J. Davidson, Angels at Qumran: A Comparative Study of 1 Enoch 1-36; 72-108 and Sectarian Writings from Qumran
(JSPSup 11; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1992); Carol A. Newsom, Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice. A Critical Edition (HSM 27;
Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1985).
91
   Davidson, Angels at Qumran, 356ff.
92
   This statement reflects searches in The Dead Sea Scrolls Electronic Reference Library (CD-ROM), ed. Timothy H. Lim in consultation
with Philip S. Alexander (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1997). The eleven instances where Myhwl) / Myl) [ynb] and Myk)lm occur within fifty
words of each other are: 1Q28b (1QSb), col. IV; 4Q225, frg. 2, col. II; 4Q403, frg. 1, col. I; 4Q403, frg. 1, col. II; 4Q405 frg. 19ABCD,
line 7; 4Q405 frg. 20-21-22, col. II; 4Q405 frg. 23, col. I; 4Q510, frg. 1; 4Q511, frg. 2, col. I; 4Q511, frg. 10; 4Q511 frg. 35.
93
   1Q28b (1QSb), col. IV; 4Q225, frg. 2, col. II; 4Q403, frg. 1, col. I; 4Q403, frg. 1, col. II; 4Q510, frg. 1; 4Q511, frg. 2, col. I; 4Q511,
frg. 10; 4Q511 frg. 35.
94
   Again, see Chapters Three and Five for a brief discussion of the assumptions underlying the consensus denial of the retention of the
         Second, material from Qumran and other Second Temple period sources unmistakably speak of a

second deity-level co-regent alongside the God of Israel, albeit under his ultimate sovereignty. 11QMelchizedek

identifies the singular Myhwl) of the divine council scene in Ps 82:1 as Melchizedek, not Yahweh. The

writings of Philo transparently espouse a second divine being in the Hebrew Bible—that Yahweh had a vice-

regent. Philo refers to “two Gods,” which was “a synonym for ‘two powers’ in rabbinic thought.”95 He also

calls certain angels divine, refers to the Logos as “God” (qeo,j) and a “second God” (deu,teron qeo,n), and

positively associates the Logos with the second power in heaven.96 Eusebius “credits Philo with the term

‘second God,’ denoting the Logos.”97 Philo was very careful, however, to note that the Logos was not the God

of Israel Himself but rather the visible form of Yahweh. The fact that Philo “nowhere seeks to defend these

beliefs against a charge of heresy” creates the distinct impression that Philo was not departing from Jewish

orthodoxy, and that his teachings on the Logos met with no objections.98 While this is an argument from

silence, it is not without force, as other scholars have pointed out:

         . . . [R]esearch into the sociology of knowledge indicates that when objections are raised
         against one's belief system, that belief system or worldview must be defended or legitimated. .
         . . This is not to be explained by the lack of any universally recognized authority which could
         speak for Jewish “orthodoxy” in this period. Even within the context of first century Jewish
         diversity, parties in conflict with one another took seriously the objections of their opponents
         and sought to respond to them. . . . 99

         Another example comes from the first century C.E. apocalyptic work, The Apocalypse of Abraham,

where readers encounter the angel Yahoel, who bears the divine name and tells Abraham about “the ineffable

Name that is dwelling in me.”100 This language is drawn from Exod 23:20-23, where the hwhy K)lm is

distinguished from all other heavenly beings in the Hebrew Bible due to the presence of the divine Name. As


council gods after the exile.
95
   Segal, Two Powers in Heaven, 159. The Philo passage is Som. i, 227ff.
96
   For the Logos as “God,” see Som. i, 230ff. For the term “second God” who is the Logos, see QG 2,62. These passages are discussed
by Segal, Two Powers in Heaven, 159-181.
97
   Segal, Two Powers in Heaven, 164. The passage in Eusebius is P.E. VII, 13, 1.
98
   James McGrath and Jerry Truex, “ ‘Two Powers’ and Early Jewish and Christian Monotheism,” (paper presented at the annual meeting
of the Society of Biblical Literature, Denver, CO), 2 [cited 1 January 2003]. Online:
http://www.iwu.edu/~religion/ejcm/McGrath_SBL_2001_TwoPowers.htm.
99
   Ibid., 2. The authors cite Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckmann, The Social Construction of Reality (New York: Penguin, 1966),
110-146. With respect to inner-Jewish polemic in early Judaism, see Luke T. Johnson, “The New Testament’s Anti-Jewish Slander and
the Conventions of Ancient Polemic,” JBL 108 (1989): 436-441.
100
    Apoc. Ab. 10. See Alan Segal, “Some Observations about Paul and Intermediaries” (paper presented at the Philadelphia Seminar on
Christian Origins, Philadelphia, PA, February 4, 1988), 14 [cited 1 January 2003]. Online: http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/
psco/year25/8802.shtml.
Segal notes of Yahoel, “the figure is a personification of the name itself . . . it is quite clear that Yahoel is God’s

vice-regent, second only to God himself.”101 Later, in the second century, the terminology becomes even bolder,

as the vice-regent Metatron-Yahoel receives the divine name in the form of the phrase Nw+qh hwhy (“the lesser

Yahweh”).102

         With respect to the context of this study, if divine plurality had been erased from Israelite religion

shortly after the exile, how could belief in one God become “a keynote of the Jewish mission to Gentiles, as

attested by its importance in Jewish propaganda literature and its recognition by pagan writers as a mark of

Jews,”103 while including a second god? How could Jews tolerate references to plural Myhl) and assigned the

divine name to another being all the while maintaining—at times on pain of death—that they were

monotheists?104 The same could be asked of Christians who worshipped Jesus as Yahweh incarnate alongside

Yahweh, yet refused to embrace pagan Graeco-Roman polytheism under the same dire circumstances. 105

         In the last fifteen years a handful of scholars have taken note of the shortcomings of the consensus

evolutionary paradigm for monotheism as it relates to Second Temple Jewish literature. Two competing lines of

scholarly opinion have emerged in the effort to understand Second Temple Judaism’s accommodation of divine

intermediaries.

         The first line of thought, reflected by Hurtado’s earlier comments, argues that monotheism should be

redefined to accommodate the data of first century C.E. Judaism. In this view, cultic worship of any being other


101
    Segal, Two Powers in Heaven, 196.
102
    Ibid., 197. See 3 En. 7; 12:5, 48.
103
    Paul A. Rainbow, "Jewish Monotheism as the Matrix for New Testament Christology," NovT 33 (1991): 81-82. For examples of
Jewish propaganda literature, Rainbow cites, among many primary references, Sib. Or., frg. 1; III, 11-12; IV, 27-32; V, 172-176, 284-
285, 493-500; Pseudo-Arist. 132-143. He also cites Emil Schurer, The History of the Jewish People in the Age of Jesus Christ (175 B.C.-
A.D. 135), vol. III.1 (eds. Geza Vermes, Fergus Millar, and Matthew Black; rev. English ed.; Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 1973-1986), 150-
164. Among the non-Jewish writers and their works cited by Rainbow are Tacitus, Hist., V.5; Juvenal, Satire XIV.96-106. See also John
Gager, The Origins of Anti-Semitism: Attitudes Toward Judaism in Paganism and Christian Antiquity (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1983), 67-88 (esp. 84).
104
    For example, the decrees of Antiochus Epiphanes (ca. 167 B.C.E.) put Jews under such duress. See Elias J. Bickerman, The God of
the Maccabees: Studies on the Meaning and Origin of the Maccabean Revolt (trans. H.R. Moehring; SJLA 32; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1979).
105
    Larry Hurtado, "The Binitarian Shape of Early Christian Worship," in The Jewish Roots of Christological Monotheism: Papers from
the St. Andrews Conference on the Historical Origins of the Worship of Jesus (ed. Carey C. Newman, James R. Davila, and Gladys S.
Lewis; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999), 187-213; idem, "First-Century Jewish Monotheism," 21-22. See also in this regard Larry Hurtado, One
Lord, One God: Early Christian Devotion and Ancient Jewish Monotheism (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1988); P.M. Casey,
"Monotheism, Worship, and Christological Development in the Pauline Churches," in The Jewish Roots of Christological Monotheism:
Papers from the St. Andrews Conference on the Historical Origins of the Worship of Jesus (ed. Carey C. Newman, James R. Davila, and
Gladys S. Lewis; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999), 214-243 (esp. 214-218); and Adele Yarbro Collins, "The Worship of Jesus and the Imperial
Cult," in The Jewish Roots of Christological Monotheism: Papers from the St. Andrews Conference on the Historical Origins of the
Worship of Jesus (ed. Carey C. Newman, James R. Davila, and Gladys S. Lewis; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999), 234-257 (esp. 234-236).
than Yahweh was forbidden in accord with Deut 6:4-6. Later expressions of the same rhetoric have received

considerable scholarly attention in studies by Samuel Cohon,106 Ralph Marcus,107 Henry J. Wicks,108 L.

Stuckenbruck,109 and Paul Rainbow.110 These scholars have conclusively shown that "it is in the area of worship

that we find 'the decisive criterion' by which Jews maintained the uniqueness of God over against both idols and

God's own deputies."111

         As noted in the earlier discussion with respect to attempts to redefine monotheism by scholars of the

Hebrew Bible, the result of all the scholarly emphasis on the restriction of worship to one divine being is still

monolatry, not monotheism. While one could argue that such monolatry—if understood as a species-unique

mono-Yahwism—is in fact monotheism on ancient terms, this does not nullify the affirmation that other deity-

level beings exist.

         The second line of thought essentially recognizes that monolatry is the only workable categorization for

those strains of Second Temple Judaism whose faith included a divine vice-regent. Proponents of this view

argue that the abundance of evidence drawn from Jewish religious texts for what has variously been termed

"binitarianism," the "bifurcation of God," "ditheism," and "angelic divine agency" simply disqualifies Judaism at

this time from the modern understanding of monotheism. Either Judaism’s concept of the one God must have

been in a state of flux that allowed for an ambiguous relationship between God and other celestial beings, or the

religion of Israel was not exclusively monotheistic until the second or third centuries C.E.

         With such evidence in mind, P. Hayman concluded, "it is hardly ever appropriate to use the term

monotheism to describe the Jewish idea of God," remarking, that "hardly any variety of Judaism seems to have

been able to manage just one divine entity."112 He adds:



106
    Samuel S. Cohon, "The Unity of God: A Study in Hellenistic and Rabbinic Theology," HUCA 26 (1955): 425-479. Cohon's article
deals with Jewish self-identification and identification by others in monotheistic terms.
107
    Ralph Marcus, "Divine Names and Attributes in Hellenistic Jewish Literature," in Proceedings of the American Academy for Jewish
Research, 1931-32 (New York: American Academy for Jewish Research, 1933), 43-120. Marcus' work is a compilation of theological
vocabulary to discern to what degree (if any) Jews adopted the religious and philosophical language of Greeks about the nature of God.
108
    Henry J. Wicks, The Doctrine of God in the Jewish Apocryphal and Apocalyptic Literature (London: Hunter & Longhurst, 1915).
This is a survey of the apocryphal and apocalyptic literature of the Second Temple period documenting the firm monotheistic beliefs of
the Jews in this literature.
109
    Loren Stuckenbruck, Angel Veneration and Christology (Tübingen: J. C. B. Mohr, 1995).
110
    Rainbow, "Jewish Monotheism as the Matrix,” 78-91.
111
    Hurtado, "First-Century Jewish Monotheism," 22.
112
    Hayman, "Monotheism,” 2, 11.
         Monotheism . . . is indeed a misused word in Jewish Studies. The pattern of Jewish beliefs
         about God remains monarchistic throughout. God is king of a heavenly court consisting of
         many other powerful beings, not always under his control. For most Jews, God is the sole
         object of worship, but he is not the only divine being. In particular, there is always a prominent
         number two in the hierarchy to whom Israel in particular relates. This pattern is inherited from
         biblical times.113

         M. Barker agrees with Hayman's contention that Judaism may not properly be called monotheistic until

late antiquity. She charges that the "true religion of Israel, i.e., the pre-exilic religion of Jerusalem, was

preserved only by those who wrote 1 Enoch and related works."114 This religion, according to Barker, was by its

very nature polytheistic, since there were "several Sons of God, one of whom was Yahweh, the Holy One of

Israel."115 The differentiation between El and Yahweh is preserved in a number of ways, chief among them the

fact that "there are those [in the Hebrew Bible] called sons of El Elyon, El or Elohim, all clearly heavenly

beings, and there are those called sons of Yahweh or the Holy One who are human."116 According to Barker, the

El and Yahweh fusion in Israelite religion articulated by the Dtr was unsuccessful. El and Yahweh remained

Father and Son, and the former was always the high God of Israel while the latter became the patron angel of

Israel when the earth was divided among the sons of Elyon in Deut 32:8-9 (Septuagint).117

         Hayman’s comments identify the divine council as related to the presence of exalted divine beings in

Second Temple Jewish texts. His observation of the vice-regency paradigm drawn from the Hebrew Bible is

especially astute. In the judgment of this writer, Barker overstates the data in some cases. The separation of El

and Yahweh on polytheistic or henotheistic terms is problematic, as recent studies have demonstrated.118 Barker

fails to observe that Hos 1:10 mars the tight distinction she draws with respect to the vocabulary of divine

sonship (“Yet the number of the children of Israel will be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor

numbered; and it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto them, ‘You are not my people,’

113
    Ibid., 15.
114
    Margaret Barker, The Great Angel: A Study of Israel’s Second God (Louisville, KY: Westminster / John Knox Publishers, 1992), 14.
115
    Barker, The Great Angel, 3.
116
    Ibid., 4.
117
    Ibid., 6,10. See also Hayman, “Monotheism,” p. 6. Herafter, Septuagint is abbreviated as LXX.
118
    See Mark S. Smith, Origins, 45-48; Cross, Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic, 60-75; J. C. de Moor, The Rise of Yahwism: The Roots
of Israelite Monotheism (Bibliotheca Ephemeridum Theologicarum Lovaniensium XCI; Leuven: University Press / Uitgeverij Peeters,
1990), 223-260 (esp. 237-239); M. Dijkstra, “Yahweh-El or El-Yahweh?” in “Dort ziehen Schiffe dahin . . .” Collected Communications
to the XIVth Congress of the International Organization for the Study of the Old Testament, Paris 1992 (BEATAJ 28; Frankfurt am
Main: Peter Lang, 1996), 43-44; Stefan Paas, Creation and Judgement: Creation Texts in Some Eighth Century Prophets (OtSt 47;
Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2003), 134-143. The view that El and Yahweh were either two “unrelated” deities or “Father and Son” is dealt with at
there it shall be said unto them, ‘You are the sons of the living God’ [           yx'-lae ynEB.]”). The point of the
observation is that in this passage, the “sons of El” are clearly human and not divine, thereby overturning the

tidy distinction for which Barker argues. It is also marred by references to Israel as the son of God (Exod 4:22;

Hos 11:1). These passages and others link the language of divine sonship (Myhl) ynb) and human sonship in a

general “democratized” sense that extends beyond royal messianic divine sonship. In so doing, the divine

family of the divine council is made to include human beings—a theme that is quite familiar from Qumran and

the New Testament.119 Consequently, the “adoption” of humans into the council does not mean the council and

its members are downgraded. In fact, the relationship in Hosea and later in the Second Temple and New

Testament periods relies on the retention of a worldview that embraced the divine council in its pre-exilic

articulation.120



1.4 Comments on Metaphor and Divine Imagery

         As noted earlier, the goal of this dissertation is to demonstrate that belief in a divine council that

included other gods continued in Israelite religion after the exile. A potential objection readers may have to this

position is that later canonical literature may reference other gods in purely metaphorical terms. Some brief

comments on this objection is appropriate at this point.

         In his recent work on metaphor, semantics, and divine imagery, D. Aaron asks an important question:

“When we read a biblical passage that in some way involves the deity, how do we know whether its language

was meant literally or figuratively?”121 This question does not concern itself with whether the language utilized



length in Chapter Three. The point of the discussion there is not whether El and Yahweh were intellectually separated at some point in
Israel’s religion, but whether such a separation is evidenced by Deut 32:8-9 and Psalm 82.
119
    See Devorah Dimant, “Men as Angels: The Self-Image of the Qumran Community,” in Religion and Politics in the Ancient Near East
(ed. Adele Berlin; Bethesda, MD: University Press of America, 1996), 95; Carol Newsom, “He Has Established for Himself Priests:
Human and Angelic Priesthood in the Qumran Sabbath Shirot,” in Archaeology and History in the Dead Sea Scrolls: The New York
University Conference in Memory of Yigael Yadin (ed. Lawrence H. Schiffman; JSPSup 8; Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1990), 101-120;
Harold Riesenfeld, “Sons of God and Ecclesia: An Intertestamental Analysis,” 89-104; B. Byrne, “Sons of God”—“Seed of Abraham”;
James Tabor, “Firstborn of Many Brothers: A Pauline Notion of Apotheosis,” 295-303.
120
    The rule of the council is also extended to the “one like a human being” (the Son of Man) in Dan 7:9-13, an important passage at
Qumran and in Second Temple literature. As God’s vice-regent, this Son of Man shares his status with the people of Israel (Dan 7:22ff.).
Israel is therefore not to be equated with the Son of Man, but her status as divine son means shared authority with the council and its
vice-regent. See Chapter Six on Daniel 7 and these issues.
121
    David H. Aaron, Biblical Ambiguities: Metaphor, Semantics, and Divine Imagery (Brill Reference Library of Ancient Judaism 4;
Leiden: E. J. Brill), 1.
conveys to us that the deity or deities described actually exist. The historian of religion is rather concerned to

“establish the meaning intended by the author,” since “what matters is what the speaker believes.”122

          During his brief survey and critiques of the work of other linguists for their views on how metaphor

“works,” Aaron embarks on his goal of “cast[ing] doubt on the well-entrenched but unscrutinized methodologies

that currently dominate biblical scholarship regarding metaphor.”123 Along the way he makes several significant

observations about developing his “language-based interpretive strategy” for answering the question above.124

First, he notes that “a successful theory of meaning should not be limited to language alone; rather it should be

able to account for meaning in semiotic structures other than those exclusively linguistic, such as ritual acts [or]

iconography . . . ascriptive statements will be part of a broader cultural knowledge of how the world works.”125

Second, he rejects the common assumption that the absence of mythopoeic, poetic forms means that the literary-

structual elements of a given passage convey only demythologized content. In short, he argues that there is more

than one way to express myth. Third, he asks on what basis—other than some presumption of intellectual

superiority—biblical scholars have determined that imagery of pagan literary origin is to be taken literally,

whereas imagery in Israelite religious texts can be understood figuratively.

          This study raises each of these issues in different ways, and so Aaron’s proposals for handling divine

descriptions are most welcome. Aaron proposes two criteria for determining when a statement is not

metaphorical: (1) when “real actions, not figurative ones, are required by God as established by the context;”

and (2) when “there is no incongruity or anomaly implied by predicational statements.”126 By way of example,

Aaron understands literally such statements as “God is sun,” “Yahweh is a warrior,” and “Yahweh is a shield,”

meaning that, in the mind of the writer, Yahweh rules the skies and literally fought for and protected Israel from

her enemies. Such appositional statements, however, “do not convey ontological identity via reductionism [so

that] ontological identity is not the only alternative we have to metaphorical meaning.”127


122
    Ibid., 7, 11. The emphasis is the author’s. It should be noted tha Aaron is quite familiar with the literature related to the philosophy of
language and the ongoing debate about authorial intention. The purpose here is not to rehearse his discussion of those issues, but to get
to what he suggests for understanding metaphor and divine imagery.
123
    Ibid., 9.
124
    Ibid., 3, 44-46, 56-57.
125
    Ibid., 3, 61.
126
    Ibid., 59. The emphasis is the author’s.
127
    Ibid. The emphasis is the author’s.
            These remarks are useful for encouraging readers who might argue that the late canonical and Second

Temple period material examined in this study only refers to other gods in metaphorical terms to consider the

alternative. As this study will demonstrate, there are many texts, canonical and otherwise, that speak of other

gods and a second divine vice-regent in heaven which may be submitted to Aaron’s criteria for determining

when a statement is not metaphorical. But those criteria, it must be recalled, were proposed in the context of his

goal to “establish the meaning intended by the author” and his assertion that “ascriptive statements will be part

of a broader cultural knowledge.” In other words, one’s judgment as to whether certain texts convey real divine

actions, not figurative ones and evince no incongruity or anomaly must be made from the viewpoint of the

writer and his “broad cultural knowledge of how the world works.”

            Most biblical scholars consider deutero-Isaiah the most clearly monotheistic voice in Israel’s canon. As

this study will detail, there are cogent reasons to consider that his monotheistic commitment may be overstated.

Aside from the ambiguity of Deutero-Isaiah’s presumed denials of the existence of other gods, 128 the issue of

how to understand some of his statements can be illustrated in Isa 40:26:

                                                ~a'b'c. rP's.mib. ayciAMh; hL,ae ar'b'-ymi War.W ~k,ynEy[e ~Arm'-Waf.
                                                   s`rD'[.n< al{ vyai x;Ko #yMia;w> ~ynIAa brome ar'q.yI ~veB. ~L'kul.
                                         Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who has created these [objects / stars],
                                         who leads their host by number, who commands all of them by name by his
                                         tremendous power and mighty strength; not one is missing.


            The question is whether Deutero-Isaiah speaks here of the stars of heaven, the heavenly host, as a “well-

arrayed army” of divine beings led by Yahweh or something else.129 As already noted in this chapter, the belief

that the stars were gods in pre-exilic Israelite religion is well established.130 The question is important and

relevant, for the same terminology is used by the Deuteronomic writer in Deut 4:19-20, which, when compared

to the nearly identical text of Deut 32:8-9, clearly informs the reader that the starry host of heaven were thought

of as deities created and commanded by Yahweh. As we will see in Chapter Four, many scholars have no




128
      Chapter Four deals with the alleged denials of the existence of other gods in Deutero-Isaiah.
129
  F. Lelli, “Stars,” DDD, 809.
130
   I. Zatelli, “Astrology and the Worship of the Stars in the Bible,” 86-99; H. Niehr, “Host of Heaven,” DDD, 429; F. Lelli,
“Stars,” DDD, 809-815.
trouble affirming this for Deuteronomy, but are quite averse to it in Deutero-Isaiah since the latter is considered

to deny the existence of other gods.

          I see two possible answers to the question offered above: (1) In concert with the rest of the

contemporary ancient Near East, Deutero-Isaiah believed the stars were animate deities (albeit in his case, they

were firmly under Yahweh’s control), or (2) Deutero-Isaiah comprehended that the apparent movement of the

constellations was an entirely natural phenomenon related to the earth’s rotation, and so his reference to

Yahweh’s “leading” the host of heaven referred to the physical laws of the earth’s motion created by Yahweh.131

With respect to Aaron’s work on metaphor, we must ask which of these options in the mind of writer convey

real divine actions, not figurative ones taken in context with the writer’s “broad cultural knowledge of how the

world works.”

          It would be absurd to suggest that, in his pre-scientific world, Deutero-Isaiah could have grasped the

physical laws governing the earth’s movement on its axis. However, it is perhaps possible—though in my

judgment very unlikely—that Deutero-Isaiah did see the movement or “activity” of the stars as entirely natural

without understanding that process. Deutero-Isaiah could have had knowledge of the constellations and their

movement. Assuming he wrote at the same time or after the literary production of the writers of Job, Chronicles,

Amos, and Psalm 8, one could appeal to 1Chr 12:33, Job 9:9, and Amos 5:8 as evidence of this knowledge.

However, the ability to make such observations does not rule out that the ancients (and thus Deutero-Isaiah)

simultaneously believed the stars to be divine, an idea held as late as rabbinical and early Christian astrology.132

For the sake of consistency, then, one can only argue that Deutero-Isaiah is writing exclusively in metaphor in

Isa 40:22-26 by insisting (and proving) that he rejected the dominant worldview of his day, that the stars were

divine beings.

          It is far more likely that Deutero-Isaiah believed the stars to be animate. Other late exilic or post-exilic

writers contemporary with Deutero-Isaiah wrote in such mythological terms. For example, in Psalm 148:1-5 we

read:

131
   The movement of the constellations in this regular manner is associated with precession, a phenomenon involving the change in
orientation of the pole star, and that most scholars contend was not understood by the ancients until the Greek scientist Hipparchus (ca.
130 B.C.E.). The movement of constellations was of course known much earlier; it is only the meaning of precession that is in dispute.
See Tamsyn Barton, Ancient Astrology (New York: Routledge, 1994), 5-65.
                wyk'a'l.m;-lk' WhWll.h; 2 `~ymiArM.B; WhWll.h; ~yIm;V'h;-!mi hw"hy>-ta, Wll.h; Hy" Wll.h; 1
                                `rAa ybek.AK-lK' WhWll.h; x;rey"w> vm,v, WhWll.h; 3 `wya'b'c.-lK' WhWll.h;
                           hw"hy> ~ve-ta, Wll.h;y> 5 `~yIm'V'h; l[;me rv,a] ~yIM;h;w> ~yIm'V'h; ymev. WhWll.h; 4
                                                                                      `War'b.nIw> hW"ci aWh yKi
                        1 Praise Yah! Praise Yahweh from the heavens! Praise him in the heights! 2 Praise him, all
                        his angels! Praise him, all his hosts! 3 Praise him, sun and moon! Praise him, all stars of
                        light! 4 Praise him, O heavens of heavens and waters above the heavens! 5 Let them praise
                        the name of the Yahweh, for he commanded, and they were created.


         Ps 148:1-5 either links the elements of the heavenly hosts (sun, moon, stars) with angels, or the terms

are separate classes of beings who praise Yahweh from the heights of the heavens. The latter is more likely,

since angels would not be referred to as sun and moon, though it was common to identify these bodies as

gods.133 The reference to the “waters above the heavens” is also important, for it points to the pre-scientific

mythological worldview that there were waters above a solid vault of the earth, atop which Yahweh’s throne

was placed.134 Other texts in Job (22:12; 26:10; 28:24; 37:18; 38:7-8) utilize vocabulary that points to a

mythological understanding of the stars and “domed vault.” Deutero-Isaiah himself uses the kind of

mythological vocabulary found in Job and Psalms in the very same chapter as the host of heaven reference:

#r,a'h' gWx-l[; bveYOh; (Isa 40:22; “It is he [Yahweh] who sits enthroned upon the circle of the earth”).                       135




         It is difficult to see how Deutero-Isaiah was rejecting the worldview that saw the stars as divine

beings—the worldview of Deut 4:19-20; 32:8-9 (cf. Deut 17:3; 29:25). In light of the pre-scientific context of

his statements and the mythologically-charged vocabulary, it is also hard to judge the claim that Deutero-

Isaiah’s words are purely metaphorical as anything but a “literary emendation, [the] claim that a narrative,

idiom, or literary figure has been demythologized . . . when scholars, troubled by the mythological implications

of the words at the literal level, opt for a less mythological rendering that conforms better to their view of

Israelite belief.”136 There is no archaeological evidence for archaeoastronomy in Israel, nor are there Israelite


132
    Barton, Ancient Astrology, 68-74.
133
    The parallelism of Job 38:7-8 makes it clear that the stars are the “sons of God” (Myhl)h-ynb). This study distinguishes these beings
from angels (Myk)lm) in the divine council.
134
    H. G. May, "Some Cosmic Connotations of Mayim Rabbim, Many Waters," JBL 74 (1955): 9-21; Stadelmann, The Hebrew
Conception of the World, 42-43, 126.
135
    Norman C. Habel, "He Who Stretches Out the Heavens," CBQ 34:4 (1972): 421. Habel notes that “The verb ys\b , when applied to
Yahweh, frequently means enthronement.”
136
    Aaron, Biblical Ambiguities, 44.
astronomical texts like those from Mesopotamia demonstrating any astronomical practices in Israel. As Chapter

Four details, however, the divine council does appear in Deutero-Isaiah.

1.5 Overview of Ensuing Chapters

        This dissertation posits that indications of divine plurality in late canonical and non-canonical Second

Temple period texts are better explained by hypothesizing the survival of Israel’s pre-exilic divine council than

by the consensus view of the development of monotheism. The investigation proceeds by summarizing the data

for the divine council and its features in pre-exilic texts of the Hebrew Bible (Chapter 2), so as to indicate those

data upon which ensuing chapters will focus. Chapter Three deals with assumptions and arguments related to

two questions: (1) whether the Hebrew Bible underwent a systematic redaction to eliminate or obscure divine

plurality in its pages and (2) whether the received text contains hints of a progression from polytheism to

monotheism. The discussion focuses on how Deuteronomy 32 and Psalm 82 are used to argue these positions

and whether this argumentation is logically and exegetically coherent. Chapter Four concentrates attention on

the divine council and the religious worldview of Deuteronomy and Deutero-Isaiah. Chapter Five surveys exilic

and post-exilic texts not covered in preceding chapters (namely Job, Psalms, and Zechariah) in search of

evidence for divine plurality and divine council motifs. The book of Daniel is excluded from this chapter since

the entirety of Chapter Six discusses the divine council in that book, moving the study into the heart of the

Second Temple Period. Chapter Seven focuses on the sectarian literature of Qumran and its numerous

references to divine plurality and the divine council. The final chapter, Chapter Eight, overviews the divine

council in key LXX texts and Apocryphal and Pseudepigraphic literature dated prior to the end of the first

century C.E. The picture that emerges from this investigation is that the pre-exilic divine council not only

survived into the Second Temple Period, but for many Jewish writers and leaders during and after the exile it

was an integral component of their faith.
                                                       Chapter Two


                           The Divine Council of Pre-Exilic Israelite Religion
                         as the Backdrop for Divine Plurality in Late Canonical
                                       and Non-Canonical Texts


         Recent scholarly studies of the divine council document the linguistic and literary proof for the

correlation between the divine assembly at Ugarit and in the Hebrew Bible. This is not to say that the council of

Ugaritic religion and that of Israel are identical, only that there is a significant degree of congruence. A brief

survey of these data is essential for providing the reader with the body of evidence that will guide the

investigation through ensuing chapters to demonstrate the continuity of a council worldview from pre-exilic to

later canonical and non-canonical texts. This chapter first sketches the conspicuous terminological evidence for

a pantheon in both Ugaritic and Hebrew literature. The discussion then moves to a more detailed description of

the bureaucratic structure of the respective councils, highlighting the role of the vice-regent in the Ugaritic

council and Israelite adaptation of that structure in the context of its own monolatry. Brief comments are also

interjected as to how the features of this divine bureaucracy challenge the consensus view that a pre-exilic

council worldview was discontinued after the exile.


2.1 Terminology for the Divine Council

         The literature of Ugarit has a number of designations for the divine assembly. The most common

designations at Ugarit involve the root ph}r:137

         ph}r )ilm - "the assembly of El/ the gods"138
         ph}r bn )ilm - "the assembly of the sons of El/ the gods"139
         ph}r m(d - "the assembly of meeting"140
         ph}r kkbm - "the assembly of the stars"141
         As Smith notes, scholars are divided on whether the final -m in )ilm is enclitic,142 and thus whether the

phrases in which it appears denote any assembly of the gods or only El's assembly.143 El's assembly is certainly

137
    Mark S. Smith, Origins, 41; Mullen, Divine Council, 117-120.
138
    Gregorio Del Olmo Lete and Joaquín Sanmartín, “ph}r,” A Dictionary of the Ugaritic Language in the Alphabetic Tradition 2:669
(hereafter, DULAT). KTU 1.47:29, 1.118:28, 1.148:9.
139
    DULAT 2:669. KTU 1.4.III:14.
140
    DULAT 2:669. KTU 1.2.I:14, 15, 20, 31.
in view, however, when there is no final -m: mph}rt bn )il-"the assembly of the gods."144 Likewise, when ph}r

appears with other deity names, the specific council becomes apparent: ph}r b(l, "assembly of Baal."145

         None of these examples have precise linguistic equivalents in the Hebrew Bible, though Isa 14:12 does

refer to the d(wm rh ("mount of assembly") as the meeting place of El and his assembly. Closer to Hebrew

terminology are other Ugaritic phrases for council:

         (dt )ilm - "assembly of El / the gods"146
         dr )il - "assembly (circle) of El"147
         dr bn )il - "assembly (circle) of the sons of El"148
         dr dt s\mm - "assembly (circle) of those of heaven"149
         dr )il wph}r b(l - "the assembly (circle) of El and the assembly of Baal"150

          Linguistic parallels to these phrases have been found in the Hebrew Bible. Ps 82:1 makes reference to

the l) td(, translated variously as "divine assembly," "assembly of God," or "assembly of El." An unpointed

Hebrew Krd may refer to the divine council in Amos 8:14. The word is typically pointed Krede (“way”), but it

may actually be Hebrew rw@d (“circle”) with second person singular suffix (“your circle”; i.e., “your

pantheon”).151 Conceptually equivalent to the Ugaritic notion of a divine assembly are the Hebrew terms dws

(“council”) and lhq (“congregation”). For example, in Jer 23:18, 22 one reads "But which of them has stood in

the council of the LORD (hwhy dwsb) . . ." and, "But if they had stood in my council (ydwsb) . . ." Job 15:8




141
    DULAT 2:670. KTU 1.10.I:4; the phrase is parallel to bn )il in the same text. See also Job 38:7.
142
    Mark S. Smith, Origins, 41. See also Korpel, A Rift in the Clouds, 269.
143
    Mark S. Smith, Origins, 41.
144
    DULAT 2:566. See KTU 1.65:3; cf. 1.40:25, 42 along with bn )il in 1.40:33, 41 and its reconstruction in parallel lines in the same text
- lines 7, 16, 24; 1.62:7; 1.123:15 (so noted by Mark S. Smith, Origins, 42).
145
    DULAT 2:670. See KTU 1.39:7; 1.162:16; 1.87:18.
146
    DULAT 1:152. See KTU 1.15.II: 7, 11.
147
    DULAT 1:279-280. See KTU 1.15.III:19; 1.39:7; 1.162:16; 1.87:18.
148
    DULAT 1:279-280. See KTU 1.40:25, 33-34.
149
    DULAT 1:279-280. See KTU 1.10.I: 3, 5.
150
    DULAT 1:279-280. See KTU 1.39:7; 1.62:16; 1.87:18. See the ensuing discussion regarding the possibility that S[apa4nu may also
refer to El’s dwelling place. If that is the case, then Baal’s council may actually have been El’s council, with Baal ruling the council as
“king of the gods” under El.
151
    F. Brown, S. R. Driver, and C. A. Briggs, A Hebrew and English Lexicon of the Old Testament (Oxford: 1907), 189b. The suggested
repointing makes sense in the context of Amos 8:14. Compare the odd “They that swear by the sin of Samaria, and say, ‘Your god, O
Dan, lives,’ and, ‘The manner (Krede) of Beersheba lives’; even they shall fall, and never rise up again” to the parallelism in “They that
swear by the sin of Samaria, and say, ‘Your god, O Dan, lives,’ and, ‘The pantheon (K1r:du) of Beersheba lives’; even they shall fall, and
never rise up again.”
refers to the "council of God" (hwl) dws, and Ps 89:8 references the "council of the holy ones" (My#$dq dws).

The same psalm (89:6) also contains the phrase "assembly of the holy ones" (My#$wdq lhq).


2.2 The Meeting Place of the Divine Council152

         In broad terms of ancient Near Eastern mythology, the divine council was considered to meet on a

“cosmic mountain," that place where the gods lived, where heaven and earth intersected, divine decrees were

given, kingship was exercised, and from which the cosmic waters of fertility flowed.153 At some point in the

development of ancient near eastern religions, including those of the west Semitic variety, the temple also

became a cosmic center.154

         In Ugaritic mythology, El and his council met to govern the cosmos at the "source of the two rivers,"

(mbk nhrm) in the "midst of the fountains of the double-deep" (qrb )apq thmtm), located on the cosmic

mountain, h~urs\anu, associated with both physical and mythical peaks to the north of Ugarit.155 Another Ugaritic

text replaces )apq with (dt in the parallel phrases mbk nhrm || b(dt thmt ("El at the sources of the two rivers, at

the meeting place of the double-deep"), thereby confirming that El's abode was a "meeting place."156 El's

mountainous meeting place was also designated ph}r m(d, the place of the "assembled congregation."157

         Baal's divine mountain, Mount S[apa4nu, a proper noun of uncertain etymology,158 was also a focal point

of Ugaritic cosmic geography, as indicated by the characterization of a list of deities as "the gods of S[apa4nu

()il s[pn) and a reference to the cultic "feasts of S[apa4nu" (dbh s[pn).159 Baal's Mount S[apa4nu is also called a

"pleasant place" (n(m) which, as Smith notes, is "garden language that, in biblical texts, is a recurring motif for

the center of the cosmos."160 Interestingly, it appears as though El also either lived on Mount S[apa4nu161 or on a

152
    The fullest treatments of this item occur in Mullen, The Divine Council, 128-74, and Clifford, Cosmic Mountain, 34-176.
153
    Clifford, Cosmic Mountain, 3-4.
154
    Ibid., 21.
155
    DULAT 1:91. See KTU 1.3.V:5-7; 1.6.I:32-34. See also Cross, Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic, 36; Korpel, A Rift in the Clouds,
370; Clifford, Cosmic Mountain, 23-24, 37-38, 98-160.
156
    DULAT 1:151-152. See KTU 1.100:3. See also Claude F.A. Schaeffer, Ugaritica V: Nouveaux texts accadiens, hourrites et
ugaritiques (Paris: Paul Guenther, 1968), 564.
157
    Korpel, A Rift in the Clouds, 269.
158
    The two major studies of the word’s etymology are Cecelia Grave, “The Etymology of Northwest Semitic s[apa4nu,” UF 12 (1980):
221-229 and N. Wyatt, “The Significance of S[PN in Western Thought,” in Ugarit: Ein östmediterranes Kulturzentrum im Alten Orient:
Ergebnisse und Perspektiven der Forschung (ed. Manfried Dietrich and Oswald Loretz; Ugarit und seine altorientalische Umwelt 1;
Münster: Ugarit-Verlag, 1995), 213-237.
159
    DULAT 2:788; Mark S. Smith, Origins, 29. See KTU 1.3:III.29; 1.47.I; 1.148.I; 1.91.1; 1.101:2.
160
    Mark S. Smith, Origins, 29.
mountain range of which S[apa4nu was part.162 El’s bestowal of the throne of kingship over the gods, “delegated

in turn to Yamm, Baal, and Athtar,”163 occurs in KTU 1-2, where a number of mountainous peaks at times

appear interchangeable in view of the literary parallelism.164 Given the variety of mountain peaks for this scene,

the fact that Baal had his own council may be explained as his rulership of the entire divine council in his role as

the one who “rules over the gods” under El’s sovereign oversight. In view of Baal’s role as vice-regent (see

below), this understanding is quite possible. The plausibility of this perspective is strengthened by coupling it to

the recent work on the patrimonial household patterns in the Baal Cycle with respect to both the human and

divine family at Ugarit.165

          In connection with convening on the cosmic mountain at the crossroads of heaven and earth, El and his

council issued divine decrees from the “tents of El” (d;d )il)166 and the "tent (shrine)” (qrs\ ) of El.167 At least one

text also presents the divine mountain (h~urs\anu) in parallel with the divine tent (d;d). As Clifford notes in this

regard, that El would be described as living in a tent is no surprise, for in the Keret Epic, the gods live in

)ahlm ("tents") and ms\knt ("tabernacles").168 Other important vocabulary for El's dwelling at Ugarit include

mt`b ("dwelling") and mz[ll ("shelter") and, outside the Baal Cycle, bt ("house") and hklm ("temple").169 El is at

times alone in these places, and the gods come to his abode to seek various decisions and permissions, while at

other times he is pictured with his assembly.170

          All of this descriptive terminology for the cosmic center is found in the Hebrew Bible with respect to

Israel’s God and his council. Yahweh's sanctuary is on a mountain, Mount Zion (Ps 48:1-2) which is located in




161
    Wyatt, Religious Texts from Ugarit, 99, n. 128. Wyatt sees the activities in KTU 1.1.III:22-23, 1.2.III:4-5, and 1.4.IV:19-24 as taking
place at El’s abode (which is clear in those texts), but interprets the entourage sequence and Baal’s “departing for the heights of Saphon”
as referring to the same journey to El’s abode.
162
    Wyatt, “The Significance of S[PN in Western Thought,” 225-226.
163
    Wyatt, Myths of Power: A Study of Royal Myth and Ideology in Ugaritic and Biblical Tradition (UBL 13; Münster: Ugarit-Verlag,
1996), 34-44.
164
    Wyatt, “The Significance of S[PN in Western Thought,” 213-226.
165
    J. D. Schloen, “The Patrimonial Household in the Kingdom of Ugarit: A Weberian Analysis of Ancient Near Eastern Society” (Ph.D.
diss., Harvard University, 1995), 399. See the discussion below on the divine family.
166
    On the meaning of d;d and the form as plural, see Clifford, Cosmic Mountain, 51-53 and W. E. G. Watson, “Ugaritic Lexical Studies in
Perspective,” SEL 12 (1995): 221-222. See also DULAT 1:285.
167
    DULAT 2:712. Clifford, Cosmic Mountain, 48-53; see references in footnote 44. The word d;d appears six times to designate El's
dwelling (KTU 1.1.III:23; 1.2.III:5; 1.3.V:20-21; 1.4.IV:22-23; 1.6.I:34-35; 1.17.VI:48).
168
    Ibid., 54.
169
    Ibid., 53-54.
170
    Ibid., 55.
the Nwpc ytkry, the “heights of the north (s[apho,n),"171 or on a "very high mountain" (Ezek 40:2). Zion is the

d(wm rh ("mount of assembly"), again located in Nwpc ytkry (Isa 14:13). Within the confines of the divine

assembly's meeting place in Israelite religion, one finds that the council head sits on a throne that is connected to

Zion.172 The song of Moses (Exod 15:16-18) beseeches Yahweh to plant the people of Israel Ktlxn rhb (“in

the mount of your inheritance"), which is Yahweh’s #$dqm (“sanctuary”). This seat of authority is at times

depicted above a wide expanse ((yqr) in merkabah visions (Ezek 1:22-26).173 This language is quite similar to

the dwellings of both Mot and Kothar, which are each referred to as "the throne where he sits, the land of his

heritage" ()ars[ nh[lt).174

         A tradition preserved in Ezek 28:13-16 equates the "mountain of God" with Eden, the "garden of God."

The cosmic garden is referred to in conceptual parallel in 28:2 to the seat of the gods (Myhl) b#$wm) in the

midst of the seas (Mymy blb), thereby linking the cosmic imagery used for the cosmic mountains of El and

Baal at Ugarit to the Israelite council.175 The description of Eden in Gen 2:6-15 references the "ground flow"

(d() that "watered the entire face of the earth." The four headstreams that derived from the ground flow and the

river (rhn) flowing out of Eden have all been considered by scholars as parallel to the paradise language of the

watery dwelling place of El.176 Mount Zion is described as a watery habitation in Isa 33:20-22, and Ezek 47:1-

12, Zech 14:8, and Joel 3:18 (Hebrew, 4:18) all describe the waters flowing from the temple of God in

Jerusalem, Mount Zion, the divine mountain. All of these references are rooted in the tradition of a sacred

mountain in the north, Zaphon of Syria."177


171
    See Ps 48:1-2. Additionally, Shadday may mean "mountain dweller." See Korpel, A Rift in the Clouds, 581; Cross, Canaanite Myth
and Hebrew Epic, 48-60.
172
    See Isa 6:1; 8:18; Jer 3:17; 14:21; 17:12; Ps 9:12; Ezek 1:26.
173
    Ezek 10:1-22; 11:22; cf. Ps 18:11. See also Clifford, "Tent of Meeting," 207.
174
    Clifford, Cosmic Mountain, 81, 90-91; cf. KTU 1.1.III:1-3; 1.5.II:13-16.
175
    Ed Noort, "Gan-Eden in the Context of the Mythology of the Hebrew Bible," in Paradise Interpreted: Representations of Biblical
Paradise in Judaism and Christianity (ed. Gerard P. Luttikhuizen; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999), 21-36 (esp. 27-28); K. Spronk, Beatific
Afterlife in Ancient Israel and in the Ancient Near East, (AOAT 219; Neukirchen-Vluyn, 1986), 213-227; idem, "Down with He=le4l! The
Assumed Mythological Background of Isa 14:12," in "Und Mose schrieb dieses Lied auf": Studien zum Alten Testament und zum Alten
Orient: Festschrift fur Oswald Loretz (Münster, 1998), 717-726; Herbert G. May, "The King in the Garden of Eden: A Study of Ezekiel
28:12-19," in Israel's Prophetic Heritage: Essays in Honor of James Muilenburg (ed. Bernhard W. Anderson and Walter Harrelson; New
York: Harper and Brothers, 1962), 168.
176
    For the two rivers of El's mountain and the four waterways of Genesis 2, see Clifford, Cosmic Mountain, 99-102.
177
    Clifford, Cosmic Mountain, 100, 102.
           Just as the cosmic paradise of Eden is linked to Zion by the prophets, Mount Sinai, the "mountain of

God" (e.g., Exod 3:1; 4:27), served as the cosmic center prior to the construction of the Tabernacle and the

Temple. Sinai was the place where Moses, Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and the seventy elders of Israel saw God and

feasted with him (Exodus 24). The description of this banquet includes the observation that under God's feet

was a paved construction of "sapphire stone" (rypsh tnbl; likely lapis lazuli),178 "like the heavens for

clearness." In Baal's palace in S[apa4nu, there were also paved bricks (lbnt) that made Baal's house

bht t[hrm )iqn)um ("a house of the clearness of lapis lazuli").179 Most often Sinai is the place from which divine

decrees are issued. Yahweh gave the law to Israel at Sinai in the presence of his heavenly host (Deut 33:1-2; Ps

68:15-17 [Hebrew 16-18]). Ugaritic El likewise dispensed his decrees (Ugaritic, th[m) with his assembly

present.

           The imagery of the "domed tent" of El at Ugarit corresponds to Israelite descriptions of the Tent of

Meeting (d(wm lh)) and the Tabernacle (Nk#$m).180 Moses is told to construct the Tabernacle and its

equipment according to the pattern shown to him by God on the holy mountain (Exod 26:30; cf. 25:9,40). The

Tabernacle on earth is to be a copy of the heavenly tent in accord with the religious principle of "as in heaven,

so on earth."181 Israel's tent is the counterpart of the divine "houses" on the well-watered mountain dwelling of

El and the meeting place of the divine council. As noted previously, in the Keret Epic, the gods and "the circle

[pantheon] of El" lived in)ahlm ("tents") and ms\knt ("residences").182 El issued his decrees from his tent,183 as

the tent of Israel was the place God dispensed oracles for his people (Exod 33:7-11; Num 11:16-30). In Israel,

Yahweh came upon a "chariot of cloud" (Nn(h b() at Sinai, and the Tent of Meeting and the Tabernacle were

overshadowed by a cloud (Nn().184 At Ugarit, (nn "was a messenger of the deity, a cloud in all likelihood."185 In


178
    Ludwig Koehler, Walter Baumgartner, and Jakob Stamm, HALOT II:764.
179
    Ibid., 112.
180
    Clifford, "Tent of Meeting," 221-27.
181
    Clifford, Cosmic Mountain, 123. Clifford also notes that, "the similarity in form between the earthly dwelling of the god and its
heavenly prototype brings about the presence of the deity” (p. 150).
182
    DULAT 1:32, 2:591.
183
    KTU 1.4.I: 20-44.
184
    Exod 19:9. For the translation, see Clifford, Cosmic Mountain, 109ff. See Exod 19:16; 24:15ff.; 40:34-38; Num 9:15ff; 10:11;
12:5ff.; ; Deut 5:22; 31:15; 1 Kings 8; Isa 4:5.
185
    Clifford, Cosmic Mountain, 112. See also DULAT 1:170. Interestingly, one of the chiefs of the archangels (the Watchers) in the
Second Temple period book of 1 Enoch (1 En. 6:7; 69:2) was named l)nn( ((anan-el; lit., “cloud of El/God”). See Chapter Eight.
addition, Israel's tabernacle had a court (rcx). Baal's house had a h[s[r as well,186 but Baal coveted the bt /

h[z[r (“temple / [divine] mansion”) that other gods had.187 The above tent motifs are also transferred to Mount

Zion. Moreover, Zion is Yahweh's lh) in Isa 33:20 and other passages.188

          The specific section of the tabernacle and temple in which the presence of Yahweh dwelled was called

                                                o
the "most holy place" (My#$wdqh #$dq) which was "under the wings of the cherubim" (~ybi(WrK.h; ypen>K;


tx;T;-la,), a clear reference to throne room imagery.189 The My#$wdqh #$dqo phrase is infrequently replaced or
paralleled with rybd, the "inner sanctuary."190 According to Ps 76:3 and other texts, Yahweh's “pavilion” and

“dwelling place” (wtnw(mw wks) are on Zion.191 Given the context of the inner sanctum being situated at the

center of Yahweh's tent (tabernacle), house (temple), and the associated cloud and mountain language, there is

conceptual overlap between this most sacred location and the throne-room meeting place of Yahweh-El and his

council, the d(wm lh) / Nw(m / Ks.

          Finally, there are descriptions and terms for the cosmic center in the Hebrew Bible that are not shared

with Ugarit. Genesis 28 describes the patriarch Jacob’s vision of the Myhl) yk)lm ascending and descending

on the divine stairway (Mls) as the "house of God" and the "gate of heaven" (28:12-17). The association of this

vision at Bethel with the activity of God and various members of his divine council is confirmed in Genesis 35.

Bethel is described as another place where heaven and earth met, a place where the divine council held court.

Not only did Jacob see Yahweh at the top of the stairway (28:13) and the messenger Myk)lm going about their

business (28:12), but Gen 35:7 tells us that the plural Myhl)h also appeared to him (the verb is plural; w@lg;ni).192




186
    KTU 1.4.IV:51; 1.4.V: 63; 1.3:V:47.
187
    DULAT 1:245-250, 1:382. See Clifford, Cosmic Mountain, 125.
188
    Pss 26:8; 74:7; 1 Chr 9:23.
189
    See Exod 26:33; Num 18:10; 1 Kgs 8:6.
190
    See 1 Kgs 8:6; I1 Chr 5:7; Ps 28:2.
191
    For the terminology and other references, see Clifford, Cosmic Mountain, 151 and 1 Sam 2:29ff.; Pss 26:8; 26:15; 2 Chr 36:15; Deut
26:15; 2 Chr 30:27. wks (“his abode”) comes from the masculine Ks.
192
    Compare Gen 35:9 (dA[ bqo[]y:-la,( ~yhil{a/ ar'YEw: ; “And God appeared to Jacob again”) to 35:7 (~yhil{a/h'( wyl'ae Wlg>nI ; “the gods
appeared to him”).
While Mls ("stairway”) has no specific linguistic equivalent at Ugarit, but if scholars are correct in identifying

Mls as a ziggurat, then it is merely an artificial cosmic mountain.193

2.3 The Members of the Divine Council

         With respect to the constituents of the Ugaritic divine assembly,194 members are referred to as )ilm

("gods" [of the pantheon]),195 bn )il ("sons of El"), and bn )ilm ("sons of the gods / El").196 In the Keret Epic, El

sits at the head of the assembly and addresses its members as either )ilm ("gods") or bny ("my sons").197 The

interplay in terminology may suggest that El had his own council at Ugarit, composed of his own "sons," and

this council was part of a still larger, more general council.198 The divine assembly at Ugarit also included

"messenger gods" (ml)km),199 but contrary to the conclusions of scholars who have studied the divine council to

this point, I do not consider the ml)km to be members of the divine council. The ml)km were present in council

because they rendered service to the high god and the other gods who ranked above them,200 but the ruling

council was composed entirely of El and his spouse and offspring. In the textual references above to the

Ugaritic council, when members are identified the language of kinship is always used. The gods were all

fathered by El and were thus members of his divine family. A distinction between council membership (and its

authority) and service to council members must be drawn for reasons that will become clear below.

         As Mark S. Smith and L. Handy detail, the council members at Ugarit are arranged into a strictly ranked

hierarchy. The highest rank of authority was occupied by the royal couple, El and Athirat. Handy comments:

"They owned the heavens and the earth and so were entitled to appoint and establish various rulers of their




193
    Speiser understood Mls, a biblical hapax legomenon, as being derived from a Semitic stem sll, “to heap up” and suggested the
Mesopotamian ziggurat as the referent (E. A. Speiser, Genesis [AB 1; Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1964], 218). Others have proposed
that Mls should be connected (by metathesis) to Akkadian simmiltu (“stairway”), but the parallel is not without difficulty since in
Mesopotamia deities did not use stairways for descent as in Genesis 28 (H. Hoffner, “Second Millennium Antecedents to the Hebrew
bw),” JBL 86 (1967): 397 [n. 30], 398. See also the cautious approaches of H. R. Cohen, Biblical Hapax Legomena in the Light of
Akkadian and Ugaritic (SBLDS 37; Missoula, MT: Scholars Press, 1978), 34, 108; and F. Greenspahn, Hapax Legomenon in Biblical
Hebrew (SBLDS 74; Chico, Calif.: Scholars Press, 1984), 176.
194
    The fullest discussion of this topic is found in Mullen, The Divine Council, 175-208. See also Korpel, A Rift in the Clouds, 269-99.
195
    DULAT 1:48-51.
196
    DULAT 1:225-227. KTU 1.16.V:10-25; 1.40.R:25, 41-42; 1.65.R: 1-3; 1.162: 16-17; cf. Mullen, "Divine Assembly," 215.
197
    KTU 1.15.III:19; 1.16.V:10-25 (esp. 24-25). On this topic in general, see Mullen, The Divine Council, 183ff.
198
    Mark S. Smith, Origins, 43.
199
    DULAT 2:546.
200
    Ibid. See also Lowell K. Handy, "The Appearance of Pantheon in Judah," in The Triumph of Elohim: From Yahwisms to Judaisms,
ed. by Diana Vikander Edelman (Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 1995), 35-36.
cosmic world."201 At Ugarit, then, El was "the highest king of a series of kings over various aspects of the

universe," while Asherah was a "Queen Mother" figure.202

         The second tier at Ugarit was composed of the "royal children," the seventy sons of Athirat and El.203

The divine offspring possessed derivative authority granted to them by the level of highest authority. Handy

notes:

         They basically [had] free dominion in their rules, which allowed them to fight among
         themselves, argue with their superiors, abuse their power to thwart others (both divine and
         human) and even kill each other (not to mention humans). In all this, however, they remain
         answerable for their behavior and can be called up in judgment before El.204

         To this second tier belonged the major figures of the pantheon: Anat, Athtart, Athtar, Baal, and Mot

among others. In earlier studies of the Ugaritic material, Baal was considered to be an outsider to El’s family

due to his designation as the “son of Dgn.”205 Elsewhere Baal is clearly referred to as “son of El,”206 and refers

to El as “Bull El, my father.”207 The seventy sons of El and Athirat are also called Baal’s brothers.208

         That Baal was indeed a son of El is accepted by most scholars today. There have been three approaches

to the problem of El and Dagan, particularly with a goal to resolving Baal’s sonship. Based upon his work

demonstrating that Ugaritic Dagan was a weather god, N. Wyatt proposes that the nomen rectum in the phrase

bn Dgn be taken attributively and translated “son of rain” (“Rainy One”).209 This view casts aside any filial

relationship between Baal and Dagan, so that Baal is the son of El only. More recently J.D. Schloen has

proposed an explanation of bn Dgn that fits with his view that the Baal Cycle exhibits concerns of

patrimonialism. Schloen reasons that bn Dgn reflects an awareness “of a longer family history” of the gods

similar to that found in The Phoenician History of Philo of Byblos.210 In that version of history of the Canaanite

gods, both El (=Kronos) and Dagan (Dagon) were sons of Heaven (Ouranos) by the chief wife Earth (Ge4). Baal

was a younger son of Heaven (Ouranos) by a mistress, but only after El had overthrown Heaven. El “captured

201
    Handy, "Appearance of Pantheon," 33. Mark S. Smith and Handy disagree as to how much authority was actually shared by Athirat.
202
    Ibid.
203
    Mark S. Smith, Origins, 45.
204
    Handy, "Appearance of Pantheon," 35.
205
    For example, see KTU 1.2.I:18-19, 35-37; 1.5.VI:24; 1.6.I:6-7.
206
    KTU 1.17.VI:28-29.
207
    KTU 1.3.V:35; 1.4.IV:47; 1.17.I:23.
208
    KTU 1.4.VI:44-46.
209
    N. Wyatt, “The Relationship of the Deities Dagan and Hadad,” UF 12 (1980): 375-379.
210
    J. David Schloen, The House of the Father as Fact and Symbol: Patrimonialism in Ugarit and the Ancient Near East (Winona Lake,
Heaven’s mistress and gave her in marriage to his brother Dagan, whereupon she gave birth to Baal,” who was

thus half brother to both El and Dagan, and also a stepson to Dagan.211 As Schloen explains:

         By the time of the events recounted in the Ugaritic Baal myth, El’s brother Dagan had
         departed the scene and El was patriarch of an extended family that included his half-
         brother and nephew Baal, the adopted son of Dagan, as well as sons of his own—Yamm
         and Mot—who were Baal’s cousins and nephews. . . . The advantage of this explanation
         of Baal’s parentage as son of Dagan is that it accounts for the bitter rivalry between Baal
         and his agnatic relatives in the household of El. As a son of Heaven himself and younger
         brother of El, Baal could claim El’s patrimony as his own rightful inheritance. On the
         other hand, as full sons of the patriarch El, Yamm and Mot could claim the same
         inheritance. . . . This may explain El’s initial failure to defend what Baal regards as his
         rightful status.”212

         In Schloen’s view, then, Baal was son to El in the context of patriarchalism. While such a

tradition cannot be discounted, the problem with this perspective is that at Ugarit Baal is not considered a

brother of El, and Yamm and Mot are described as Baal’s brothers, not cousins and nephews. The

conflict between sons within a patriarchal household motif also does not depend on Baal’s status as an

outsider.

         G. del Olmo Lete opts for a third answer, that El and Dagan are the same deity. This view is

supported by the fact that KTU 1.118 and 1.47 have both El and Dagan sharing the same epithet, “father

god” ()ilib).213 Additionally, inscriptions at what most scholars consider the temple of Dagan at Ugarit

make an identification very likely,214 the Mesopotamian pantheon identified both Dagan and El with the

supreme god (Anu/Enlil),215 and at Ebla Dagan is the high god, also called “lord of Canaan.”216 Combining

Wyatt’s reasonable conclusion that Dagan was a weather god with the shared epithet and this

comparative material persuades this writer that, in the words of del Olmo Lete, “there can be no doubt

that the equation of Ilu and Daganu expresses the process of cultural and cultic identification of two




IN: Eisenbrauns, 2001), 354.
211
    Ibid, 354.
212
    Ibid.
213
    G. del Olmo Lete, Canaanite Religion According to the Liturgical Texts of Ugarit (trans. Wilfred G. E. Watson; Bethesda, MD: CDL
Press, 1999), 74. See DULAT 1:52.
214
    Ibid., 74, note 78. See also J. Fontenrose, “Dagon and El,” Oriens 10 (1957): 277-279.
215
    del Olmo Lete, Canaanite Religion, 74, n. 78.
216
    G. Pettinato, The Archives of Ebla (New York: Doubleday, 1981), 245ff.
(Canaanite / Amorite) pantheons.”217 This fusion explains the dual reference to Baal’s parentage

alongside the clear descriptions of his kinship with the other sons of El.

         The tier under the bn )ilm was presumably occupied by "craft deities" who were portrayed as

"specialists whose expertise was appreciated by those above them, but who had to take orders."218 These deities

are allowed to talk back to their superiors, argue with them and even make fun of them, but are (according to

Handy) not allowed to disobey.219

         Evidence for this third tier at Ugarit is weak. There is little reason to accept its presence in the council

structure. The most telling argument against this tier is that its members have freedom to act and argue with the

other gods, and are thus not mere servants of the council. Handy believes that the submission shown by these

deities must place them below the first two tiers, but this criterion makes little sense since all deities below El

were expected to obey him. Even Baal had to seek El’s approval for important decisions. Moreover, as Smith

notes elsewhere, one of these craftsmen deities may actually be regarded as royalty due to -mlk occurring in his

name (ktrmlk), making that deity a member of the second tier. Smith objects to this deity having second-tier

status since he was an outsider—a foreigner—whose homes were in Egypt and Crete. However, if the El-Dagan

correspondence reflects a merger between Canaanite and Amorite religion, the inclusion of an outside deity is

not sufficient for eliminating a deity from the second tier. In point of fact, as indicated below, the possession of

authority over a geographic region also marks a deity of the second tier. Lastly, given the absence of a

“craftsman” tier in the Hebrew pantheon, when its general structure is otherwise so similar to that of Ugarit,

there seems little reason to argue for this structural element of the council.

         At the bottom of the pantheon’s hierarchy were "the slaves of the divine realm, the messengers," the

ml)km, who "were not allowed any personal volition, [but] simply took orders, delivered messages, and behaved

themselves."220 This lack of volition, which extended to never arguing with those deities above them or

questioning authority, truly separates this tier from the others, and will be important for comparative purposes



217
    del Olmo Lete, Canaanite Religion, 74.
218
    Handy, "Appearance of Pantheon," 35. Mark S. Smith recognizes this tier, but admits it is poorly attested in Ugaritic texts. See my
subsequent comments on the tenuous nature of his third tier.
219
    Ibid.
220
    Ibid., 36.
with the Hebrew Bible. Despite their lowly status, these beings are still called )ilm in the Ugaritic literature.221

Smith speculates that this designation is used at Ugarit because the vocabulary for divinity can be used generally

to mark off a being that is not the same as a human.222 As noted below, there is likely a more coherent reason

behind the designation than “general divinity.”

          The Hebrew Bible evinces the same ranked hierarchy, with nuanced differences. At the top of the

pantheon was Yahweh or, depending on one's view of the relationship of epigraphic evidence from

Kuntillet (Ajrud and Khirbet el-Qom, the divine couple, Yahweh and his consort Asherah.223 What is clear is

that Yahweh (alone) is specifically described in several passages of the Hebrew Bible as presiding over a

council of divine beings.224

          The second tier is marked in the Hebrew Bible by the identification of the members of the divine

council as divine family members or "sons of God," the Myhl)h ynb and Myl) ynb.225 The Myhl)h ynb of

the divine assembly are also respectively called Myhl) and Nwyl( ynb in Ps 82:1,6. The Hebrew Bible refers to

these same beings as "stars" in Job 38:7 (rqb ybkwk in parallel to Myhl) ynb) and Isa 14:13 (l) ybkwk).226

Although these phrases can be used of celestial bodies, the context of these references points to divine beings,

not astronomical phenomena. As Oldenburg points out, El is never identified with a heavenly body.227 Scholars

have therefore argued persuasively that these phrases in both languages point to divine beings. Consequently,

the phrase “stars of El" in Isa 14:13 points to created beings with divine status rather than self-existent beings

who are divine in nature. The Hebrew Bible at times names the other Myhl) who are part of Yahweh's retinue,

notably Resheph (Deut 32:23-24; Hab 3:5) and Deber (Hab 3:5).228



221
    KTU 1.3.III:32. See K. M. Alomia, "Lesser Gods of the Ancient Near East and Some Comparisons with Heavenly Beings of the Old
Testament" (Ph.D. diss., Andrews University, 1987), 237.
222
    Mark S. Smith, Origins, 6, 97ff.
223
    The controversy relates to inscriptions from these locations that mention "Yahweh and his Asherah." There are other translation
possibilities for the phrase, but among those who accept "his Asherah" the question that requires an answer is whether or not a belief in
Asherah as Yahweh's consort was localized or part of the official worship at the Jerusalem Temple. This debate in turn involves the
interpretation of the asherah symbol in 2 Kgs 17:16. See Mark S. Smith, Origins, 47, 72-74; idem, Early History of God, 80-96.
224
    Pss 82, 89; Jer 23:18,22; Job 15:8; 1 Kings 22. See the discussion in Chapter Three for the controversy over Psalm 82 and the
relationship of the names Yahweh and El.
225
    Pss 29:1; 89:6 (Heb. 89:7); Gen 6:2,4; Job 1:6; 2:1. See Simon B. Parker, "Sons of (the) God(s)," DDD, 794-800.
226
    Ibid., 794-795.
227
    Ulf Oldenburg, "Above the Stars of El: El in Ancient South Arabic Religion," ZAW 82 (1970): 187-208 (cf. 197).
228
    Mark S. Smith, Early History of God, 47, 67-68, 149.
         The designation "stars" and its conceptual overlap with astral bodies very likely explains why certain

council members in the Hebrew Bible can also be described with terms of luminosity. Isa 14:12-15 refers to a

divine being rx#$ Nb llyh ("Shining One, son of Dawn"), possibly a biblical adaptation of the Athtar

mythology.229 Isa 14:12-15 is considered conceptually parallel to Ezek 28:1-19, where a description of Eden as

a well-watered garden and cosmic mountain evidence the divine council setting.

         The third tier of Handy and Smith, the craftsmen tier, is purely speculative. Handy postulates that the

"god of snake-bite-cure," called Neh[ushtan by Hezekiah, is evidence for a third-tier deity revered in the

pantheon of Judah.230 Handy argues that the similarity of this "healing deity" with the Ugaritic third-tier deity

Shatiqatu justifies this conclusion, but the argument lacks force due to the tenuous nature of this tier at Ugarit.231

         In concert with Ugaritic literature, the occupants of the lowest level of the divine assembly in the

Hebrew Bible are the Myk)lm, the "angels" of the English Bible. Specialists in Israelite religion who have

focused on the divine council are apparently in agreement that, unlike the Ugaritic texts, at no point are the

biblical Myk)lm ever specifically designated Myhl), Myl), or the Myhl)h ynb in the Hebrew text.232 Thus

in the consensus view, Myk)lm of the Israelite council are not only a separate class and at the lowest level of

the heavenly bureaucracy, but they are not regarded as ontologically equivalent to the Myhl), Myl), or the

Myhl)h ynb.

         While there is no conclusive evidence to overturn this viewpoint, it is important to point out that the

above distinctions may be incorrect. The Myhl) yk)lm (“angels/messengers of God”) in Jacob's dream of

Genesis 28 have already been brought into the discussion. It was noted that not only did Jacob see Yahweh at

the top of the stairway (28:13) and the Myk)lm going about their business (28:12), but Gen 35:7 tells us that


229
    Michael S. Heiser, “The Mythological Provenance of Isa 14:12-15: A Reconsideration of the Ugaritic Material,” VT 51:3 (2001): 354-
369.
230
    Lowell K. Handy, "Hezekiah's Unlikely Reform," ZAW 100 (1998): 114-115.
231
    The same could be said of Second Temple period material, where Raphael (cf. Hebrew )pr) is described as the healer of God in Tob
12:11-22. The fact that there is a divine being with this function does not prove a “craftsman” tier in the council.
232
    Handy, Among the Host of Heaven, 158-59; idem, “Dissenting Deities or Obedient Angels,” Biblical Research 35 (1990): 18-35;
Mark S. Smith, Origins, 46-48, 55-56; Simon B. Parker, “Sons (of the) God(s),” DDD, 794-800. Mullen’s earlier study does not directly
address the question in its discussion of council members (Divine Council, 175-209). I have not found any scholar who attempts to
the plural Myhl)h also appeared to Jacob in this theophanic vision (Myhl)h is the subject of w@lg;ni in 35:7).

The possibility therefore exists that the Myhl) yk)lm are Myhl)h. This would mean that, just as at Ugarit,

the Myk)lm were regarded as deities; that is, Myk)lm is a purely functional term. The Myk)lm would then

be Myhl)h on errands for Yahweh, and there would only be two tiers in the Israelite council—Yahweh and the

gods.233 This would be an interesting Israelite adaptation of the Canaanite council, given that all the gods would

be viewed as inferior and subservient to Yahweh, but this is not monotheism as we have seen. This

understanding also might assist in articulating the deity status of the hwhy K)lm, considered by many scholars

and Second Temple period rabbis as the human manifestation of Yahweh or the Name.234 Against the “two tier”

understanding, it could be argued that all three levels of the Israelite council were present in Jacob’s dream.

This view also suffers from later Jewish understanding of an angelic class of divine being,235 and the patrimonial

aspects of the divine council noted by Schloen.

          The strict separation of Myk)lm from Myhl), Myl) (ynb) is of great importance to some scholars. As

Chapter Three of this study details, Smith, Parker, and Handy argue forcefully from this position that, after the

exile, the middle tiers of the council—the tier of the other gods—disappeared or were absorbed by the lower

tier, thereby leaving only God and the angels. This alteration of the pre-exilic council was due to the advent of

exclusive monotheism. But if Myk)lm are actually Myhl) / Myl) (ynb) sent on errands, and Myk)lm are not

a distinct class in the Israelite version of the council, then the idea of a loss of the middle council tiers leaving

only God and his “angels” (Myk)lm) carries no weight whatsoever in either defending monotheism or denying




identify the Myk)lm as the plural Myhwl) / Myl) (ynb) in Israelite religion. It is likely that the overarching acceptance of the
consensus paradigm of monotheism prohibits such an approach for reasons discussed in this section of the study.
233
    The only other conceivable equation of the terms is the interchange in Dan 3:25-28, where Nebuchadnezzar sees a fourth personage in
the fiery furnace whose appearance he describes “as a son of the gods” in 3:25 (Nyhl)-rbl) and an angel in 3:28 (K)lm). Scholars
agree that, since these words are placed in the mouth of a foreigner, these descriptions cannot necessarily be taken as an articulation of
Jewish religion.
234
    See Fishbane, “Some Forms of Divine Appearance,” 261-270; Charlesworth, “The Hypostatic Voice,” 19-41; Fossum, The Name of
God and the Angel of the Lord, 76-87, 106-111, 192-203 (cf. 204-211 for later rabbinic evidence for this view).
235
    For example, the term “archangel” refers to a ruling angel. An archangel could be conceived as a member of the same heavenly class
who is granted authority over other constituent members, or a separate class superior to angels. Regardless of which explanation is
correct, the term and associated designations appear along with “gods” or “sons of God” in Second Temple texts.
the survival of the pre-exilic council. There would be no such class as angels; only God and the subservient

gods are in the council, before and after the exile.


2.4 The Structure and Operation of the Divine Council’s Bureaucracy

         This study accepts the view that Myk)lm are to be distinguished from Myhl), Myl) (ynb), but denies

an erasure of the middle tier of gods. The overall structure and operation of the Israelite divine council become

clearer once the second tier of the council of Ugarit and the vice-regency of Baal are adequately understood.

Clarity in these matters makes the Israelite council and the rationale for adaptation and alteration

comprehensible.

         As implied in Schloen’s treatment of patrimonial concerns in the Baal Cycle, along with the explicit

terminology involved, the top two tiers of the divine council at Ugarit should be understood in terms of a divine

family. At the top tier are the divine parents, followed in descending order by their children, "the seventy sons

of Athirat," who are the leading member gods of the council.236 The family/sonship nomenclature was the

primary litmus test for inclusion in the second tier. Second-tier status was reserved only for those deities related

to El. The ml)km are not "the sons of El" at Ugarit.

         Inclusion in the second tier of the divine council is also marked in five other ways. First, as Mark S.

Smith concludes in his most recent work on the council, “Deities were generally marked for holiness (qds\ ), as

can be inferred from the general designation of deities as 'holy ones.'"237 This appellation derives from the

language of divine kinship, particularly the phrase bn qds\.238 While this phrase can mean “sons of holiness,”

here qds\ is “an epithet of El himself” and thus the more appropriate translation is "sons of the Holy One."239

That the phrase applies to the second-tier deities is also apparent from its placement in parallel to )ilm in the

context of a meeting of the divine council with El present.240 Although Smith does not make the assertion, his

comments suggest that only those members of the Ugaritic divine council’s first two tiers are described in such a


236
    Mark S. Smith, Origins, 55-56.
237
    Ibid. See also DULAT 2:695-696.
238
    KTU 1.2.III:19-20; 1.2.IV:20-22; 1.16.I:10-11. Wyatt comments (Religious Texts, 54, n. 78) that the translation of qds\ as “(the
goddess) Qudshu” is “a modern invention . . . [since] the Egyptian examples adduced in her reconstruction have the feminine indicator
(qds\t).”
239
    Wyatt, Religious Texts, 221 (cf. note 203). See also DULAT 2:696.
240
    Mark S. Smith, Origins, 94. KTU 1.2.III:19ff. (see Wyatt, Religious Texts, 54); KTU 1.2.I:20-22, 37-38.
way, so that holiness was an attribute shared only by members of the divine family, not the ml)km. This reflects

Smith’s firm separation between the second and third tiers.

         Contrary to Smith’s implied restriction of holiness to the first two tiers, messengers are given such an

attribution. In one passage of the Baal Cycle, the Queen Mother Athirat sends two of her ml)km to deliver a

message. One of the messengers is named Qds\.241 That a mere servant of the council might be given such a

name is not surprising, for at Ugarit the ml)km were referred to as )ilm. When Baal’s messengers, Gpn and

)Ugr are sent out with a message to the other gods, the Baal Cycle informs us that Anat “caught sight of the

gods ()ilm).”242 This scene relates to the reason why ml)km are referred to as )ilm. When ml)km are referred to

as )ilm, the context is uniformly that of messengers being sent out by gods of higher rank. Ml)km are called

)ilm because they represent second-tier deities before an audience. This is an important element in the

discussion below related to vice regency and why the hwhy K)lm is at times indistinguishable from Yahweh in

the Hebrew Bible. The hwhy K)lm is the lone divine being in the Hebrew Bible in which Yahweh places the

divine Name (Exod 20:20-23).243

         These observations are also important with respect to the Hebrew Bible’s use of the appellation “holy

ones” (My#$dq) for members of the heavenly host. To be sure, the second-tier Myhl) of the Israelite divine

council are My#$dq.244 Ps 89:6-8 clearly mentions the My#$dq dws (“council of the holy ones”) and the

My#$dq lhq (“assembly of the holy ones”) specifically in reference to the Myl) ynb (“sons of God/the

gods”).245 Yahweh is the Holy One, and the holiness of the members of his council, his sons, derives from him.

Second Temple canonical texts make the same connection, as the phrase Ny#$ydq Nyhl) (“the holy gods”)




241
    DULAT 2:697. See KTU 1.3.VI:10-11.
242
    KTU 1.3.III:32. Wyatt, Religious Texts, 78.
243
    In two instances human beings are called hwhy K)lm (Mal 2:7, the priest; Hag 1:13, the prophet Haggai). I know of no scholar who
would argue that these human beings are theophanies or were the hwhy K)lm of pre-exilic Israelite religion. There is also no indication
that the divine Name is placed in these individuals. The hwhy K)lm as a divine personage is the visible manifestation of Yahweh, the
visual equivalent of the Name and other personified attributes of Yahweh. See H. B. Huffmon, “Name,” DDD, 611; R. E. Clements, God
and the Temple: The Idea of the Divine Presence in Ancient Israel (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1965); J. E. Fossum, The Name of
God and the Angel of the Lord, 76-87, 106-111.
244
    Wyatt, Religious Texts, 54, n. 78.
245
    Cf. earlier comments about the possibility of enclitic mem here.
occurs four times in the book of Daniel.246 There are also several references in Daniel to a "holy one" (#$ydq) or

“holy ones” (Ny#$ydq) in apposition to Nyry( / ry( (“Watcher[s]”),247 beings which, in non-canonical Second

temple literature are appositional to the Myhl)h-ynb. With respect to the Myk)lm, it is quite remarkable that

there is not a single occurrence in the Hebrew Bible where the noun K)lm is ever modified by #$dq.248 The

apparent implication is that, like the Ugaritic council, only the divine sons, the second-tier gods, are holy ones in

late canonical and non-canonical texts. A comparison of Job 4:18 and 15:15, however, renders such a

conclusion untenable, since the parallelisms between those texts link Myk)lm and My#$dq, thereby indicating

that My#$dq is a general term for any member of the heavenly populace, regardless of status.

          Of greater dissimilarity are the facts that, in the Hebrew Bible, faithful Israelites are called My#$dq,249

and Israel is spoken of in terms of divine sonship. Corporate Israel is also described as Yahweh’s “son” (Exod

4:22-23) and “sons of the living God” (Hos 2:1, Hebrew). The Israelite king is spoken of in divine sonship terms

(Ps 2:7; 45:6) and, as an Israelite and representative of Yahweh on his throne, was to be holy.250

          Second Temple literature makes use of all these motifs and connections in its own theology of the

divine council. For example, the book of Daniel refers to the faithful of Israel as “holy ones” (Dan 7:21-22; 25-

27) and as “shining like the brightness of the firmament” and “as the stars” (Dan 12:1-3). Daniel’s “holy ones”

also share the kingdom rule with the Most High and his vice-regent.251 The explicit teaching in the Shabbat

Shirot and other sectarian texts from Qumran, that the sect’s faithful would be numbered among the sons of God

and the divine council, has long been noted by scholars.252 The idea is even carried into the New Testament as

well, where followers of Christ are referred to as “sons of God” and “holy ones.”253 The current mainstream


246
   Dan 4:5-6, 15; 5:11. While it is true that the phrase in these texts is placed in the mouth of Gentiles, it is consistent with pre-exilic
Israelite divine council language.
247
    Dan 4:10, 14, 20. It is clear from the context of Daniel 4 that the phrase vyDIq;w> ry[I does not denote two different classes of beings.
There is only one being (note the 3ms subject of the verbs) conversing in Nebuchadnezzar's dream.
248
    The results of a computer search for the roots *#$dq* and *k)lm* in the same verse in the Hebrew Bible produce no occurrences of
singular K)lm or plural Myk)lm being described as holy.
249
    See Deut 33:3; Pss 16:3; 34:10; Isa 62:12; Dan 8:24; 12:7. The more common term for the faithful, though, is Mydysx.
250
    See Pss 2:6, 89:19-21 (Hebrew).
251
    For divine vice regency in Daniel, particularly against the backdrop of the Baal Cycle, see Chapter Six.
252
    See Chapter Seven for the relevant passages.
253
    For New Testament references to Christians as the “sons of God,” see John 1:12; Rom 8:14, 19; Phil 2:15; 1 John 3:1-2). The term
view—that a divine council with second-tier Myhl) disappeared during the exile—not only overlooks the

continuity of the language of divine plurality in Second Temple texts, but eviscerates important elements of

Second Temple Judaism by dismissing this language.

           Smith’s second indicator of an intermediate tier divine being is that the holiness of El and his progeny

is imparted to places or objects. As Smith notes in his study of the connection between holiness, cult places, and

cult objects, only beneficent gods (as opposed to cosmic enemies / monsters) received sacred mountains and cult

sites, which are "extensions of divinity."254 These beneficent gods are the sons of El and Athirat; the ml)km are

by definition excluded from worship or sacred spaces.255 Only members of the El’s family possessed holy

places or occupied divine mountains. Hence Baal's mountain, S[apa4nu, is called holy.256 Yahweh’s mountain,

like S[apa4nu, is the cosmic center, and therefore holy, as is the temple, its vessels, and ritual objects like the ark

of the covenant.257 In Second Temple Jewish thought, the Watchers of 1 Enoch—considered the sons of God of

the Hebrew Bible—had their own sacred mountain, Mount Hermon. The only divine beings who inherit or rule

mountains or sacred sites are those whose second-tier status is made clear by associated vocabulary and motifs.

         Third, as divine sons, each member of the second tier was given specific and respective spheres of

control to rule (mlk) under the overarching sovereignty of El and his vice-regent.258 In a divine council scene in

KTU 1.2, when the gods of the council, the bn qds\ (“sons of the Holy One”), see the messengers of Yamm they

“lower their heads . . . onto the thrones of their princeships.”259 In KTU 1.16.V:24-25 El commands, “sit my

children in your seats, on your princely thrones.” El, Baal, Yamm, Mot, and Athtar are all “kings” in Ugaritic

literature, and Yamm and Mot are both described as “Beloved of El” (Yamm mdd )il, Mot ydd )il), “a title

which represents the oracular authority designating an heir to the throne.”260



“saints” (a`gi,oi and other plural forms) is quite common in the New Testament (e.g., Acts 26:10; Rom 1:7; 8:27; 1 Cor. 14:33; Eph 1:1;
Phil 1:1). See B. Byrne, “Sons of God”—“Seed of Abraham”: A Study of the Idea of the Sonship of God of All Christians in Paul
Against the Jewish Background.
254
    Mark S. Smith, Origins, 28-31, 77.
255
    Ibid., 28-31.
256
    KTU 1.3.III:29-30; 1.16.I:7.
257
    For example, see Isa 11:9; 56:7; 57:13; Ezek 20:40; 28:14; Exod 26:34; 1 Kgs 8:4; 2 Chr 35:3; Pss 5:7; 11:4; 138:2; Mic 1:2; Hab
2:20.
258
    Handy, “Dissenting Deities,” 21; idem, “A Solution for the Problem of Many MLKM,” UF 20 (1988): 58.
259
    KTU 1.2.I: 24-25, 27-29.
260
    Wyatt, “Quaternities in the Mythology of Ba(al,” UF 21 (1989): 453. See also N. Wyatt, “‘Jedidiah’ and Cognate Forms as a Title of
Royal Legitimation,” Bib 66 (1985): 112-125.
          Other titles given to ruling deities at Ugarit include zbl (“prince”)261 and t`pt[ (“judge”).262 The latter can

mean more than a judicial function, as indicated by the Baal Cycle, where Yamm is called “prince [zbl] Yamm”

in parallel to “Ruler [t`pt[] Naharu” several times.263 The parallel terms also occur with respect to Baal.264 The

word t`pt[ is typically understood as “judge” but, according to Handy and others, “should be understood as a

designation for a ruler, parallel to mlk, ‘king.’”265 Pardee agrees with this assessment when he notes “One of

Yammu’s standard titles in these texts is t`pt[ nhr, where the first word is the old West Semitic term t{a4pit[u,

denoting a tribal / clan ruler.”266 The word is used with deities at Ugarit to denote “a god who passes judgment”

over a specific geographical territory ()il t{pz[ b TN).267

           These spheres of authority dispensed and approved by El could be over a geographical region or a

natural phenomenon, and fit together into a coherent administration of the cosmos and the earth.268 El’s

decisions on establishing these dominions are described most often with the verb mlk (“to rule”),269 though the

Ugaritic texts also utilize kn and s\kn (“establish, assign”).270 With respect to a territorial rule, in Ugaritic

religion the patron deity was responsible for appointing a human ruler or dynastic succession to maintain order

as a human regent in the god’s place.271 Any one of these rulers, divine or human, could be referred to as a mlk,

or have the exercise of his authority described with the verb mlk.272

           With respect to the Israelite divine council, the connection of the vocabulary of royalty to the sons of

God along with its associated “sphere sovereignty” is a significant correspondence to the Ugaritic council

hierarchy. The idea of a lead sovereign (Klm) governing along with royal princes (Myr#o), the viceroys of


261
    DULAT 2:998.
262
    DULAT 2:926.
263
    For example, see KTU 1.2.III:15-16, 21-25; 1.2.IV:29-30.
264
    For zbl, see KTU 1.5.VI:9-10; 1.6.I:41-43; 1.6.III:2-3, 8-9, 20-21; 1.6.IV:4-5, 15-16;1.9:18; 1. For t`pt[, see KTU 1.3.V:32-33 and
1.4.IV:43-44.
265
    Handy, Among the Host of Heaven, 113. Handy cites Rene8 Dussaud, “Les Combats sanglants de (Anat et le pouvir universal de El (V
AB et VI AB),” RHR 118 (1938): 151, n. 8, and J. Gray, The Legacy of Canaan (2d ed.; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1965), 87. See also C.
Gordon, “t`pt[,” Ugaritic Textbook (AnOr 38; Rome: Pontifical Institute, 1969) and “+p#$,”KBL (2d ed., Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1958). Wyatt
also points out that the Punic term s\opet[ is “frequently translated in Greek and Latin texts by their equivalents for mlk, basileuj and rex”
(Wyatt, “Titles of the Ugaritic Storm God,” 422).
266
    “The Ba(lu Myth,” translated by Dennis Pardee (COS 1.86:245, n. 36).
267
    DULAT 2:926.
268
    Handy, “Dissenting Deities,” 21; idem, “The Authorization of Divine Power and the Guilt of God in the Book of Job: Useful Ugaritic
Parallels,” JSOT 60 (1993): 108.
269
    DULAT 2:549. For example, KTU 1.6.I:47-55, the installation of Athtar, uses this verb four times.
270
    DULAT 1:447, 2:815. See KTU 1.3.V:36 for kn and KTU 1.16.26-27 for s\kn.
271
    Handy, Among the Host of Heaven, 112.
government,273 is drawn from the royal human bureaucracy (cf. Isa 32:1). In pre-exilic Israelite texts, Deut 32:8-

9 articulates an Israelite worldview where the second-tier Myhl)h-ynb are placed over the nations of the earth,

while Israel is Yahweh’s inheritance. Deities such as Chemosh are considered to rule over regions and people

groups,274 and Naaman’s request to carry dirt from the land of Israel evinces the belief that gods were connected

to geography.275 David’s concern that he had been driven from his share in Yahweh’s inheritance also reflects

the same worldview.276

          However, none of this should be taken as an indication that Yahweh’s global lordship is a late idea. As

noted in the Introduction, the earliest texts of the Hebrew Bible reflect a belief in Yahweh’s global reign.277 For

example, there is no biblical proof for the idea that pre-exilic Israelites viewed Yahweh as equal to (much less

beneath) Chemosh in authority. Additionally, Naaman’s request as written by the Dtr presupposes Yahweh’s

ability to judge him outside Israel, and David’s concern (again, typical of Dtr concerns) is related to cultic

obligations and priestly intercession that was restricted to Judah in practical terms. The possession and

governance of the surrounding nations by other gods must therefore be viewed in the context of hierarchical

bureaucratic authority.

          Psalm 82, a passage which most scholars consider a late composition that makes anachronistic use of

pre-exilic Israelite beliefs,278 also links the second-tier gods to the rule279 of the earth when the plural Myhl)

(v.1), the Nwyl( ynb (v.6), are asked, “how long will you judge (w+p#$t) unjustly . . .?” Rather than perform

the commands to render justice laid down in 82:3-4, the gods of the council have become corrupt, resulting in

the foundations of the earth being out of course (v.5). As punishment the gods are told in verse six, “you will

die (Nwtwmt) like humankind (Md)k) and fall like any of the princes (Myr#o).” Although the reference to


272
    Handy, “Many MLKM,” 57-58.
273
    P.A.H. deBoer, “The Counsellor,” in Wisdom in Israel and in the Ancient Near East: Presented to Professor Harold Henry Rowley
(ed. M. Noth and D. Winton Thomas; JSOTSup 3; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1955), 49.
274
    Judg 11:24-25.
275
    2 Kgs 5:17-18.
276
    1 Sam 26:19.
277
    Cf. Patrick D. Miller, “Israelite Religion,” 166; Cross and Freedman, Studies in Ancient Yahwistic Poetry, 45, n. 59.
278
    See Chapter Three for a critique of this perspective as it relates to the divine council. The chapter also contains discussion of the use
of Deut 32:8-9 by the Psalmist.
279
    Recall the work of Handy and Wyatt on +p#$ as “rule” (footnote 224). This understanding is in concert with Psalm 82’s relationship
to Deut 32:8-9 as discussed in Chapter Three.
princes certainly refers to any human ruler in light of the parallelism, the cosmic-geographical worldview of

Deut 32:8-9 which the psalm utilizes makes a double entendre possible. Ps 82:6 may imply that the gods will be

put to death just as any of the human princely rulers in their individual sphere of divine governance can be

dispatched. Even the high God’s own human regent, Adam, was so sentenced after becoming corrupt in his own

stewardship of Eden, the cosmic center.280

         As was the case with the connection of the gods to the description “holy ones,” the clearest references to

princely rulers of the divine realm exercising terrestrial rule are found in Second Temple literature. Dan 10:13,

20, 21 and 12:1 specifically indicates that nations (including Israel) have an assigned heavenly prince (r#o).

This description does not match the Myk)lm class in the divine council. At no time in Ugaritic literature or the

Hebrew Bible are the Myk)lm said to govern territory, nor are they ever referred to in royal terms.

         Fourth, and closely related to the idea that the second-tier gods are governing princes in the council

hierarchy, second-tier divine sons are distinguished in the Ugaritic divine council from the lowest tier of the

Myk)lm by independence or freedom. This freedom is not to be understood as complete autonomy, for “gods

in the second tier . . . are always subject to divine veto from the highest tier.”281 As Handy states:

         The act of running the cosmos has been left to other deities. . . . These deities are allowed a
         certain amount of freedom in their actions. They are turned loose to do what they do best . .
         . [but] messengers (ml)km) are ordered about by the other gods. . . . They have no
         independent authority . . . [and] are without independent volition.282

         The Hebrew Bible contains a number of references to divine beings possessing freedom to act

independently under the sovereignty of Yahweh. Aside from the implied freedom to govern in references like

Deut 32:8-9 and Psalm 82, the episodes in Job 1-2 where the sons of God assemble before Yahweh are

frequently noted in this regard. Specifically it is the sat[an who most clearly exercises his freedom to dispute

with Yahweh. Scholars have long recognized that the sat[an is performing a well-defined role for council

activity at Ugarit that was carried over into the Hebrew Bible. Quoting Handy once again:

         The Satan works for God, not against him . . . [his] duty is to patrol the universe for those who
         break the rules of the cosmic authority of Yahweh. . . . We are clearly not dealing with a
280
    The same verb form as in Ps 82:6, Nwtwmt, is used in Gen 3:14.
281
    Handy, "Appearance of Pantheon," 35.
282
    Handy, “Dissenting Deities,” 20, 23-24.
         member of the lowest level of divinities. . . . While the Satan is given some autonomy in the
         attack upon Job, the parameters of allowable action are clearly established by Yahweh. . . .
         The exact method of carrying out the tests is left to the Satan.283

         1 Kgs 22:19-23 also describes interaction on the part of members of the divine council with respect to

affairs on earth:

         19 Micaiah continued, "Therefore hear the word of the LORD: I saw the LORD sitting on his
         throne with all the host of heaven standing around him on his right and on his left. 20 And the
         LORD said, 'Who will entice Ahab into attacking Ramoth Gilead and going to his death there?'
         One suggested this, and another that. 21 Finally, a spirit came forward, stood before the LORD
         and said, 'I will entice him.' 22 'By what means?' the LORD asked. 'I will go out and be a lying
         spirit in the mouths of all his prophets,' he said. 'You will succeed in enticing him,' said the
         LORD. 'Go and do it.' 23 So now the LORD has put a lying spirit in the mouths of all these
         prophets of yours. The LORD has decreed disaster for you."

         P. D. Miller references the Dtr’s description of the deliberations within Yahweh’s council to entice

Ahab to go against Ramoth-Gilead in this passage to highlight the volitional ability of council members:

         [1 Kings 22 describes] the working out of the Lord’s plan and revealing it to the Lord’s true
         prophet. The decree is clearly that of the Lord. It is Yahweh’s word that initiates the
         conversation in council. But conversation and discussion do go on about how to implement
         the Lord’s plan.284

         More generally, but still with the volition of the gods of the council in view, Miller notes that:

         The rule of the cosmos is in the hands of Yahweh, but the context in which that rule takes
         place is the activity of the council where Yahweh’s decrees directing the human community
         and divine world are set forth and through whom they are communicated or enacted.285

         The idea that the second-tier gods govern under the authority of the High God in both the Ugaritic and

Israelite council rebuts a common argument offered by those who contend that the council disappeared from

Israel’s religion. Scholars frequently note that the pre-exilic council gods threatened to “diminish the centrality

of power in the single deity.”286 According to this view, the crisis of the exile and Yahweh’s apparent defeat

made it absolutely necessary for the exiles to see their God as supreme, necessitating the elimination of any

divine competition. This argument does not cohere. There is no hint at Ugarit that El’s position and power were

threatened by the second tier. Virtually all scholars of Ugaritic religion would now agree with Wyatt that “the



283
    Handy, “The Authorization of Divine Power,” 109, 117.
284
    Patrick D. Miller, “Cosmology and World Order in the Old Testament: The Divine Council as Cosmic-Political Symbol,” in Israelite
Religion and Biblical Theology: Collected Essays (JSOTSup 267; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 2000), 431.
285
    Ibid., 426.
286
    Handy, “Dissenting Deities,” 27.
old theory of El’s emasculation and deposition may now be discarded. . . . His authority is unquestioned.”287

Likewise, pre-exilic Yahwism is not threatened in any regard by the gods of the council. Yahweh in pre-exilic

Israelite religion is incomparable (Exod 15:11) and “has been enthroned as king forever” (Ps 24:7-10; 29:10).

          The fifth and final criterion for distinguishing the gods of the council’s second tier from the lower tier

beings is nonverbal indication of rank. Scholars have noticed that in the Baal Cycle all the gods of the second

tier pay obeisance to El, “but nowhere is it said that El, being the superior god, is expressing obeisance to

anyone.”288 The second-tier gods “never pay homage to one another and the messengers who belong to the

lowest rank always prostrate themselves before others, but others never honour them.”289 M. Smith has argued

that traveling denotes rank as well. The second-tier gods travel to El’s abode, but El never visits another deity,

indicating El’s superior status.290 Posture in council meetings also indicates rank,291 and this form of nonverbal

communication is more significant for the purposes of this study since Israel’s religion excludes gods showing

respect for one another or traveling to each other’s abode. Both Ugaritic and Israelite descriptions of council

proceedings have one or more gods standing or sitting on multiple thrones. As subsequent discussion will note,

though this vocabulary takes on technical status in the context of the divine council, its importance varies

depending on what is transpiring in the scene. More extended comments in this regard are deferred to the

discussion below on Baal’s role as vice-regent and other chapters.


2.5 The Status and Role of the Vice-Regent

          The data for vice regency are drawn from Ugaritic religion. Under the authority of El, the most

powerful office in the divine bureaucracy of Ugarit was the position of overlord of the gods. As scholars have

long recognized, it is this office, the right to be the one who “rules over the gods,” that is the focus of the

conflicts between Yamm, Baal, and Mot in the Baal Cycle. Within the context of El’s supreme command of the

pantheon and modern scholarship’s virtually unanimous conclusion that El was not displaced by Baal at



287
    Wyatt, “Quaternities,” 453.
288
    P. A. Kruger, “Rank Symbolism in the Baal Epic: Some Further Indicators,” UF 27 (1995): 170.
289
    Ibid. See the ensuing discussion for how this statement can be upheld in connection with the reaction of the sons of El to the
appearance of the messengers of Yamm.
290
    Mark S. Smith, “Divine Travel as a Token of Rank,” UF 16 (1984): 359.
291
    Kruger, “Rank Symbolism,” 170.
Ugarit,292 the position claimed by Baal merits consideration in terms of vice regency and as the backdrop to

Israel’s monolatrous adaptation of divine vice-regency.

         Baal must fight rivals for the right to rule the other gods. Once he emerges victorious, he is given the

titles of “most high” ((ly),293 “king, sovereign”(mlk),294 and “[the one] who rules over the gods”

(d ymlk (l )ilm).295 The Baal Cycle reads that the response to Baal’s victory is tgr )il bnh, which de Moor

renders as “El appointed his son deputy.”296 Baal is thus referred to as “lord” or “ruler” (yw) of the gods.297 The

rendering “god of the gods” is also possible, according to Wyatt, who remarks, “The apparent sense was ‘lord’,

or even ‘god’, given the equation in BM93035 )ilu = yau.”298 Baal also earns the title zbl b(l ars[ , a title “found

on nine occasions . . . but never used until Baal’s victory over Yamm is assured.”299 This title “appears to

indicate that the conflict between Baal and Yamm is concerned with lordship of the earth.”300 This would make

contextual sense, since the other sons of El were princes over geographic regions of the earth, while their ruler

would have authority over them and their individual earthly provinces. The title therefore is another reminder

that Baal is king over the second-tier gods under El. Lastly, in the divine council scene of KTU 1.2.I:20ff.,

while the second-tier gods of the council are sitting (yt`b) on their princely thrones, Baal is described as

“standing by El” (qm (l )il).301 The phrase comes at the point in the Baal Cycle where Yamm challenges the

gods of the council to surrender Baal, “the god whom you obey.”302 The gods of the council are described in

cringing posture at the demand, and are rebuked by Baal.


292
    Wyatt’s comment, noted previously in the discussion, is worth repeating here: “The old theory of El’s emasculation and deposition
may now be discarded . . . His authority is unquestioned” (Wyatt, “Quaternities,” 453). The older view of El’s otiose nature and
displacement now has anomaly status in Ugaritic scholarship.
293
    DULAT 1:169. KTU 1.16.III:6,8. See Wyatt, “The Titles of the Ugaritic Storm God,” 419.
294
    DULAT 2 :550. KTU 1.3.V: 32; 1.4.IV:43
295
    KTU 1.4.VIII:50. This title was also used of Yamm before he was defeated by Baal (KTU 1.1.IV.11-14).
296
    Johannes C. de Moor, The Seasonal Pattern in the Ugaritic Myth of Ba(lu (Kevalaer / Neukirchen-Vluyn, 1971), 118. KTU
1.1.IV:10-11. See also DULAT 1:310. Wyatt translates “El appointed his son regent,” and references de Moor’s opinion that the form in
the text should be a Dt (<y>tgr) from the root gr. The translation is derived from the Arabic cognate g\arra4 [y] (Wyatt, Religious Texts
from Ugarit, 48, note 49). It should be noted that the more traditional rendering of the phrase tgr )il bnh (“El has opposed his son”) is
also quite possible, given the Hebrew cognate grh (“to oppose”; cf. HALOT 1:202; DULAT 1:926). The problem is that the phrase
describes El’s response to Baal’s victory, and so “oppose” seems awkward.
297
    KTU 1.1.IV:10-11. Wyatt suggests that Ugaritic yw “is probably a Sanskrit loan word (yau<dyaus) occurring in various Near Eastern
contexts, including, perhaps, the DN Yahweh” (Wyatt, Religious Texts from Ugarit, 48, note 51). Wyatt’s idea regarding the divine
name derivation is supported by few (cf. J.C. de Moor, The Rise of Yahwism, 113-118). See Karel van der Toorn, “Yahweh,” DDD, 911;
idem, “Anat-Yahu, Some Other Deities, and the Jews of Elephantine,” Numen 39 (1992): 88-92.
298
    Wyatt, Religious Texts from Ugarit, 48, n. 51.
299
    Wyatt, “The Titles of the Ugaritic Storm God,” 416.
300
    Ibid.
301
    The translation is that of Wyatt (Wyatt, Religious Texts from Ugarit, 60). The purpose would no doubt be for service as vice-regent.
302
    Ibid., 61. See KTU 1.2.I:34, and the earlier reference in KTU 1.2.I:17-18.
         The interchange is curious, for Yamm at the time is referred to as the “ruler of the gods” but since Baal

is the god who is obeyed in council, Yamm must challenge him. Wyatt notes in this regard, “though Baal is

Yamm’s successor on the divine throne, it appears from the present passage that he also had a prior claim to it,

but was passed over by El in favour of Yamm.”303 Schloen’s patrimonial approach to the Baal Cycle comes to

mind as an explanation here, but regardless of how one parses the cosmic intrigue, Baal’s position in the council

as standing by El (the context is a meal, not a trial)304 is in some way connected to the perception among the

gods of the council that they owe Baal obeisance. Hence the Baal Cycle in its entirety clarifies who ultimately

earns the kingship of the gods under El. The two powers in the Ugaritic heaven are certainly El and Baal.

          The monolatrous nature of Israel’s religion meant a degree of divergence in function and description. It

is recognized that there were varieties of Yahwism in pre-exilic Israel that may have seen Asherah as a consort

figure, but the “official” Yahwists who produced the Hebrew Bible excluded this idea, if it indeed existed at all,

from the canonical text. But while the idea of a consort was apparently objectionable, the concept of vice-

regency was not. 305

         From an early stage, Israel adapted the role of a vice-regent in the divine council so that it was allowable

in a monolatrous context and did not violate the Shema. At Ugarit, though El was the ultimate sovereign, El and

Baal exercised rule over all the other gods of the council. El and Baal were separate deities, and since other

gods (Yamm) also bear Baal’s rulership titles early in the Baal Cycle, the vice-regency was apparently

something for which gods fought. In official Yahwism, on the other hand, the vice-regent position could not be

held by Baal. Rather than allow Baal a position in the council—even under Yahweh’s authority—Israelite

prophets and scribes appropriated Baal’s epithets and authority for Yahweh himself. The vice-regent in Israelite

303
    Ibid., 49, n. 55.
304
    See Mullen, The Divine Council, 230-232 for a discussion of the vocabulary of “standing” in the council. However, Mullen focuses
only on “legal” decision-making contexts of council scenes.
305
    This distinction would be especially noteworthy if McCarter’s thesis is correct. McCarter theorizes that Asherah in the
Kuntillet (Ajrud and Khirbet el-Qo,m inscriptions is the hypostasis of Yahweh, not a goddess. See P. Kyle McCarter, “Aspects of the
Religion of the Israelite Monarchy: Biblical and Epigraphic Data,” 137-156. Mark S. Smith (The Early History of God, 121-124) objects
to this view, but as Seth Sanders points out, while Mark S. Smith is critical of McCarter he fails to provide a more coherent alternative
(Seth Sanders, review of Mark S. Smith, The Early History of God [2d revised ed.], JHS 4 (2002-2003): 3, n.p. [cited 17 Jan 2004].
Online: http://www.arts.ualberta.ca/JHS/reviews/review119.htm). Sanders correctly points out that some of Mark S. Smith’s “secular
uses” (i.e., non-hypostatic) uses of Mynp (“face”) are not all secular in context. Specifically, Gen 33:10 and Exod 33:15-17 undermine
Mark S. Smith’s rebuttal. Sanders also notes that the example of Exod 23:21 “describes a clear angelic hypostasis of the Lord” because
of the presence of the Name. Mark S. Smith seems to admit that such a category is legitimate in Israelite religion when he says that the
goddess known as “Tannit-face-of-Baal” was actually the “representation” of Baal. There seems to be little discernible difference
religion was a divine being considered an extension of Yahweh himself. That is, the vice-regent is Yahweh’s

hypostasis.

          This construct contextualizes the term hwhy K)lm. At Ugarit, the messenger (ml)k) represents the

deity as though the deity was present. This dramatic “extension of personality” is illustrated in the Baal Cycle

(KTU 1.2.I:10ff.). The messengers sent by Yamm to demand that El relinquish Baal speak with Yamm’s voice

as though Lord Nahar were actually present. The frightened reaction of the second-tier gods at the appearance

of what would ordinarily be mere servants is telling, for they respond as though Lord Yamm was actually

present. It is in this extended passage that the ml)km are referred to as )ilm, and the reason is clear given the

bureaucratic character of the council. These ml)km are serving as extensions of the person of Yamm, Lord

Nahar, and thus they are virtual )ilm, their presence being understood as though Lord Nahar were there “in

person.” They are not )ilm; they only represent Yamm/Nahar as though he was present.

          This “personal extension” dynamic is in operation in the Hebrew Bible’s portrayal of the relationship

between the hwhy K)lm and Yahweh. This special agent of Yahweh and Yahweh himself are at times

virtually indistinguishable, yet the hwhy K)lm is not Yahweh. The issue is clarified if one recalls the infusion

of the divine name in this particular K)lm (Exod 23:20-23). This K)lm had power to withhold forgiveness of

sins and is consistently described—interchangeably with Yahweh—as the One who would defeat the inhabitants

of the land of Canaan.306 The interplay between the deliverance of Israel by the angel who bears the Name and

the deliverance by Yahweh himself is indicative that a principal angel is in mind, not just any indefinite member

of the heavenly host.307 Moreover, in Jacob’s encounter with the human figure at the river Jabbok, the being


between a divine “representation” and hypostasis.
306
    Any view of the hwhy K)lm which posits that any heavenly being could assume that role must account for these elements: the
presence of the Name, the power of forgiveness, and the identification with Yahweh as deliverer. There is no indication in the text that
the position of the hwhy K)lm rotated among members of the heavenly host. In contrast, the writers and redactors of the received text
create subtle linkages between various passages that suggest they viewed this being as a single recurring figure in the divine drama. See
the ensuing discussion for these linkages, noted by the rabbis with respect to the two powers controversy.
307
    See also Exod 33:2; Judg 2:1-3. In the latter the hwhy K)lm speaks in the first person as Yahweh who brought Israel out of Egypt.
Compare the list of nations in Exod 23:20-23, whom the hwhy K)lm would defeat, with those passages that describe Yahweh as the one
who defeats the same nations (Exod 3:1-9, 17; 34:11; Deut 7:1-2, 22-23; Jos 3:10; 11:1-6; 24:1-10; Judg 1:4-5. It is also clear that, even
in the passages that are said to be the most “confusing” in regard to parsing the relationship between Yahweh and the hwhy K)lm, the
two are in fact distinguished. For example, in Judges 6, after the hwhy K)lm leaves Gideon (v. 21) Yahweh still speaks to him directly
(v.23). Other passages that have the hwhy K)lm speaking in the first person as Yahweh are not difficult to explain given the “extension
of personality” concept. When messengers spoke in the Hebrew Bible and other ancient near eastern literature, they often used the first
with whom Jacob wrestled is eventually recognized by him as an Myhl) (one who refused to reveal his name),

prompting Jacob to name the place l)wnp. Hearkening back to this event, the prophet Hosea (12:3ff., Hebrew)

says of Jacob:

                                                                 `~yhil{a/-ta, hr'f' AnAab.W wyxia'-ta, bq;[' !j,B,B; 4
                                                                                                lk'YUw: %a'l.m;-la, rf;Y"w" 5
                                                              `WnM'[i rBed;y> ~v'w> WNa,c'm.yI lae-tyBe Al-!N<x;t.YIw: hk'B'
                                               4 In the womb he took his brother by the heel;
                                               in his strength he strove with God (Myhl)).
                                               5 Yes, he strove with an angel (K)lm), and prevailed:
                                                he wept, and made supplication to him;
                                               he found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us.


The same correlation is struck by Jacob at the end of his life (Gen 48:15-16), where the patriarch asks God—the

Angel in parallelism—to bless Joseph and his sons:

                     qx'c.yIw> ~h'r'b.a; wyn"p'l. yt;boa] WkL.h;t.hi rv,a] ~yhil{a/h' rm;aYOw: @seAy-ta, %r,b'y>w: 15
                                                                  `hZ<h; ~AYh;-d[; ydiA[me ytiao h[,roh' ~yhil{a/h'
                                   ymiv. ~h,b' areQ'yIw> ~yri['N>h;-ta, %reb'y> [r'-lK'mi ytiao laeGOh; %a'l.M;h; 16
                                                      `#r,a'h' br,q,B. brol' WGd.yIw> qx'c.yIw> ~h'r'b.a; yt;boa] ~vew>
       15 And he blessed Joseph, and said, God (Myhl)h), before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked,
       the God (Myhl)h) who fed me all my life to this day,
       16 The Angel (K)lmh) who redeemed me from all evil, bless the boys; and let my name be upon them,
       and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the
       earth.

         One must either interpret this verse as (1) an identification of the God of Israel as a K)lm, (2) a

reference to God sending a K)lm to help Jacob, or (3) a particular K)lm is here considered a deity. The first

is incoherent in light of Yahweh’s incomparability among all the host of heaven throughout the Hebrew Bible.

The second and third options are both possible, but the third is more likely. The use of the article with


person because the recipient of the message regarded the sender as being virtually “in person” (see the extended treatment of this
“messenger-representative” phenomenon in The One and the Many in the Israelite Conception of God [Cardiff: University of Wales,
1961], 1-37. S. A. Maier objects to this explanation, arguing that “any messenger who failed to identify the one who sent him subverted
the entire communication process” (S. A. Maier, “Angel of Yahweh,” DDD, 58). As an argument against the hwhy K)lm being an
extension of Yahweh via the role of the messenger, this argument lacks force. By the time of Judg 2:1-4 in the story of Israel’s journey,
it is abundantly clear to the audience who the angel represents by virtue of the implication of Exod 23:20-23, that the angel had been
guiding Israel since leaving Egypt. In such “late” accounts, there was no need of identification. Indeed, the reader knows who this being
represents from his first appearance in the canonical story (Gen 16:7) by virtue of the repetition of Yahweh’s promise to Abraham on the
K)lm and the parallelism of K)lmh to Myhl)h indicate a correspondence is being struck between a

particular K)lm and the God of Israel. The only instance in Jacob’s life where a single K)lm intervenes in his

life occurs in Genesis 32, where Jacob wrestles with a “man” (32:25, Hebrew) but later Jacob claims to have

seen God (Myhl)) “face to face” (32:31, Hebrew). One could argue that the definite article refers to the

particular K)lm in Genesis 32 and no more, yet this neither accounts for Jacob’s claim (the narrative does not

say Yahweh appeared with the K)lm) nor the parallelism in the Hosea passage above that deals with the same

event. The most plausible interpretation of the Genesis 32 event and these passages is that this particular entity

(K)lmh) is the divinized K)lm in whom Yahweh’s Name dwells.

         In this regard, the Name theology of Deuteronomy and the Dtr deserves equal emphasis as an important

key to understanding divine vice regency in Israel’s monolatrous religion. Scholars have frequently pointed out

that the divine Name of Yahweh “can be understood as a hypostasis of the deity,308 and that in Deuteronomy

God dwells in heaven but his Name dwells in the earthly sanctuary.309 Mettinger has noted five principal terms

(Nk#$, Mw#$, hyh, tyb, )rq) commonly used in connection with M#$ to express the idea that the Name was an

independent, localized, extension of Yahweh’s own presence.310 Several examples are especially illustrative:

                                                                                                                      Deut 12:11a
                                                ~v' Amv. !Kev;l. AB ~k,yhel{a/ hw"hy> rx;b.yI-rv,a] ~AqM'h; hy"h'w>
                                      Then there shall be a place which the Lord your God shall choose to make his
                                      Name dwell there . . .

                                                                                                                         Deut 12:5
                  ~v' Amv.-ta, ~Wfl' ~k,yjeb.vi-lK'mi ~k,yhel{a/ hw"hy> rx;b.yI-rv,a] ~AqM'h;-la,-~ai yKi
                                                                         `hM'v' t'ab'W Wvr.d.ti Ank.vil.
                            But you shall seek the place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your tribes
                            to put his Name there; to his habitation shall you inquire, and there you will come.

                                                                                                            1 Kgs 5:19 (Hebrew)
                  rmoale ybia' dwID'-la, hw"hy> rB,Di rv,a]K; yh'l{a/ hw"hy> ~vel. tyIB; tAnb.li rmeao ynIn>hiw>
part of the hwhy K)lm (Gen 16:10; cp. Gen 12:1-3; 15:5).
308
    Niehr, “Religio-Historical Aspects,” 237.
309
    Compare Deut 4:36; 26:36 with Deut 12:5,11; 14:23; 16:11. For the Name dwelling in the sanctuary, see 2 Sam 7:13; 1 Kgs 3:2; 5:7;
8:12; 9:3,7; 2 Kgs 21:7; Ps 74:7. See T. N. D. Mettinger, The Dethronement of Sabaoth: Studies in the Shem and Kabod Theologies
(ConBOT 18; Lund: CWK Gleerup, 1982), 38-79; I. Wilson, Out of the Midst of the Fire: Divine Presence in Deuteronomy (SBLDS
151; Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1995), 1-15.
310
    Mettinger, The Dethronement of Sabaoth, 38-40.
                                                     `ymiv.li tyIB;h; hn<b.yI-aWh ^a,s.Ki-l[; ^yT,x.T; !Tea, rv,a] ^n>Bi
            And, behold, I intend to build a house for the Name of the Lord my God, as the Lord spoke to David
            my father, saying, Your son, whom I will set upon your throne in your place, he shall build a house for
            my Name.

                                                                                                               2 Chr 20:9
                                   hZ<h; tyIB;h; ynEp.li hd'm.[;n: b['r'w> rb,d,w> jApv. br,x, h[' r' Wnyle[' aAbT'-~ai
                                        `[;yviAtw> [m;v.tiw> Wnter'C'mi ^yl,ae q[;z>nIw> hZ<h; tyIB;B; ^m.vi yKi ^yn<p'l.W
                                If evil comes upon us, as the sword, judgment, pestilence, or famine, let us stand before
                                this house and your presence (for your Name is in this house) and when we cry to you
                                in our affliction, then you will hear and help.

                                                                                                                   Ps 74:7
                                                                   `^m,v.-!K;v.mi WlL.xi #r,a'l' ^v,D'q.mi vaeb' Wxl.vi
                                They have cast fire into your sanctuary; they have cast down (in defilement) the
                                dwelling place of your Name to the ground.


            It should be pointed out that the presence of the Name on earth in the sanctuary in Deuteronomy and

elsewhere was not designed to denote Yahweh’s transcendence, since Yahweh is also repeatedly referenced on

earth via the phrase hwhy ynpl.311 This juxtaposition of Yahweh in heaven yet present on earth and utilizing an

extension of his person on earth might seem confusing or redundant, but a vice regency model clarifies the

situation. The hwhy K)lm was the anthropomorphized Name, and his presence (or the Name’s indwelling of

the sanctuary) was understood as Yahweh himself being present. Divine immanence is the result, not divine

distancing.



2.6 Interpretation of Divine Hypostases and the Vice-Regent in Second Temple Texts

            This hypostatic vice-regency was the foundation for the “second power in heaven” belief articulated by

Second Temple Jewish writers. It is the Canaanite context that provides the conceptual bridge between the

Hebrew Bible and the later Jewish belief. Although he never established the connection between Israelite and

Canaanite religion and the second power idea, Segal suspected as much:

            Let us [summarize] the previous findings about scriptural traditions. The dangerous passages
            include (1) Dan 7:9ff. and the speculation about the identity of the “son of man”; (2) the Exod
            24 theophany, possibly together with other passages in the Bible where God is pictured in the
            form of a man; (3) the related descriptions of the angel of YHWH who carries the divine
311
      See Wilson, Out of the Midst of the Fire, 199-217.
          name; (4) scriptural verses which describe God as plural (Gen 1:26). . . . It is worthwhile to
          point out that many of these dangerous exegetical traditions may never have been entirely
          separate at any point in their development. Biblical scholars have recently noticed the
          relationship between all works describing the divine warrior figure (including both Exod 15
          and Daniel 7) and ancient near eastern mythology.312

          Segal’s conjecture was based in part on his discovery that the rabbis of the Second Temple period linked

the hwhy K)lm to the military figure of Josh 5:14-15, the hwhy-)bc-r#o (“the Prince of the host of

Yahweh”), whom they understood to be “the man of war” of Exod 15:3.313 The rabbis based this correlation on

Num 22:23 where the description of the hwhy K)lm includes the detail,                      Ady"B. hp'Wlv. ABr.x;w> (“and his
sword [was] drawn in his hand”) the exact phrase found in Josh 5:13’s description of Prince of the host of

Yahweh. Second Temple writers and later rabbis also linked hwhy K)lm (and thus the hwhy-)bc-r#o) to

figures in the book of Daniel: The prince (r#o) of the host, the prince (r#o) of princes (Myr#o-r#o), and the “one

like a son of man”—the only other heavenly being besides the hwhy K)lm to bear a name of Yahweh.314 All of

the roles of these biblical figures correspond to roles of Baal in Ugaritic religion. Baal, of course, was the

warrior god of Ugaritic religion. As the vice-regent of El he was also the prince who ruled all other second-tier

divine beings in the Ugaritic council bureaucracy. That both Yahweh and his vice-regent performed Baal roles

is expected in light of Israel’s monolatry and description of the vice-regent as hypostasis of Yahweh.

          The remainder of this study proceeds with an eye to the vocabulary, motifs, and bureaucratic structures

discussed in this chapter. The divine council’s survival in canonical literature from the exile afterward and in

the non-canonical literature of the Second Temple period is readily discerned through a number of features:

      •   Identical or very similar phrases for a heavenly council and its associated mythological motifs, such as
          divine mountains and council meeting places.
      •   References to plural Myhl) / Myl) (ynb), especially in divine council or throne room contexts, or
          evidence of more than one divine being who exercises authority in heaven and earth.
      •   The language of divine sonship with respect to these Myhl) / Myl) (ynb), including royal titulary.
      •   Earthly geographical dominion by plural Myhl) / Myl) (ynb) who outrank angels, or a worldview that
          reflects Deut 32:8-9.


312
    Segal, Two Powers in Heaven, 184.
313
    Segal, “Some Observations,” 5.
314
    I refer here to the “rider upon the clouds” title. This and nearly identical phrases are used only of Yahweh in the Hebrew Bible, save
for the “Son of Man” in Daniel 7. The title comes from a Baal epithet. This study considers the “one like a Son of Man” to be a deified
figure, and so the phrase will hereafter be capitalized. See Chapter Six of the present study.
    •   Behavior on the part of heavenly council members or throne room characters that portrays some degree
        of independence.
    •   Vice-regent status, variously indicated by special terminology, proximity to the throne of God (e.g.,
        God’s right hand), or non-verbal indications of exaltation (e.g., seated on a heavenly throne).

        With these criteria in mind, the next three chapters evaluate claims of the abandonment of the divine

council’s second tier of Myhl) during a presumed redactional overhaul of the Hebrew Bible during the exilic

and post-exilic periods.
                                                         Chapter Three



                                  Assumptions of Exilic Redaction and
                            the Progression From Polytheism to Monotheism:
                           The Argument from Deuteronomy 32 and Psalm 82


         Having overviewed the terms, motifs, and structure of the divine council, our focus now turns to an

evaluation of the theory that monotheism was a profound exilic innovation that required propagation and

enforcement by means of a scribal agenda to eliminate or dilute Israel’s antiquated polytheism. Since the divine

council would reflect such outmoded polytheism, the theory postulates, references to the council and its

members had to be expunged from the text or at least neutralized. The goal of this chapter is to show that the

exilic and early post-exilic315 canonical texts of the Hebrew Bible evince neither an evolution from monolatry to

intolerant monotheism nor a redactional agenda that supported such a religious transition. Rather, this study

proposes that Israel's religion prior to the exile was monolatry, and that the data of exilic and early post-exilic

texts suggest that this religious worldview was maintained during these eras and well into the Common Era.316


3.1 Text-Historical Assumptions and Late Israelite Religion

         This study does not contend that Jewish scholars and scribes were never troubled by passages that

contained references to Myl) and Myhl)h-ynb, but would propose that not all Jews were troubled by divine

plurality. That there were such concerns within scribal schools entrusted with the transmission of the text is

obvious in light of the well-known textual variance in Deut 32:8-9, where the text underlying the LXX contains

a reference to Myhl)h-ynb (“sons of God”) but the MT does not.317 The consensus view of monotheistic

evolution would contend that the polytheistic reading of LXX has the stronger claim to being original due to the

fact that Israelite religion initially embraced other gods. However, it would also argue that the theologically

neutral reading of the MT implicitly suggests an evolutionary leap to monotheism occurred during the time the

315
  I use this phrasing to exclude the book of Daniel, which will be considered in Chapter Six.
316
  My claim is not that Israelite religion never underwent any major changes. Exactly when Israel either merged El and Yahweh or
comprehended that El and Yahweh were the same god is hotly debated by scholars but is beyond the scope of this study.
Torah was redacted. In addition, the consensus perspective assumes that the monotheistic reading arose during

or shortly after the exile with the result that scribes systematically targeted polytheistic readings for elimination.

         These assumptions are methodologically suspect for several reasons. The outlawed Hebrew reading

underlying the LXX of Deut 32:8-9 did indeed survive total eradication. Since the reading was preserved and

perpetuated by Jewish scribes, it is evident that there were learned Jews who were untroubled by its content.

Assuming that post-exilic Israelite religion and later Judaism had unanimous rejected the pre-exilic worldview

overlooks several salient facts.

         First, scholars simply do not know when such variants arose in historical terms. The fact remains, for

instance, that scholars cannot date the initial appearance of the MT reading of Deut 32:8. Given the manuscript

evidence, it could have arisen well into the Second Temple period, but many scholars assume such changes

were made much earlier due to their preconception of a monotheistic revolution after the exile. All scholars

really know with certainty is that the most ancient textual data demonstrate textual diversity, not censorship.

         Second, as far as text-critical scholars have determined, there is no evidence from the Second Temple

period for the sort of textual suppression postulated by the assumption of a thoroughgoing exilic redaction

driven by intolerant monotheism.318 This is undeniable in light of the Qumran material—and Deut 32:8-9 is a

pointed example—that has been found in support of LXX readings. As Ulrich notes, the text that underlies the

Qumran reading for Deut 32:8-9, 4QDeutq, “was not [a] new text form . . . pluriformity was the nature of the

biblical text in the late Second Temple period.”319 It can be plausibly argued, then, that some forms of Second

Temple Judaism saw no problem with the divine plurality of Deut 32:8-9. If scholars acknowledge that it is a

fallacy to argue that Second Temple Judaism was a homogeneous institution, then it is equally fallacious, given

the lack of textual censorship, to assert that Judaism after the exile was unanimously intolerant of divine

plurality.




317
    Hereafter, Masoretic Text is abbreviated as MT.
318
    Emanuel Tov, Textual Criticism of the Hebrew Bible (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1992), 116–117. See also S. Talmon, "The Old
Testament Text," in The Cambridge History of the Bible (ed. P.R. Ackroyd and C.F. Evans; vol. 1; Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1963), 159–199; Ulrich, “Hebrew Scriptures,” 106.
319
    Eugene Ulrich, “The Text of the Hebrew Scriptures at the Time of Hillel and Jesus,” in Congress Volume, Basel 2001 (ed. A.
Lemaire; VTSup 92; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2002), 95.
         Third, scholars who specialize in textual criticism think it more probable that deliberate changes were

made for theological reasons later rather than earlier, when the text was being "standardized" circa 100 C.E.320

In the case of Deut 32:8-9, one would suspect a later manipulation of the text as opposed to an exilic provenance

because an original deletion would require the subsequent addition of the controversial reference to the

Myhl)h-ynb to produce the textual diversity evidenced at Qumran. These kinds of textual changes make far

more sense in a first century C.E. context than as oversights in MT that "survived" an assumed editorial zeal for

exclusivistic monotheism. Deferring to Ulrich’s expertise once more:

         There was no standard text of the Bible (in fact no Bible as such) in the late Second Temple
         period. The Masoretic Text is not the central text of the Hebrew Bible, though it long appeared
         to be—just as the earth is not the central body of the universe, though it long appeared to be.
         The Masoretic Text is a chance collection from a wide pool of circulating texts.321

         In another publication Ulrich adds:

         Even if there were standard texts for each book, presumably they would have to be the texts
         championed by the Pharisees and then adopted by rabbinic Judaism to be meaningful as the
         “standard text” that eventually became the Masoretic Text. But is there any evidence to suggest
         that the Pharisees were aware that they had texts which differed from the ones in use by Temple
         priests, or that they had the religious authority—acknowledged by any other groups within
         Judaism—to claim that their texts were standard and others not so? To my knowledge, there is
         no such evidence. . . . Lawrence Schiffman perceptively notes that ‘the gradual transfer of
         influence and power from the priestly Sadduccees to the learned Pharisees went hand in hand
         with the transition from Temple to Torah’, i.e., during the period after the First Jewish Revolt
         (66-74). . . . Thus, though scholars had grown accustomed to equating the MT with the text and
         the contents of Judaism’s authoritative Scriptures prior to the two revolts, that view must be
         recognized as in serious need of revision.322

         This study, then, does not deny that some textual changes may have been motivated by theological

concerns. Rather, this study questions the extent and uniformity of such concerns, and the use of chronological

assumptions about such variances as evidence of an exilic or early post-exilic redactional campaign to enforce

intolerant monotheism. The considerable amount of exilic and post-exilic material that affirms or implies the

existence of other Myhl) defies the explanation that a concerted, systematic campaign to replace the old



320
    E. Tov, "Textual Criticism (OT)," ABD VI: 395, 407.
321
    Ulrich, “Hebrew Scriptures,” 98.
322
    Eugene Ulrich, “Qumran and the Canon of the Old Testament,” in The Biblical Canons, Proceedings of the 50th Colloquium Biblicum
Lovianiense (ed. J.M. de Jonge; BETL 163; Leuven: Peeters, 2003), 63-64. See also Eugene Ulrich, “The Qumran Biblical Scrolls—The
Scriptures of Late Second Temple Judaism,” in The Dead Sea Scrolls in Their Historical Context (ed. Timothy H. Lim, et al.; Edinburgh:
T & T Clark, 2000), 67-87. The quotation from L. Schiffman is from L. Schiffman, From Text to Tradition: A History of the Second
Temple and Rabbinic Judaism (Hoboken, NJ: Ktav, 1991), 112.
monolatrous worldview with intolerant monotheism was at work. If the data at issue were a mere handful of

ambiguous texts, and if later Judaism showed no signs of embracing divine plurality, this view would have

explanatory power. Neither of these circumstances is the case.

         It is also not coherent to argue that scribes unflinchingly devoted to exclusivistic monotheism

deliberately retained affirmations of other divine beings to persuade readers that these same beings did not exist.

It is difficult to see how this perspective avoids the trap of arguing that intolerant monotheism was tolerant in

the name of intolerance. It should also be pointed out that this perspective suffers from inconsistent application.

For example, it is doubtful that late texts like Job 1:6ff. and 2:1ff., two of the most obvious passages affirming

multiple divine beings (Myhl)h-ynb) in the Hebrew Bible, are rhetorically arguing for intolerant monotheism.

In other words, while scholars may deal with passages like Psalm 82 in such a way as to argue that it actually

points to intolerant monotheism,323 consistency demands that those who take this view demonstrate such rhetoric

for all the late canonical material that affirms divine plurality. It is not sufficient to assert that texts reflect

“older” religion without explaining the clarity of their monolatrous content in canonical material that post-dates

the shift to intolerant monotheism.

         There is no text-historical reason, then, for a systematic campaign to obscure or eradicate Israel’s pre-

exilic monolatry. There is also no need to posit that intolerant monotheists would build their rhetoric on the

language of monolatry. Thus it is misguided to argue that the divine council was a threat to Israel’s post-exilic

religion324 or that the post-exilic scribes needed to displace the pre-exilic divine assembly.325 The remainder of

this chapter devotes attention to the canonical text of Psalm 82 and Deuteronomy 32 since these passages have

been utilized in recent works on Israelite religion to demonstrate these ideas. More specifically, these important

chapters are offered as evidence of an antiquated polytheism in the Hebrew Bible that gradually evolved into

monolatrous henotheism and then monotheism. This study argues, on the other hand, that those who composed

and edited the Hebrew Bible articulated a monolatry that established a Yahweh-El identification, acknowledged

the reality of other gods, but forbade their worship by Israel. It can of course be objected that popular religion

323
    For example, this is how Simon B. Parker (“The Beginning of the Reign of God,” 532-559) interprets Psalm 82. This chapter
challenges this view.
324
    Handy, “Dissenting Deities,” 27.
and the religion of those who held political and religious power in Israel may at times have diverged from this

worldview. The point made by this study is that those who produced the Hebrew Bible held to monolatry or

“mono-Yahwism” before and after the exile.


3.2 The Argument for Exilic Alteration or Elimination of the Divine Council

         Several influential scholars of Israelite religion have recently argued that the concept of the divine

council was viewed by the redactors of the canon as an impediment on the path toward ever-tightening

monotheism. According to Mark S. Smith, the prophetic condemnations of other deities, particularly the

goddess Asherah, signals "[a] paradigmatic shift away from the model of the divine couple in charge of the four-

tiered pantheon to a single figure surrounded by minor powers, who are expressions of that divinity's power.”326

Handy echoes this verdict when he says, "[T]he post-exilic world . . . [saw] the pantheon reduced to only two

levels: that of the one highest authority and that of totally subservient messengers, leaving only one power

actively running the universe."327

         Simon Parker, in an important article on Psalm 82, asserts that the redactors of Psalm 82 "have modeled

their myth on the common way of narrating a bid to displace the present ruler . . . in order to justify Yahweh's

total displacement of the old pantheon and its assembly."328 Mark S. Smith elaborates on the same idea:

         The author of Psalm 82 deposes the older theology, as Israel's deity is called to assume a new role
         as judge of all the world. Yet at the same time, Psalm 82, like Deut 32:8-9, preserves the outlines
         of the older theology it is rejecting. From the perspective of this older theology, Yahweh did not
         belong to the top tier of the pantheon. Instead, in early Israel the god of Israel apparently
         belonged to the second tier of the pantheon; he was not the presider god, but one of his sons.
         Accordingly, what is at work is not a loss of the second tier of a pantheon headed by Yahweh.
         Instead, the collapse of the first and second tiers in the early Israelite pantheon likely was caused
         by an identification of El, the head of this pantheon, with Yahweh, a member of the second tier.329




325
    Parker, “The Beginning of the Reign of God,” 557.
326
    Mark S. Smith, Origins, 49.
327
    Handy, “Appearance of Pantheon,” 42.
328
    Parker, “The Beginning of the Reign of God,” 557. See also, Herbert Niehr, “Religio-Historical Aspects of the 'Early Post-Exilic'
Period,” in The Crisis of Israelite Religion: Transformation of Religious Tradition in Exilic and Post-Exilic Times (ed. Bob Becking and
Marjo C.A. Korpel; OtSt 42; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999), 241.
329
    Mark S. Smith, Origins, 49.
         The alleged “collapse” referred to by Smith was therefore the result of Yahweh passing a death sentence

on the gods of the other nations (Ps 82:6-7) so as to finally emerge as the just ruler of the universe.330 In this

way the psychological needs of the Israelite community were met.

         To briefly elaborate, Smith believes that the collapse of the first and second tiers of the divine council

"would have taken place by the eighth century, since Asherah, having been a consort of El, would have become

Yahweh's consort . . . only if these two gods were identified by this time."331 Prior to this time, then, Yahweh

and El were separate deities in an older, polytheistic religion. Indeed, the former separation of El and Yahweh as

father and son is an important element in their understanding of the council and its degradation. The reduction of

the old pantheon was allegedly motivated by the "fully developed" monotheism of the post-exilic community.

         These lines of argumentation are problematic in that the reasoning behind them is at times circular, and

the textual data upon which they rest are considered in isolation from contemporaneous texts that support a

different conclusion.

         According to those who argue the divine council was displaced after the exile, the downgrading of the

Myhl) of the divine council in passages like Ps 82:1 to mere Myk)lm must have occurred, since the alternative

would amount to retaining pre-exilic polytheism. By this logic, the appearance of multiple Myhl) (or Myl)) in

pre-exilic texts is to be understood as indicating polytheism, but when plural Myhl) (or Myl)) appear in exilic

or post-exilic texts, they are to be understood as members of the fourth tier, the Myk)lm. Hence Mark S.

Smith's assertion (emphasis mine):

         [T]he Dead Sea scrolls frequently refer to angelic powers as )lym, literally, 'gods,' but in the wake
         of the earlier telescoping of the pantheon and the collapse of its middle tiers, this word probably
         conveyed the sense of heavenly powers (under One Power) rather than full-fledged deities.332

This assumed semantic shift is justifiable in Smith’s thinking because he presumes that Jewish leaders during

the exile and post-exilic periods were moving toward strict, exclusivistic monotheism, and they would not have

retained an outdated word meaning as part of that evolution.



330
    Parker, “The Beginning of the Reign of God,” 558.
331
    Mark S. Smith, Origins, 49.
332
    Ibid., 50. The italics are mine.
         This rationale is ultimately based on conclusions that Smith and others have drawn from their exegetical

work in Psalm 82 and Deut 32:8-9. Though the passages are ultimately interrelated, we will begin with Psalm

82.


3.3 Psalm 82: Yahweh-El or Yahweh and El?

         Ps 82:1 is a focal point for the view that the tiers of the divine council collapsed in later Israelite

religion:

                                                             `jPov.yI ~yhil{a/ br,q,B. lae-td;[]B; bC'nI ~yhil{a/
                                                                          God ()lhym) stands in the divine assembly;
                                                                 in the midst of the gods ()lhym) he passes judgment.

         Mark S. Smith contends that the wording in this verse "presents Yahweh in an explicit divine council

scene [that] does not cast him as its head (who is left undecidedly mute or undescribed, probably the reason why

it survived the later collapsing of the different tiers)."333 In so doing, he draws on the work of Parker, whose

study is the most recent attempt to distinguish Yahweh from El as originally separate entities in this psalm.

While acknowledging that "there is no question that the occurrences of )lhym in verses 1a, 8 refer (as usually in

the Elohistic psalter) to Yahweh," and that "most scholars assume that God, that is Yahweh, is presiding over

the divine council," Yahweh is actually just "one of the assembled gods under a presiding El or Elyon."334 It

matters not, argues Parker, that throughout the Elohistic psalter or the psalms of Asaph, that Yahweh, the God of

Israel, was considered to be presiding over the other deities, since each and every psalm must be understood as

an independent literary unit. When this is done, a polytheistic division between El and one of his sons, Yahweh,

becomes apparent in Psalm 82.335

         Parker supports his conclusion with linguistic arguments drawn from the connotations of two key verbs

in the first verse, bcn (ns[b; stand”) and +p#$ (s\pt@ ; “judge”). He declares:

         Are these the actions of a presiding officer, or of a member of a court? At first sight of the root
         s\pt[ (v. 1) many have leapt to the conclusion that the speaker is acting as judge. But the root
         s\pt[ has a variety of meanings; indeed each of its four occurrences in this psalm bears a different
         meaning. Its specific sense in v. 1 is defined by the speech which the word introduces. This
         consists of a rebuke . . . it calls upon the members of the assembly not to pervert justice by
333
    Ibid., 48.
334
    Parker, “The Beginning of the Reign of God,” 533-534.
335
    Ibid., 534-535.
         favoring malefactors. . . . Understanding the speech as a charge, rebuke, or accusation, we must
         assign the occurrence of s\pt[ in v. 1 the specific meaning: 'to charge with, accuse of, injustice' (or,
         put positively, 'to call for justice'). S0pt[ neither states nor implies that the speaker is presiding over
         the gods, only that he is accusing the gods.336

         In conjunction with this distinction between accusing versus presiding, Parker notes that, in legal

contexts "the judge sits while the parties to a dispute – and specifically the plaintiff – stand."337 Citing several

verses which illustrate the judge in seated position, Parker concludes that:

         In the divine assembly in particular, the language used of the members who attend – as distinct
         from the presiding deity – refers to standing: htys[b in Job 1:6; 2:1; (md in 1 Kings 22:19,21
         (where Yahweh is ys\b 'sitting'). In Zechariah's vision of the divine assembly, Joshua the high
         priest and the prosecuting angel 'stand' ((md) before Yahweh (or his representative ml)k), along
         with all others present (h(mdym lpnyw, 'those standing before him'; h(mdym h)lh, 'these standing
         around' [Zech 3:1,3,4,7]). In the Aramaic of Daniel, vast numbers of the divine council 'stand'
         before the presiding judge who 'sits' (yt{b; Dan 7:9-10). Even after the (judicial) court (dyn)) 'sits'
         (Dan 7:10), the others present remain standing (q)my) , v. 16). . . . The weight of this evidence
         leads to the conclusion that the language of verse 1, together with the context of vv. 2-4, indicates
         that [Yahweh] is not here presiding over the divine assembly as judge, but rather stands among
         the gods to pronounce a charge of injustice. There is – tactfully – no direct reference to the
         president of the assembly. (On the other hand, all modern historians of West Semitic religion
         recognize within the designation of the divine assembly [(dt -)l, v. 1] and the pantheon
         [bny (lywn, v. 6] two terms for old high gods [El and Elyon]."338

         In the view of Smith and Parker, then, Psalm 82 depicts the high god El presiding over an assembly of

his sons. Yahweh, one of those sons, accuses the others of injustice. Several observations are necessary in

response.

         First, the view that El and Yahweh were separate deities in Israelite religion is disputed among scholars.

Although it is widely understood on the basis of texts such as Exod 6:3 that Yahweh and El were at some point

separate and then merged in Israelite religion, this merger could have been a combining of the high gods of two

different religions. Hence their separation does not in itself demonstrate a father-son differentiation. A number

of scholars also believe this merger was psychological; that is, Exod 6:3 does not refer to the combination of

separate deities, but reflects a recognition that Yahweh and El were separates names for the same deity.

Scholars such as F.M. Cross and J. C. de Moor have been the chief defenders of the view that identifies Yahweh

as a title of El.339 This issue is beyond the scope of this study, but its controversial nature deserves note.

336
    Ibid., 535-536.
337
    Ibid., 536.
338
    Ibid., 537-538.
339
    Cross, Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic, 60-75; de Moor, The Rise of Yahwism, 223-260, esp. 237-239. See also the general
         Second, recalling the earlier comment by Smith that Psalm 82 is a clarion call for Yahweh “to assume a

new role as judge of all the world” presupposes that the concept of Yahweh being the ruler of all the world was

new and not part of pre-exilic Israelite religion. This assumption is integral to the view that the pre-exilic belief

in a divine council vanished in response to a worldview where Yahweh became sovereign over the gods of the

other nations during the crisis of the exile. As noted already in this study, this is not the case. In Chapter One it

was pointed out that the assertion that Yahweh was only a national god prior to the exile runs contrary to the

theme of Yahweh’s kingship over the world, a prominent feature in enthronement psalms and early Israelite

poetry that some scholars date between the 12th and 10th centuries B.C.E.340 Ps 29:10, long noted for its divine

council setting (cf. 29:1) declares succinctly that ~l'A[l. %l,m, hw"hy> bv,YEw: bv'y" lWBM;l; hw"hy . This       >
description is especially noteworthy here since this early psalm has Yahweh “sitting (b#$y) upon the flood," an

image that, as noted in earlier, explicitly denotes presiding over the divine council in the meeting place of the

council. Hence even in this early psalm Yahweh has already been identified with El and exercises sovereign rule

as high God.341 F. M. Cross’s assertion with respect to this passage and Psalm 24 and Exod 15:18, two very

early texts, is worth repeating: “The kingship of the gods is a common theme in early Mesopotamian and

Canaanite epics. The common scholarly position that the concept of Yahweh as reigning or king is a relatively

late development in Israelite thought seems untenable.”342

         Third, there is a coherence problem with Smith's statement that "Psalm 82, like Deut 32:8-9, preserves

the outlines of the older theology it is rejecting." Why the editors would do this, but elsewhere leave no

ambiguity as to the fusion of El and Yahweh in their redacted confessional statements of monotheism, points to

the coherence problem alluded to in Chapter One. Not only were "polytheistic" elements of Israel's religion

presumably missed in the editing of the final form of the text, but now it is argued that the redactors deliberately

utilized the rejected polytheism to convince their audience that Yahweh is the lone god. This view does not

account for exilic and post-exilic texts discussed subsequently in this chapter and the next which speak of other


summation of this view in K. van der Toorn, "Yahweh," DDD, 910-913.
340
    Cross, Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic, 90-93; Freedman, “Who is Like Thee Among the Gods?” 317.
341
    Cross, Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic, 36; Korpel, A Rift in the Clouds, 370; Clifford, Cosmic Mountain, 98-160. See KTU
1.4.iv:20-24; 1.3.v:5-7; 1.6.i:32-34; 1.101:2; 1.3.iii:29.
342
    Cross and Freedman, Studies in Ancient Yahwistic Poetry, 45, n. 59.
gods as though they exist without any rhetorical indication they are being rejected. Again, several of these texts

are among the clearest examples of an Israelite pantheon whose linguistic elements are shared with wider

Canaanite culture. One must ask why there is no scribal and rhetorical consistency, and how passages such as

Job 1-2 convey the loss of divine plurality. This position also fails to account for divine vice regency in late

canonical material, or how so many writers in the Second Temple period who speak of other Myhwl) /

Myl) (ynb) in language drawn from the Hebrew Bible could have missed the rhetoric of intolerant monotheism.

            Logic aside, the most significant problem for Smith's and Parker's understanding of Psalm 82 comes

from the text itself. Both these scholars distinguish Yahweh as the deity who "stands" in the divine council,

bringing the accusation of his corrupt divine brethren before the seated El, head of the council.343 The

accusation uttered by Yahweh, the "plaintiff," in Ps 82:2-5 follows:


                                         ~Aty"w> ld;-Wjp.vi 3 `hl's,-Waf.Ti ~y[iv'r. ynEp.W lw<['-WjP.v.Ti yt;m'-d[; 2
                                                  `WlyCih; ~y[iv'r. dY:mi !Ayb.a,w> ld;-WjL.P; 4 `WqyDic.h; vr'w" ynI['
                                            `#r,a' ydes.Am-lK' WjAMyI WkL'h;t.yI hk'vex]B; Wnybiy" al{w> W[d.y" al{ 5
            These charges are immediately followed by the judicial sentencing, also considered by Smith and Parker

to come from Yahweh:344

                                                                      `~k,L.Ku !Ayl.[, ynEb.W ~T,a; ~yhil{a/ yTir.m;a'-ynIa] 6
                                                                        `WlPoTi ~yriF'h; dx;a;k.W !WtWmT. ~d'a'K. !kea' 7
            Neither Smith nor Parker offer any explanation as to why, in the scene they are creating, El the seated

judge does not pronounce the sentence. In this reconstruction El apparently has no real function in the council.

If one wants to press the courtroom metaphor, then the idea of the accuser also pronouncing sentence is both a

violation of protocol and an overstepping of the role of accuser.

            At this juncture, Smith notes that, "[A] prophetic voice emerges in verse 8, calling for God (now called

)e$lo4h|<m) to assume the role of judge over all the earth. . . . Here Yahweh in effect is asked to assume the job of



343
      Mark S. Smith, Origins, 48; Parker, “The Beginning of the Reign of God,” 557.
344
      Mark S. Smith, Origins, 48; Parker, “The Beginning of the Reign of God,” 539-540.
all the gods to rule their nations in addition to Israel."345 Parker concurs that after Yahweh announces the fate of

the gods, "the psalmist then balances this with an appeal to Yahweh to assume the governance of the world."346

Ps 82:8 reads:

                                                `~yIAGh;-lk'B. lx;n>ti hT'a;-yKi #r,a'h' hj'p.v' ~yhil{a/ hm'Wq
            The problem with this understanding of Ps 82:2-8 for those who separate Yahweh from El therein is, in

Parker’s words, “an appeal to Yahweh” to rise up (hmwq) in 82:8. Yahweh is asked to rise up to act – to take

control of the nations, which would mean in the context of the psalm’s imagery that he had been heretofore

seated. Given the imperative in 82:8, the text assumes that Yahweh is the one seated, and hence the one who

presides over the council. This creates confusion, for if Yahweh is asked to rise from his throne to take action,

who then was standing as accuser?

            These problems arise from the fact that Smith and Parker have inserted a seated El in Psalm 82. The text

(as well as other passages Parker cites) evinces no separation between El and Yahweh. Psalm 82 never includes

any description of a seated deity. This notion has been supplied by virtue of the supposition that El and Yahweh

were still conceived of separately at the psalm’s composition or redaction. Yet earlier texts clearly affirm the

contrary. As Psalm 24, Psalm 29, and Exod 15:3 inform us, Yahweh had long since been equated with El, the

ruler of the council, by virtue of the imagery in those much older texts having been drawn from Ugaritic myths

and applied to Yahweh. Additonally, the Dtr makes the equation explicit in 2 Sam 22:32:

hw"hy> yde[]l.B;mi lae-ymi yKi (“For who is El but Yahweh?”). It is difficult to see the Dtr as bonding the two
deities together so forcefully as this only to have the writer of Psalm 82 build a novel rhetorical argument for

monotheism by disconnecting the high God of the Israelite council into two gods. Yahweh certainly is the

accuser, and as high God, is the only one with the authority to accuse the very gods he placed over the nations to

govern them long ago as described in Deut 32:8-9, when He allotted the nations to the sons of God. Indeed, as

noted below, the conception that the Hebrew Bible separates El and Yahweh is ultimately inferred from Deut

32:8-9.

345
      Mark S. Smith, Origins, 48.
         There are more coherent options for sorting out the characters in the judicial scene of Psalm 82. First, it

is perhaps easiest to see Yahweh the council head and high God as exercising the authority only he has to accuse

the royal sons who have become corrupt. Along with this sole authority to accuse comes the authority to pass

sentence. Smith and Parker do have Yahweh passing sentence, but their imaginary courtroom reconstruction,

vividly created for the reader, becomes a hindrance at this point, for one would expect El as seated judge to pass

sentence, for this is the role of the judge. Yet the seated god has no role in their scene; he is utterly vestigial.

His only function is apparently to prop up the El-Yahweh separation; otherwise he is useless. This confusion

fades if one sees Yahweh alone, already identified with El, as both accuser and judge, which is precisely the

conclusion of the major study on the prophetic lawsuit (byr) pattern:

         If we are to undertake an investigation of the understanding of God which is presupposed by the
         prophetic lawsuit, we would do well to begin with a consideration of the roles Yahweh plays in
         the lawsuit. It would appear from our brief survey of recent research, as well as the textual
         analyses we have here performed, that it is characteristic of the prophetic lawsuit that Yahweh
         enjoys the dual role of prosecutor and judge. That Yahweh appears as prosecutor can be
         explained by the fact that it is he who has been wronged.347

         What then of the imperative in 82:8?

         In a study specifically focused on the "rising" of the deity from his throne to begin taking action, B.

Batto notes that the imperative hmwq alone was "standardized language for awakening God" and "stereotypical

language" often found in "universal prayers for times of duress."348 As scholars have noted, the context for

Psalm 82 is certainly one of duress. The exiled members of Israel must come to grips with their situation as a

defeated people.

         Batto's article deals mainly with the anthropomorphism of rousing God from sleep, but also delves into

how these stock phrases are used elsewhere. Particularly significant for the context of the issue under discussion

is Batto's detection of the pervasiveness of the theme of the divine king resting in his temple palace and divine




346
    Parker, “The Beginning of the Reign of God,” 546. The italics are mine.
347
    Kirsten Nielsen, Yahweh as Prosecutor and Judge: An Investigation of the Prophetic Lawsuit R|,b-Pattern (trans. Frederick Cryer;
JSOTSup 9; Sheffield: University of Sheffield, 1978), 74.
348
    B. Batto, "The Sleeping God: An Ancient Near Eastern Motif of Divine Sovereignty," Bib 68 (1987): 169.
mountain – the place where the divine council assembles.349 For example, Mount Zion, located by the psalmist

in the Nwpc ytkry (48:1-2), was the eternal "resting place" of Yahweh in Ps 132:7-8, 13-14:350

                                                                        `wyl'g>r; ~doh]l; hw<x]T;v.nI wyt'AnK.v.mil. ha'Abn" 7
                                                                           `^Z<[u !Ara]w: hT'a; ^t,x'Wnm.li hw"hy> hm'Wq 8
                                                                            `Al bv'Aml. HW"ai !AYciB. hw"hy> rx;b'-yKi 13
                                                                       `h'ytiWIai yKi bveae-hPo d[;-yde[] ytix'Wnm.-tazO 14

         Even more important is Batto's observation that "the motif of the sleeping deity is used to express

Israel's belief in Yahweh's absolute kingship."351 Commenting on the occurrence of hmwq and the other

imperatives in Ps 44:24-27, he adds:

         "[T]his very conviction gives [Israel] the confidence to appeal for help. Yahweh's reign is
         supreme and he can be counted on to 'awaken' and maintain that right order which he decrees as
         creator and sovereign of all" (emphasis mine).352

         Smith and Parker contend that Psalm 82 points to a time in Israel's religion when Yahweh was not

considered to be the sovereign of all nations. The use of the stock imperative in 82:8, however, argues against

this, given the overall backdrop of Batto's study. The seated god, Yahweh, is not asked to arise to begin a new,

heretofore unimagined governance of the nations; he is beseeched to maintain the order he decreed in ancient

times. He is not asked to assume a new role; he is expected to act because he already is the eternally supreme

king. The burden of proof falls to Smith, Parker and other scholars to detect any expression in the Hebrew Bible

that demonstrates Yahweh lacked jurisdiction over any part of the earth at any time in Israelite religion.353

         Seeing Yahweh as the judge who presides over the council and who passes and carries out the sentence

gives rise to a second option for discerning the characters in the scene of Psalm 82. It is perhaps possible to see

the plaintiff not as Yahweh, but as an unidentified council member. The idea has precedent since this motif




349
    Ibid., 165-166.
350
    For commentary on some text-critical issues in this psalm, see Batto, "The Sleeping God," 266, n. 39.
351
    Batto, "The Sleeping God," 170.
352
    Ibid., 170. The emphasis is mine.
353
    There are some texts to which Mark S. Smith and Parker would no doubt point, such as Judg 11:24, 1 Sam 26:19-20, and 2 Kgs 3:27.
Other scholars would firmly disagree, however, that these passages point to a denial of Yahweh's universal sovereignty, and have done so
in other studies. For a brief summary, see Paul Sanders, The Provenance of Deuteronomy 32, 372-373.
occurs elsewhere in divine council contexts, such as Isaiah 40 (see verses 13-14).354 I would suggest that what is

needed to sort of the “legal proceedings” of Psalm 82 and other such passages that involve divine courtroom

scenes is a grasp of the interchangeability of Yahweh and his vice-regent. The importance of this observation

and emphasis will become apparent in Zech 3:1-7, but for now it is sufficient to introduce the possibility that

this interchange may be the best solution to Psalm 82. While it is true that Yahweh could be both judge and

plaintiff,355 it may be the case that, although Yahweh is the One wronged and the One who will judge, his vice-

regent may fulfill one of those roles as in the case of Zechariah 3.




354
   See Whybray, The Heavenly Counsellor in Isaiah XL 13-14.
355
   This possibility has a precedent of sorts on the earthly plain. In 1 Sam 22:6-19 king Saul acts as plaintiff and judge, and so the idea is
not completely foreign to the composers and redactors of the Hebrew text.
3.4 The Relationship of Deuteronomy 32:8-9 to Psalm 82

         Ultimately, the position of Parker and Smith regarding Psalm 82 depends on their understanding of

whether El and Yahweh are separate deities in Deut 32:8-9, which most scholars see as pre-dating and

influencing Psalm 82. Deut 32:8-9 reads:

                                                 ~yMi[; tl{buG> bCey: ~d'a' ynEB. Adyrip.h;B. ~yIAG !Ayl.[, lxen>h;B. 8
                                                                                             `laer'f.yI ynEB. rP;s.mil.
                                                                      `Atl'x]n: lb,x, bqo[]y: AM[; hA'hy> ql,xe yKi 9
         The importance of Deut 32:8-9 (reading Myhl)h ynb from the LXX and Qumran material instead of

l)r#oy ynb of MT in verse 8) for the view that Psalm 82 contains hints of an older polytheistic theology where

El and Yahweh were separate deities is noted immediately by Smith:

         [This] divine arrangement of the world appears also in versions of Deuteronomy 32:8-9 preserved
         in Greek (LXX) and the Dead Sea Scrolls. . . . The texts of the LXX and the Dead Sea Scrolls
         show Israelite polytheism which focuses on the central importance of Yahweh for Israel within
         the larger scheme of the world; yet this larger scheme provides a place for the other gods of the
         other nations in the world. Moreover, even if this text is mute about the god who presides over
         the divine assembly, it does maintain a place for such a god who is not Yahweh. Of course, later
         tradition would identify the figure of Elyon with Yahweh, just as many scholars have done.
         However, the title of Elyon ("Most High") seems to denote the figure of El, presider par
         excellence not only at Ugarit but also in Psalm 82.356

         That the text of LXX and the Dead Sea Scrolls is superior to MT in Deut 32:8-9 is not in dispute. I

object to the notion that the title Elyon in verse 8 refers to El rather than to Yahweh in verse 9. There are

several reasons why separating Yahweh and El here does not appear sound.

         First, the form of Deuteronomy 32 argues against the idea that Yahweh is not the Most High in the

passage. It has long been recognized that a form-critical analysis of Deuteronomy 32 demonstrates the

predominance of the lawsuit, or byr, pattern. As G. E. Wright noted in one such study, "the lawsuit pattern is

the central form in Deuteronomy 32."357 Building on the then recently published study of the divine council by

H. Wheeler Robinson, Wright also noted that the dominant picture of the heavenly assembly was that it served

as a court of law. Wright traces the elements of the lawsuit pattern through the passage, noting how the election

356
  Mark S. Smith, Origins, 48-49.
357
  G. E. Wright, "The Lawsuit of God: A Form-Critical Study of Deuteronomy 32," in Israel's Prophetic Heritage: Essays in Honor of
James Muilenburg (ed. Bernhard W. Anderson and Walter Harrelson; New York: Harper and Brothers, 1962), 43.
of Israel and the placement of each Gentile nation under the authority of a member of the heavenly court

establish the setting of Deuteronomy 32. An indictment (32:15-18) is issued against Yahweh's elect people,

Israel, who had abandoned their true Rock (32:5-6) and turned to the worship of the other gods who were under

Yahweh’s authority. The judge—Yahweh—then passes judgment (32:19-29).358 The point is this: as with

Psalm 82, the presupposition of the passage is that Yahweh is presiding over the lawsuit procedures and

heavenly court. Only the high god has the authority to render a verdict, and that god is Yahweh. Deuteronomy

32 does not envision Yahweh as a subordinate, but as Most High in the council.

         Second, the separation of El and Yahweh in Deut 32:8-9 in part depends on the decision to take the yk

of 32:9 as adversative and denoting some contrast between Elyon of 32:8 and Yahweh of 32:9 (“However,

Yahweh’s portion is his people . . .”).359 Other scholars, however, consider the yk of 32:9 to be emphatic and

translate, “And lo, Yahweh’s portion is his people . . .”).360 Other scholars accept the adversative use but do not

separate El and Yahweh in the passage.361 Scholarship on this construction lacks consensus, and so conclusions

based on the adversative syntactical choice are not secure.

         Third, as noted in Chapter Two, Ugaritic scholars have noted that the title "Most High" ((lyn or the

shorter(l ) is never used of El in the Ugaritic corpus.362 In point of fact it is Baal, a second-tier deity, who twice

receives this title as the ruler of the gods.363 The point here is to reject the argument that the mere occurrence of

the term Nwyl( must refer to El in Deut 32:8-9. Due to the well-established attribution of Baal epithets to

Yahweh, the title Nwyl( could conceivably point directly to Yahweh in Deut 32:8-9. It is also worth recalling

Smith’s argument that the 8th century prophetic condemnation of the goddess Asherah, indicating a rejection of

her as Yahweh’s wife, means that a Yahweh-El fusion had occurred by that time since Asherah was El’s wife.

Hence the author of Deuteronomy would have embraced a Yahweh-El fusion with Yahweh as the head of the

358
    Ibid., 33-53.
359
    For the arguments for an adversative yk, see Tsevat, “God and the Gods in Assembly,” 132, n. 28, and J. Muilenburg, “The Linguistic
and Rhetorical Usages of the Particle yk in the Old Testament,” HUCA 32 (1961): 140.
360
    Tigay, Deuteronomy, 303; Duane L. Christensen, Deuteronomy 21:10-34:12 (WBC 6B; Nashville: Thomas Nelson Publishers, 2002),
791 (n. 9a-a), 796; A. Schoors, “The Particle yk,” OTS 21 (1981): 240-253.
361
    Sanders, The Provenance of Deuteronomy 32, 159-160, 363-374, esp. 373.
362
    Korpel, A Rift in the Clouds, 276; Wyatt, "Titles of the Ugaritic Storm-God," 419; E.E. Elnes and Patrick D. Miller, "Elyon," in DDD,
294.
divine council. Indeed, what point would the Deuteronomic author have had in mind to bring back a Yahweh-El

separation that had been rejected two hundred years prior? Further, what point would even later redactors have

in mind by retreating to a long-discarded separation of El and Yahweh as they finalized the canonical text during

the exile? Given the compositional and redactional history of Deuteronomy, it seems quite strained to argue that

the text points to a separation of Yahweh and El.

         Fourth, although “Elyon” is paired with El in the Hebrew Bible, it is most often an epithet of Yahweh.364

Smith and Parker are of course well aware of this, but attribute it to "later tradition," contending that, in Deut

32:8-9 the title of Elyon should be associated with El distinct from Yahweh. This would be most curious if

Yahweh and El had been fused as early as the eighth century, since Deuteronomy post-dates this time. It is

interesting that other texts as early as the eighth century speak of Yahweh performing the same deeds as the

Nwyl( in Deut 32:8-9. For example, Isa 10:13 has Yahweh in control of the boundaries (twlwbg) of the

nations.365 The anachronistic nature of the claim that Deuteronomy’s author-redactors were separating El and

Yahweh by their wording suggests that the argument stems from the misconception that the presence of

Myhl)h-ynb in this passage points to a polytheistic worldview. This is in fact what Smith asserts when he

says, "the texts of the LXX and the Dead Sea Scrolls show Israelite polytheism."366

         Again the tension in Smith's position is apparent. This conclusion requires him (and others) to argue that

Deuteronomy 32 is a polytheistic relic deliberately allowed to remain in the text to somehow "set up" Psalm 82's

exaltation of Yahweh. Such a view presumes that Israel’s religion could not or did not qualitatively distinguish

between the Myhl) generally and Yahweh who had no species equal. Put in the form of a question, why would

the presence of Myhl)h-ynb require Yahweh and El to be separate, when a monolatrous religion with Yahweh-

El as single high God can easily accommodate Myhl)h-ynb? Deut 32:43 makes this question even more

decisive, since that text (reading again with Qumran and LXX) demands that all the other gods worship

Yahweh. Smith even concedes this point—that a divine council of Myhl)h-ynb does not require polytheism—


363
    See KTU 1.16:iii.6, 8; Wyatt, "Ugaritic Storm-God," 419.
364
    E.E. Elnes and Patrick D. Miller, "Elyon," DDD, 296.
365
    J. Luyten, “Primeval and Eschatological Overtones in the Song of Moses (Dt 32, 1-43),” in Das Deuteronomium: Entstehung, Gestalt,
when he notes that "the divine assembly is not oppositional to monotheistic statements in biblical literature."367

References to Myhl)h-ynb do not argue for a religious worldview prior to the Yahweh-El fusion due to the

fact that Myhl)h-ynb persist well after that fusion in the Hebrew Bible, not to mention well into the Second

Temple period. There is a logical disconnect in the separation argument along with the chronological

impediment.

           Fifth, separating El from Yahweh in Deut 32:8-9 is internally inconsistent, both within Deuteronomy 32

and Deuteronomy at large. This assertion is demonstrated by the two preceding verses, Deut 32:6-7. Those two

verses attribute no less than five well-recognized El epithets to Yahweh, demonstrating that the those who

fashioned Deuteronomy recognized the union of El with Yahweh, as one would expect at this point in Israel’s

religion:368


                                         ^n<Q' ^ybia' aWh-aAlh] ~k'x' al{w> lb'n" ~[; tazO-Wlm.g>Ti hw"hy>l;-h] 6
                                                 rAdw"-rAD tAnv. WnyBi ~l'A[ tAmy> rkoz> 7 `^n<n>koy>w: ^f.[' aWh
                                                                    `%l' Wrm.ayOw> ^yn<qez> ^d.GEy:w> ^ybia' la;v.
           These verses clearly contain elements drawn from ancient descriptions of El and attribute them to

Yahweh (     tazO-Wlm.g>Ti hw"hy>l;-h]). At Ugarit El is called )ab )adm ("father of mankind")               369
                                                                                                                   and


t`r )il )abh )il mlk dyknnh ("Bull El his father, El the king who establishes him").370 In like manner, Yahweh is

described as "your father" (    ^ybia') who "established you" (^n<)n>koy>w:). Yahweh is also the one who "creates"

(   ^n<Q') in verse six. The root *qny is found in the Palmyrene El epithet )l qny )rs[ ("El, creator of the earth")         371




and the Karatepe inscription's appeal to )l qn )rs[ ("El, creator of the earth").372 At Ugarit the verb occurs in the

El epithet, qny w)adn )ilm ("creator and lord of the gods"),373 and Baal calls El qnyn ("our creator").374 Gen


und Botschaft (ed. Norbert Lohfink; Leuven: Leuven University Press, 1985), 342.
366
    Mark S. Smith, Origins, 48.
367
    Ibid., 51.
368
    Sanders, The Provenance of Deuteronomy 32, 360-361.
369
    KTU 1.14:1.37, 43.
370
    KTU 1.3:v.35-36; 1.4:i.4-6; iv.47-48.
371
    Marjo Christina Annette Korpel, "Creator of All," DDD, 208.
372
    H. Donner and W. Rollig, KAI (4th ed.; Band 1; Wiesbaden: Otto Harrasowitz, 1979). The text cited is KAI 26.III.18-19.
373
    KTU 1.3:v.9.
14:19,22 likewise attributes this title to El. Deut 32:7 references the "days of old" (             ~l'A[ tAmy>) and "the years

of many generations" (     rAd=w"-rAD tAnv.) which correspond, respectively, to El's description ((lm)                 375
                                                                                                                             and title


)ab s\nm ("father of years") at Ugarit.376

         Since Smith believes the LXX / Qumran text of Deut 32:8-9 separates El-Elyon and Yahweh into Father

and Son because of the Myhl)h-ynb element of the verses, he is therefore forced to the conclusion that verses

8-9 simultaneously distinguish Elyon and Yahweh while verses 6-7 unite them. Those who crafted the text of

Deuteronomy 32 would have either expressed diametrically oppositional views of Yahweh’s status in

consecutive verses, or have allowed a presumed original separation of Yahweh and El to stand in the text while

adding verses 6-7 in which the names describe a single deity. It is difficult to believe that the scribes were this

careless or unskilled. If they were at all motivated by an intolerant monotheism one would expect this potential

confusion to have been removed. If, as Smith himself concludes, Yahweh and El had been fused in Israelite

religion by the eighth century B.C.E., why would those in religious power centuries later allow a presumed

allusion to a Yahweh and El separation to remain in the text?377 It is more coherent to argue that Israelite

religion, even at the late stage of the redaction of Deuteronomy, practiced the monolatrous worship of the single

high God Yahweh-El who presided over an assembly of Myhl)h-ynb. Belief in Myhl)h-ynb does not

necessitate a Yahweh-El separation. Even those who hold to the dominant paradigm of the rise of Israelite

monotheism would acknowledge that the belief in a council of such beings lasted well beyond the eighth century

B.C.E.

          In Deuteronomy at large, the same internal inconsistencies are manifest. In Deut 4:19-20, a parallel

passage to 32:8-9, the text informs us that it was Yahweh who “took” (xql) Israel as his own inheritance (cf.

Deut 9:26, 29; 29:25). Neither the verb form nor the idea is passive. Israel was not given to Yahweh, which is

the picture that scholars who separate El and Yahweh in Deuteronomy 32 want to fashion. Deut 32:9 is a

verbless clause, and evinces no grammatical reason to conclude that Israel was given to Yahweh by his superior,

374
    KTU 1.10:iii.5.
375
    M. Dahood, Ras Shamra Parallels (ed. L.R. Fisher; vol. I of AnOr 49; Rome: Pontifical Institute, 1972), 294-295.
376
    Ugaritica V.1.15-23.
El. In view of the close relationship of Deut 32:8-9 to Deut 4:19-20, it is more consistent to have Yahweh

taking Israel for his own terrestrial allotment by sovereign act. Deuteronomy 32 also contains the

Tetragrammaton eight times, along with three other divine names apart from Nwyl(: Myhl) (v. 8), l) (v.

18b), and hwl) (v. 15c). We are certainly not to conclude these are separate gods. In light of the presence of

these well-known epithets and alternative names for Yahweh, it is reasonable to interpret Nwyl( in a similar

way, particularly in the context of the El epithets attributed to Yahweh in 32:6-7.

            The religious worldview of the exilic redactors was unthreatened by the Myhl)h-ynb in these verses.

The scribes were not attempting to weed out polytheistic elements or use such elements to prop up a new

religious innovation. Yahweh was the incomparable king of all nations in this early biblical text and had been

viewed as such since the ancient fusion of Yahweh and El.


3.5 Summation

            The textual phenomena of Deuteronomy 32 leaves the interpreter with one of two options: the

prevailing view, that these rather obvious references to other divine beings were overlooked by exilic redactors

trying to enforce an intolerant monotheism, or that the Dtr redactors had a monolatrous worldview that included

other gods. I contend that the latter is more coherent. This choice leads to the conclusion that the presence of

other "deity class" members of the divine council in Deuteronomy 32 has no evidentiary value for arguing: (1)

that this chapter and Psalm 82 are just rhetoric for persuading Israelites that Yahweh was finally king over all

the gods; or (2) that later Second Temple period references to plural

Myhl) / Myl) (ynb) speak of a lower class of heavenly beings than the pre-exilic gods of the divine council.

In point of fact, this worldview and its monolatry is consistent throughout Deuteronomy and later post-exilic

literature, as the next two chapters demonstrate.




377
      Mark S. Smith, Origins, 49.
                                                            Chapter Four



                                   The Divine Council and Monolatry
                                 in Deuteronomy and Deutero-Isaiah


         This study’s earlier discussion on the definitions of monotheism and monolatry noted Mark S. Smith’s

distinction between the two concepts. Smith’s concise summary is worth repeating here: “Monotheistic

exclusivity is not simply a matter of cultic observance, as in the First Commandment’s prohibition against ‘no

other gods before me’ in Exod 20:3 and Deut 5:7. It extends further to an understanding of deities in the cosmos

(no other gods, period). . . . Statements of incomparability are not included; such hyperbole is known also in

Mesopotamian texts.”378 This study agrees with Smith’s assertion that statements of incomparability are not to

be understood as monotheism.

          In his important monograph on the subject of Yahweh's incomparability, C.J. Labuschagne noted

several examples from the Mesopotamian texts to which Smith alludes. For instance Marduk is called "Mighty

god, who has no equal among the great gods."379 Anu's Sumerian personal name, Ana-da-nu-me-a ("there is

none besides Anu") also expresses incomparability.380 Labuschagne elaborates:

         The concept of the incomparability of Yahweh is of greatest importance for a more profound
         understanding of the Hebrew knowledge of God. In a most surprising way it sheds light on
         those qualities of Yahweh that distinguish Him from other gods . . . [and] at the same time it
         helps to explain why Israel called itself incomparable among the nations. . . . When Israel was
         called a dx) ywg in II Samuel 7:23, it means that in view of Israel's part in the history of
         salvation, she was lone in the world, for to the exclusion of all other nations she was the people
         saved by Yahweh. Therefore, like her God, she was regarded as the single one amongst others.
         . . . When Israel compared its God with other gods, it certainly assumed that there were gods in
         the polytheistic world, and it took their existence for granted. . . . The fact that Israel did as a
         matter of fact compare its God with other gods confirms that they took the existence of other
         gods seriously.381

378
    Mark S. Smith, Origins, 151, 279, n. 20.
379
    Labuschagne, The Incomparability of Yahweh in the Old Testament, 40.
380
    Ibid., 43.
381
    Ibid., 134, 138 (emphasis is the author's). While Labuschagne's work is helpful in elucidating the concept of Yahweh's
incomparability, his understanding (and rejection) of a divine council en toto (cf. p. 137) is unfounded and misguided. For some reason,
Labuschagne strains to explain that the other gods to whom Yahweh is compared do not form a council, but are Yahweh's retinue (pp. 81-
85). He fails to articulate the difference, and does not deal with the terminology for council. Likewise he asserts that the concept of a
council would undermine incomparability (pp. 137-138). Why Yahweh is incomparable among a “retinue” but not a council is never
explained. It would seem Ps 89:7-8 [Hebrew] settles the issue decisively against Labuschagne's view: “For who in the skies can be
Commenting on the Shema Labuschagne adds:

         [H]ere we have the comparison of Yahweh with other gods carried to its logical conclusion. He is
         incomparable and therefore he is the Single One amongst the gods, the Solitary One, without peer,
         to whom no god is related, with whom no god can be on the same level. . . . We may conclude
         that the exclusiveness of the confession, dx) hwhy, is not the result of monotheistic thought, but
         the result of Moses' work, as well as Israel's experience in history that Yahweh is incomparable. . .
         . When Israel, therefore, confesses in the Shema that Yahweh, 'our God', is the Single One, she
         expresses at the same time that she owes undivided loyalty to Him alone, for He is the only One
         for her. The qualification of Yahweh as 'our God' in the confession is indispensable, for it
         witnesses the very personal relation between Israel and Yahweh.382

         The goal of this chapter is to demonstrate that the primary evidence for an intolerant monotheism in the

Hebrew Bible is at best inconclusive, and very likely speaks only to the continuity of the monolatrous pre-exilic

worldview that embraced a divine council. The evidence offered by those who insist Israelite religion achieved

monotheism with the exilic and post-exilic redaction of Deuteronomy and the composition of Deutero-Isaiah

should instead be understood as articulating the incomparability of Yahweh. Toward this goal, this chapter

raises the issue of the simultaneous presence of affirmations of other gods and claims that “besides (Yahweh),

there are no other gods” in Deuteronomy. The discussion then moves to Deutero-Isaiah, where the same phrases

occur.


4.1 Deuteronomy: Monotheism or Monolatry?

         Earlier in this study the divine plurality and inter-relationship of Deut 4:19-20 and 32:8-9 were briefly

discussed. We now return to those passages as backdrop for the issues at hand. In Deut 4:19-20 and Deut 32:8-

9 one reads:



                            ~ybik'AKh;-ta,w> x;reY"h;-ta,w> vm,V,h;-ta, t'yair'w> hm'y>m;V'h; ^yn<y[e aF'Ti-!p,W 19
                        ^yh,l{a/ hw"hy> ql;x' rv,a] ~T'd.b;[]w: ~h,l' t'ywIx]T;v.hiw> T'x.D;nIw> ~yIm;V'h; ab'c. lKo
                          ~k,t.a, aciAYw: hw"hy> xq;l' ~k,t.a,w> 20 `~yIm'V'h;-lK' tx;T; ~yMi[;h' lkol. ~t'ao
                                             `hZ<h; ~AYK; hl'x]n: ~[;l. Al tAyh.li ~yIr'c.Mimi lz<r.B;h; rWKmi
compared to the LORD? Who among the heavenly beings is like the LORD, a God feared in the council of the holy ones, great and
terrible above all that are round about him?" Yahweh is incomparable in the council, and there is no need for a forced distinction
between “council” and “retinue.”
382
    Labuschagne, The Incomparability of Yahweh in the Old Testament, 138, 141. On incomparability as relating to the rhetoric of
Deutero-Isaiah, see Walter Strolz, “The Unique One: The Uniqueness of God According to Deutero-Isaiah,” in Standing Before God:
Studies on Prayer in Scriptures and in Tradition with Essays in Honor of John M. Oesterreicher (New York: Ktav, 1981), 257-266.
                    19 And when you look up to the heavens and behold the sun and the moon and the stars, the
                    whole heavenly host, you must not be lured into bowing down to them and serving them.
                    These Yahweh your God has allotted to the other peoples everywhere under the heaven. 20 But
                    the Lord has taken you, and brought you forth out of the iron furnace, out of Egypt, to be to
                    him a people of inheritance, as you are this day.

                                                                                                                            Deut 32:8-9
                                                     ~yMi[; tl{buG> bCey: ~d'a' ynEB. Adyrip.h;B. ~yIAG !Ayl.[, lxen>h;B. 8
                                                                                                 `laer'f.yI ynEB. rP;s.mil.
                                                                          `Atl'x]n: lb,x, bqo[]y: AM[; hA'hy> ql,xe yKi 9
                                        Deut 32: (8) When the Most High gave the nations their inheritance, when he
                                        divided all mankind, he set up boundaries for the peoples according to the
                                        number of the sons of God. (9) Lo, the LORD's portion is his people, Jacob his
                                        allotted inheritance.

          Deut 32:8a reads Mywg Nwyl( lxnhb. The object of the infinitive absolute383 is Mywg. As Sanders

notes, the Hiphil of the verb lxn can be “connected both with an accusativus personae (the inheriting person;

hence, “When the Most High gave the nations their inheritance”) or with an accusativus rei (the object inherited

by this person; and so rendering, “When the Most High gave the nations as an inheritance”).384 Both options are

syntactically possible, but which should be preferred?

          The answer is to be found in Deut 32:9: “Lo, the LORD's portion is his people, Jacob his allotted

inheritance” (NIV). Since verse nine clearly presents the nation Jacob/Israel as being taken as an allotted (qlx)

inheritance (hlxn - note the wordplay on both counts with the Hiphil verb in verse 8) by a divine personage

(Yahweh), the parallelism of MT’s verse nine would require “nations” be given as an inheritance to the sons of

God by the Most High.

          But while the nations are given as an inheritance in Deut 32:8-9, in Deut 4:19-20 a complementary

perspective is taken. In 4:19-20 the sun, moon, and stars are considered living beings created by Yahweh,385 and

these deities are allotted to the nations:




383
     lx'n:hab; is a pointed as a Hiphil infinitive absolute, but should probably be understood as a defective spelling of the infinitive
construct: lxin:hAb; (Sanders, Provenance of Deuteronomy 32, 154). This is a minor consideration, for the real point is the relationship of
the object “nations” with the Hiphil verb.
384
    Sanders, Provenance of Deuteronomy 32, 154. See Deut 1:38; 3:28; 21:16; 31:7; Josh 1:6; 1 Sam 2:8; Zech 8:12; and Prov 8:21 for
other examples.
385
    For Yahweh’s creation of the heavenly host, see Isa 40:25-26; 45:12; Hos 13:4 (LXX); Pss 33:6; 148:1-5; Neh 9:6.
~yIm'V'h;-lK' tx;T; ~yMi[;h' lkol. ~t'ao ^yh,l{a/ hw"hy> ql;x'. Deut 29:25 (Hebrew) informs us that the
peoples of these nations may worship these gods, since Yahweh allotted them:

                    `~h,l' ql;x' al{w> ~W[d'y>-al{ rv,a] ~yhil{a/ ~h,l' WWx]T;v.YIw: ~yrixea] ~yhil{a/ Wdb.[;Y:w: Wkl.YEw:
            For they went and served other gods, and worshipped them, gods that they did not know, that he had
            not allotted to them.

            The effect of the complementary perspective is derisive. The other nations worship creatures, not the

creator. The gods that Israel’s fathers “knew not” are called devils (Myd#$) in Deut 32:16-17 and impotent in

32:37-39. This enslavement to feckless gods came about as the result of the disobedience at Babel (cf. Deut

32:8 and the division of nations). After Yahweh’s decision to set aside the nations, he created Israel anew to be

his own allotment. The nations and their gods deserve each other.

            Many scholars who do recognize the affirmation of divine plurality in Deuteronomy would argue that

the succeeding redaction of Deuteronomy has recast the older monolatry in a truly monotheistic framework,

pointing to Deut 4:35, 39 and 32:39 as proof, since they declare that “there is none else beside Yahweh.” In

other words, whatever the Shema and Deut 4:19-20 and 32:8-9 meant on their own terms has been subsumed by

the monotheistic framework into which they were placed by the later redactor. Adherents of this interpretive

perspective appeal to Deutero-Isaiah for support, where the same phrases and others are found. Since Deutero-

Isaiah is considered the premier example of exclusivistic monotheism,386 the correlation of these phrases

allegedly proves Deuteronomy’s references to other gods must be interpreted from the perspective of

exclusivistic monotheism.

            This explanation assumes that “none else beside” constitutes a denial of existence. The only way to

demonstrate that Deuteronomy’s affirmation that the other gods were allotted to the nations by Yahweh himself

has been “recast” by the hand of an intolerant monotheist would be to discern unambiguously that these gods

were in fact imaginary and non-existent. This case depends upon whether the relevant phrases in Deut 4:35, 39

and 32:12, 39 in fact deny the existence of other gods.

                                                                                                               Deut 4:35
                                             `ADb;l.mi dA[ !yae ~yhil{a/h' aWh hw"hy> yKi t[;d;l' t'aer.h' hT'a;
386
      Mark S. Smith, Origins, 154-155.
                                 You were shown these things so that you might know that the LORD, he is the
                                 God (Myhl)h )wh); besides him there is no other.

                                                                                                          Deut 4:39
                             l[;M;mi ~yIm;V'B; ~yhil{a/h' aWh hw"hy> yKi ^b,b'l.-la, t'boveh]w: ~AYh; T'[.d;y"w>
                                                                            `dA[ !yae tx;T'mi #r,a'h'-l[;w>
                                 Know therefore this day, and lay it to your heart, that Yahweh, he is the God
                                 (Myhl)h )wh) in heaven above and on the earth beneath; there is no other.
                                                                                                         Deut 32:12
                                                                       `rk'nE lae AM[i !yaew> WNx,n>y: dd'B' hw"hy>
                                                              The LORD alone did lead him, and there was no
                                                              foreign god with him.

                                                                                                         Deut 32:39
                                                          ydiM'[i ~yhil{a/ !yaew> aWh ynIa] ynIa] yKi hT'[; War.
                                              `lyCim; ydiY"mi !yaew> aP'r.a, ynIa]w: yTic.x;m' hY<x;a]w: tymia' ynIa]
                                          See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no god beside me; I kill and I
                                          make alive; I wound and I heal; and there is none that can deliver out
                                          of my hand.


        With respect to Deut 4:35, 39, Myhl)h )wh hwhy is a simple verbless clause with the pronoun

emphasizing the subject, but what does it mean that Yahweh is Myhl)h? Is this a denial of the existence of

other gods? The answer can be found in another Dtr passage, 1 Kgs 18:21, where Elijah challenges the crowd at

Carmel, “If Yahweh is Myhl)h, follow him, but if Baal, then follow him.” Clearly Yahweh’s status as

Myhl)h does not mean that Baal does not exist—only that Yahweh is superior to Baal. Yahweh is the God par

excellence, or, as Deut 10:17 states, Yahweh is Myhl)h yhl), “God of the gods.” To call Yahweh

Myhl)h is to call him unique, not to deny the existence of other gods.

        The second half of the statements of Deut 4:35,39 states (wdblm) dw( Ny). The phrase is usually

translated, “there is no other (beside him),” and is taken by many scholars to be a denial of the existence of all

other gods except Yahweh. There are a number of difficulties with this understanding. As Nathan McDonald

notes in his recent work Deuteronomy and the Meaning of ‘Monotheism,’ the only consideration of the negative

particle Ny) followed by the adverb dw( with or without the subsequent preposition of excluding sense
(wdblm) is that of H. Rechenmacher.387 The first part of Rechenmacher’s study was a linguistic analysis of

Hebrew verbless sentences with particles of negation. This first part is concluded by an examination of

prepositions and adverbs with an excluding sense, including those found in the verses from Deuteronomy and

Deutero-Isaiah under consideration.388 Rechenmacher argues that the examples in Deuteronomy 4 point to

exclusivistic monotheism. However, McDonald points to several methodological problems with

Rechenmacher’s study.389

          First, the above constructions are used in reference to Babylon and Moab in Isa 47:8, 10 and Zeph 2:15.

In these instances, these constructions cannot constitute the denial of the existence of other cities and nations.390

Rechenmacher comments only that these uses are “naturally relative,” but he fails to consider that possibility

with the verses referring to Yahweh and other gods. Second, McDonald notes, “Rechenmacher assumes,

without argument, that dw( is exchangeable for a preposition with excluding function and personal suffix.”391

However, on two occasions in Deuteronomy and Deutero-Isaiah (Deut 4:35; Isa 45:21) “dw( Ny) occurs with

an excluding prepositional construction . . . and such an exchange would create a tautologous expression.”392

Third, as McDonald and other scholars have noted, neither the usual temporal sense of adverbial dw( (“still,

yet”) nor the conjunctive sense (“additionally, also, again”) fit Deut 4:35, 39 and 32:39. If one accepts the list

provided in BDB for those texts where dw( does not have either of these meanings, one is left with seven

occurrences of the adverb, all of which occur in questions or answers to questions. McDonald notes that “in

each case, what is being questioned is not the absolute existence of an object, but only if there is an object in a



387
    H. Rechenmacher, “Außer mir gibt es keinen Gott!” Eine sprach- und literaturwissenschaftliche Studie zur Ausschließlichkeitsformel
(ATSAT 49; St. Ottilien, 1997).
388
    Ibid., 97-114, cited in McDonald, Deuteronomy, 82.
389
    McDonald, Deuteronomy, 83.
390
    One could also include 1 Kgs 18:1-6 in this discussion. The passage deals with the end of the three-year drought and famine during
the career of Elijah. After meeting with Elijah, Ahab calls Obadiah, the steward of his house, and together they decided upon a course of
action to find grass to save their remaining horses and mules. After deciding between themselves which districts of the land to search (v.
6a), the text says ADb;l. dx'a,-%r,d,B. %l;h' Why"d.b;[ow> ADb;l. dx'a, %r,d,B. %l;h' ba'x.a; (“Ahab went one way by himself [ADb;l.], and
Obadiah went another way by himself [ADb;l.]”). While it may be possible (but strained) to suggest that Obadiah literally went through
the land completely unaccompanied in his search, it is preposterous to say that the king of Israel went completely alone—without
bodyguards or servants—to look for grass. The point is that ADb;l. (and by extension wdblm) need not refer to complete isolation or
solitary presence.
391
    McDonald, Deuteronomy, 83.
392
    Ibid.
person’s immediate domain. . . . In each of the questions what is being asked is whether the one being

questioned has an additional [item or] member besides the ones already taken into account.”393

            The question for our purposes is, does dw( function in the same way in the phrase dw( Ny) and the

similar phrase dw( sp)? The instances where the subjects are not divine are instructive. In Isa 47:8, 10

Babylon says to herself, dw( ysp)w yn) (“I am, and there is none else beside me”). The claim is not that she is

the only city in the world but that she has no rival. Nineveh makes the identical claim in Zeph 2:15

(dw( ysp)w yn)). Similarly, where the subject is divine it can coherently be argued that the point of

dw( Ny) is not to deny the existence of other gods, but to affirm that Yahweh is unique and the only god for

Israel. This fits well with the wording of the Shema and the first commandment, where the confession and

command imply the existence of other gods.

                                                                                                                       Deut 32:12
                                                                                       `rk'nE lae AM[i !yaew> WNx,n>y: dd'B' hw"hy>
                                                                            The LORD alone did lead him, and there was no
                                                                            foreign god with him.

                                                                                                                       Deut 32:39
                                                                     ydiM'[i ~yhil{a/ !yaew> aWh ynIa] ynIa] yKi hT'[; War.
                                                         `lyCim; ydiY"mi !yaew> aP'r.a, ynIa]w: yTic.x;m' hY<x;a]w: tymia' ynIa]
                                                    See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no god beside me; I kill and I
                                                    make alive; I wound and I heal; and there is none that can deliver out
                                                    of my hand.
            Moving on to Deut 32:12, 39, the two key phrases are )wh yn) yn) followed by ydm( Myhl) Ny)w. It

is important to observe that the repetition of yn) (or ykn)) and the clause )wh yn) occurs ten times in Deutero-

Isaiah.394 In agreement with Muraoka, who rejects )wh yn) yn) as a tripartite verbless clause, categorizing it

instead as bipartite with repeated element that functions emphatically, what does it mean for Yahweh to declare,

“I, even I, am he”? Citing C. H. Williams’s monograph on the meaning of this phrase,395 McDonald summarizes

the problems with understanding the phrase as a statement of self-existence or divine interchangeability

(“translating, ‘I am the same’) before agreeing that this phrase and similar phrasings in Deutero-Isaiah amount

393
      Ibid., 84.
394
      Isa 41:4; 43:10, 11, 13; 46:4; 48:12, 15; 52:6. They occur together in Isa 43:25 and 51:12.
to the claim that Yahweh is unique and the only truly powerful God who can deliver Israel. As with similar

older treatments of pre-exilic Yahwism, this means only that Yahweh is incomparable and the other gods are

powerless in comparison.

         The second line of Deut 32:39, ydm( Myhl) Ny)w, can either be understood as “there is no God like

me,” which would not be a denial of the other gods’ existence, or “there is no god with me.” The latter would

parallel Deut 32:12’s phrase, rkn l) wm( Ny)w (“there was no foreign god with him”). These phrases do not

amount to a denial of the existence of other gods.

         In the case of Deut 32:12, the notion that, "[T]he LORD alone (ddb hwhy) did lead him, and there was

no foreign god with him," cannot be accurately construed as a denial of the existence of other gods. In one

Ugaritic text with parallel language Baal says: )ah[dy d ymlk (l )ilm ("I alone am the one who can be king over

the gods").396 This is certainly no statement for exclusivistic monotheism at Ugarit, but points to

incomparability. Deut 32:12 simply states that when Yahweh executed judgment, no other god assisted him or

stood in his way. P. Sanders makes the same point in his monograph on Deut 32 when he states, "In colon 12aB

the existence of other gods is not under discussion. The colon just says that YHWH was the only god who made

an effort for Israel."397

         With respect to Deut 32:39 Sanders adds, “On the basis of this colon alone it is difficult to decide if it is

a claim for the absoluteness of Yahweh (i.e., the existence of other gods is denied), or the incomparability of

Yahweh.”398 The solution seems to lie in balancing the colon ydm( Myhl) Ny)w (“there is no god besides me”)

with the phrase lycm ydym Ny)w (“there is none that can deliver out of my hand”). As Sanders notes:

         How do we translate ydm(? Theoretically 'with', 'beside', and 'like' are our options. In other
         parts of the song the existence of other gods is not denied but they are regarded as powerless; cf.
         v. 31, 37-38, 43a (4QDtq). This circumstance seems to render the translation 'with' less
         convincing. It is the incomparability [of God] . . . that is confessed here. The phrase
         ydm( Myhl) Ny)w must have virtually the same meaning as the far more common expression
         of YHWH's incomparability by the phrase . . . k Ny). The possibility of translating M( by 'like'
         is also suggested by some Ugaritic evidence. . . . In KTU 1.6:i.44-45 Ilu and Athiratu are

395
    C. H. Williams, I am He: The Interpretation of )Ani Hu4) in Jewish and Early Christian Literature (WUNT II, 113, 2000) 39-52.
396
    KTU 1.4.vii.49-52.
397
    Sanders, The Provenance of Deuteronomy 32, 238.
398
    Ibid., 226.
            comparing various candidates for Ba(alu's succession. Ilu rejects one of them, stating:
            dq )anm l yrz[ (m b(l l y(db mrh[ (m bn dgn
            ktmsm ("One of feeble strength cannot run like Ba(alu, one who knuckles down cannot poise
            the lance like the son of Daganu"; lines 50-52). Since at this moment Ba(alu is not among the
            living anymore, the translation 'with' is obviously unacceptable here. It has long been perceived
            that 'like' is the preferable translation.399

            The point above regarding the relationship between Yahweh's incomparability and his uniqueness is an

important one. The fact that there is no deity who can save those whom Yahweh has targeted for judgment

speaks to both aspects. This uniqueness in turn compels the confession that Yahweh alone is the "true" God (Jer

10:10). This is the basis for Israel’s monolatry. As one scholar recently noted in a work on the question of

monotheism in Deuteronomy:

            [T]he belief in one God is the central issue in the theology of Deuteronomy. In later times, the
            monotheistic statements of Deuteronomy (esp. 4:35, 39; 6:4; 7:9; 32:39) are used by the
            monotheistic religions of Late Antiquity, Judaism and Christianity, to support their argument
            against those who did not believe in one God. . . . As far as the belief in one God is concerned,
            Deuteronomy is not concerned with a theoretical monotheism, but rather gives a confession of
            faith. The monotheism of Deuteronomy emerged from the struggle against idolatry. Moreover,
            the decline of Israel is attributed to the following of other gods. The existence of other gods is
            not denied, however, only their power and significance for Israel.400

            The absence of any unmistakable denial of the existence of other gods in Deuteronomy and the Dtr

literature is also bolstered by a study of the concept of alien deities in that material by Yair Hoffman.401

Hoffman studied the occurrence and distribution of the phrases rkn yhwl), rz l), and Myrx) Myhl) to

discern whether Israel’s faith reflected an exclusivistic monotheism, or if such phrases denoted only a difference

in perspective (“they are other gods since they are not ours”).402

            Based on the infrequent number of occurrences and their distribution, Hoffman concluded the first two

phrases could not decisively answer the question. The third phrase, the most relevant to the study, resulted in

more clarity. By way of summation, Hoffman found that the phrase Myrx) Myhl):




399
      Ibid., 238; cf. note 788. On the Ugaritic evidence, see also Johannes C. de Moor, The Seasonal Pattern in the Ugaritic Myth of
Ba(alu According to the Version of Ilimilku (AOAT 16; Kevelaer & Neukirchen-Vluyn, 1971), 203.
400
    J. T. A. M. van Ruiten, "The Use of Deuteronomy 32:39 in Monotheistic Controversies in Rabbinic Literature," in Studies in
Deuteronomy in Honor of C.J. Labuschagne on the Occasion of his 65th Birthday (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1994), 223 (emphasis mine).
401
    Yair Hoffman, “The Concept of ‘Other Gods’ in Deuteronomistic Literature,” in Politics and Theopolitics in the Bible and
Postbiblical Literature (ed. Henning Graf Reventlow, Yair Hoffman, and Benjamin Uffenheimer; JSOTSup 171; Sheffield: Sheffield
University Press, 1994), 66-84.
402
    Ibid., 71. Emphasis is the author’s.
           [S]eems to testify that at least among those who used the phrase a certain concept of otherness
           relating to deity prevailed. . . . Myrx) Myhl) is certainly an idiomatic phrase, and its
           distribution proves it to be a Deuteronomistic one: it occurs 59 times (95%) in Dtr and only
           four times in non-Dtr texts . . . [its] frequent usage indicates that it gained the lexical status of a
           common term.403

           Anticipating the critical response that the study of the phrase could still not shed sufficient light on his

questions since the Hebrew Bible lacks sophisticated philosophical vocabulary, Hoffman writes:

           Such an argument loses its validity at least in verses in which Myrx) Myhl) is qualified by
           clauses such as “which you knew not” and “which neither you nor your parents knew.” Such a
           clause indicates that since the Dtr felt that the vagueness of Myrx) Myhl) prevented him
           from achieving more accuracy, he found a way of making the phrase less equivocal.404

           Hoffman’s conclusions support the position that the denunciations of other gods in Deuteronomy and

the Dtr literature were based on Yahweh’s superiority to other gods, not his lone existence:

           The qualifying phrase t(dy )l r#$) verifies that by the phrase Myrx) Myhl) Dtr did not
           intend a conclusive denial of deities other than Yahweh. . . . I suggest that the creation of the
           expression Myrx) Myhl) reflects Dtr’s vague feeling that a term was needed which could
           express the dichotomy, though not absolute contradistinction, between Yahweh and all other
           gods. . . . The creation of a term was vital for the Dtr who wanted to contrast other deities with
           Yahweh not on the level of existence, but on the level of potency.405

           By way of illustration outside the book of Deuteronomy, Hoffman offers a passage from the Dtr prophet

Jeremiah (Jer 2:13), “who juxtaposed Yahweh and other deities using the metaphor of the fountain and the

cistern: ‘My people have committed two sins: They have forsaken me, the spring of living water, and have dug

their own cisterns, broken cisterns that cannot hold water.’”406 Jeremiah’s rhetoric in 2:11a (“Has a nation ever

changed its gods? [Yet they are not gods at all]”) does not overturn the comparison based on potency with a

denial of the existence of the other gods, for 2:11b explains, “But my people have exchanged their Glory for

what does not profit.” The point of Jeremiah’s comparison is potency, not existence. Hoffman again comments:

           Thus the concept of “other gods” expressed by the term Myrx) Myhl) is that they exist, they
           may even be “helpful” for their natural worshippers, but not for Israel, which can be helped only
           by Yahweh. Such a concept of other gods leads indirectly to the belief that Yahweh is mightier
           than the other gods, and therefore it is not only immoral but stupid for Israel to transgress his
           covenant. The concept of the sovereignty of Yahweh over all deities, though not his
           exclusiveness, and the idea that it is legitimate for each nation to worship its own gods, are well

403
    Ibid.
404
    Ibid.
405
    Ibid., 72.
406
    Ibid., 72.
          attested in Deut 4:19-20. Here Israel is warned not to worship the sun, the moon, and the stars,
          “whom the Lord has allotted (qlx) unto all nations under the whole world.”

          The confessional statements of Deut 4:35, 39 and 32:12, 39 must be viewed against the backdrop of the

Most High’s dealings with the Gentile nations and the gods he appointed to govern them. It would be

nonsensical to conclude that Deut 4:19-20 and 32:8-9 have Yahweh giving the nations up to the governance of

non-existent beings. The writer-redactor’s own text is not suggesting in turn that Yahweh allotted non-existent

beings to the nations so as to explain why the nations outside Israel worship non-existent beings. The religious

outlook of the writer of Deuteronomy was not exclusivistic monotheism but monolatry based on Yahweh's

incomparability and his choice of Israel. The theology of Deuteronomy and the Deuteronimist logically called

for Israel’s exclusive worship of Yahweh, the rejection of the worship of other gods, and the removal of rival

cult centers, not because the idea that other gods existed was threatening, but because loyalty to any other god

was such an abominable response to Yahweh’s choice of Israel.

          Immediately preceding the confession of 4:35 the reader sees the linkage between election of Israel as

Yahweh's inheritance with his uniqueness. What other god was so powerful as to snatch his own possession

from the feckless gods that held sway over the other nations, namely mighty Egypt?

                                    ttoaoB. tSom;B. yAG br,Q,mi yAg Al tx;q;l' aAbl' ~yhil{a/ hS'nIh] Aa 34
                                  ~ylidoG> ~yair'Amb.W hy"Wjn> [;Arz>biW hq'z"x] dy"b.W hm'x'l.mib.W ~ytip.Amb.W
                                               `^yn<y[el. ~yIr;c.miB. ~k,yhel{a/ hw"hy> ~k,l' hf'['-rv,a] lkoK.
                           Has any god ever tried to take for himself one nation out of another nation, by tests, by
                           miraculous signs and wonders, by war, by a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, or
                           by great and awesome deeds, like all the things Yahweh your God did for you in Egypt
                           before your very eyes?


          Commenting on this relationship and its place in the Dtr's argumentation in Deuteronomy 4, A. Rofé

states:

          If the Lord 'invaded' Egypt and took for himself from there the Israelite people thus revealing his
          supreme and sovereign power, he has proved by such both his dominion, which is beyond the
          borders of the traditional concept of 'the land of the Lord' – 'the inheritance of the Lord' – and the
          impotence of Amon, the God of Egypt, that is, the futility of Egyptian faith in 'a god who cannot
          save'. The Lord is the God of the universe, and other territorial gods cannot save, that is, cannot
          act as gods. . . The notion of Israel's election is mentioned here not in order to express any virtue
          of pedigree, but to bridge between two opposing notions: the universal dominion of the Lord, the
          one God, and his recognition and worship as limited to one people and land.407

          Rofé’s observations are significant for this study's outlook in two ways. First, the idea expressed by

Smith and Parker that the editors of Psalm 82 for the first time envision Yahweh's sovereignty over all nations

and not just Israel is highly problematic in light of the basis for Yahweh's uniqueness in Deuteronomy. Yahweh

is consistently depicted as willfully exercising uncompromised dominion over other gods—who govern the

other nations—throughout the Hebrew Bible. One might ask where in the Hebrew Bible we find evidence that

Israelite religion ever denied the notion that its God was "the God of gods." Rather than gaining sovereignty

over the other nations for the first time after the exilic release, Psalm 82’s wording evokes eschatological

imagery in envisioning a time when the blameworthy gods are put to death and Yahweh takes all nations to

himself in a manner similar to Israel.408 The point of Ps 82:8 is mutual “inheritance status,” not newfound

global sovereignty.

          Second, the relationship of Deuteronomy 4 and 32 and the context of Yahweh's uniqueness highlights

the primary way an Israelite would comprehend a violation of his belief in Yahweh. Accepting the reality of

other gods was not a denial of the Israelite faith, but worshipping any other god was an absolute violation of the

marriage of Israel and Yahweh. As Deurloo comments:

          YHWH, the one God, who holds a unique position in the world of the gods, has acquired a people
          of his own which, as such, holds a unique position in the world of the peoples and as such
          commands the peoples’ respect (4:6ff.). This exceptional position is Israel's 'to be or not to be' as
          dx) ywg (2 Sam. 7:23), as a confessional community. In all its generations, all Israel—in
          Deuteronomy never the 'house of Israel' but always 'children of Israel—is constituted by the
          statement dx) hwhy.409

          This feature, that only Yahweh deserved Israel’s worship, is at the heart of an Israelite monolatry, and

has great explanatory power for the nature of Second Temple Judaism's simultaneous allowance of the elevation

407
    Alexander Rofé, "The Monotheistic Argumentation in Deuteronomy IV 32-40: Contents, Composition, and Text," VT 35:4 (1985):
439.
408
    One thinks of passages such as Isaiah 19 and Zechariah 14. Additionally, the verb form for the death of the gods in Ps 82:7 does not
denote an immediate demise. The verb form, Nwtwmt (from the phrase      !Wt+WmT. ~d'a'K. !kea'  ) is identical to the serpent's true
statement to Eve in Gen 3:4 that she and Adam would not immediately die if they disobeyed (cf.    !Wt)muT. tAm-al{  ). There is nothing to
compel us, contra Mark S. Smith and Parker, to conclude that the gods are to be considered dead and gone in Israelite religion in light of
Psalm 82.
409
    Karel A. Deurloo, "The One God and All Israel in Its Generations," in Studies in Deuteronomy: In Honor of C. J. Labuschagne on the
Occasion of his 65th Birthday (ed. F. Garcia Martinez, A. Hilhorst, J. T. A. G. M. van Ruiten, and A. S. van der Woude; VTSup 53;
of mediatorial beings to divine status and its refusal upon pain of death to worship any other than Yahweh.

There is no conundrum if one posits the continuation of Israel’s pre-exilic monolatry through the exile and into

the Second Temple period. An important element of this monolatrous worldview was the divine council.

Rather than being a threat, the divine council was a familiar religious paradigm that provided a rationale for

Yahweh’s control of other gods. In a sense, the council itself provided a theological assurance. From the very

beginning, the God of Israel created the other gods and allotted them to the nations in judgment. If Yahweh was

mightier than all the gods of every nation combined in the remote past, it was irrational to conclude that His

decreed judgment of his own inheritance to only one of the nations and their gods meant Yahweh had been

defeated.

         The implication of the above is that, in light of the divine plurality of Deut 32:8-9 and the wider

allowance for other gods in Deuteronomy and the Dtr literature, the declarations of Deut 4:35, 39 and 32:12, 39

are best understood as reflecting a monolatrous worldview, not an emerging abolition of the other gods. But

does the same picture emerge in Deutero-Isaiah?


4.2 Deutero-Isaiah: Monotheism or Monolatry?

         The most significant figure in Israel’s presumed evolution toward intolerant monotheism is the writer of

Deutero-Isaiah. Mark S. Smith states the consensus view of Deutero-Isaiah's importance well:

         [I]n Deutero-Isaiah, Yahweh is not only politically exalted as Israel is politically demoted.
         Yahweh becomes more than the god above all other gods: the existence of other gods is denied. .
         . . Yahweh is not just the god of Israel (both as land and people) but of all lands and nations.410

         Smith argues that monotheistic claims prior to Deutero-Isaiah were basically rhetoric articulated for

political purposes; that is, they amounted to "Yahwistic monolatry expressed in its rhetoric of monotheism"

marking an evolution from that monolatry to true monotheism, the belief in and worship of only one deity.411

         While this study agrees that Israel's early religion was monolatrous, it dissents from the view that

Deutero-Isaiah articulates a worldview shift from monolatry to an intolerant monotheism. Against the evidence

to the contrary, this perspective presumes that Yahweh was not considered a global sovereign in pre-exilic


Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1994), 37.
410
    Mark S. Smith, Origins, 171.
411
    Ibid., 154.
times, that the second-tier council gods were downgraded to angels, and that intolerant monotheism needed to be

enforced via editorial dilution or excision of pre-exilic ideas from the canonical text.

          Other scholars have expressed reservations with the certainty of the consensus position. Against the

backdrop of the divine council in Deutero-Isaiah, R. N. Whybray notes:

          It has recently been convincingly argued that side by side with [Deutero-Isaiah’s]
          uncompromising monotheism there are clear indications that he retained a belief in the Israelite
          concept of Yahweh's heavenly council. . . . The concept of Yahweh as possessed of unlimited
          power, far from leaving him in isolation, actually required as its corollary that, like any human
          king, he would have at his command a body of servants and messengers attending upon him to
          carry out his commands. The use of the term "monotheism" to describe Deutero-Isaiah's
          teaching has tended to obscure this, and wrongly isolate him from his historical context in the
          history of Israelite religion as if he were an entirely new phenomenon, a Greek philosopher born
          before his time. There is no evidence for such a view. He was concerned rather to preserve the
          traditional Israelite view of God than to introduce novel doctrines.412


          Questions naturally arise in the wake of such a statement. If the belief in the council was retained, and

if Deutero-Isaiah evidently wanted to “preserve the traditional Israelite view of God,” and if the term

monotheism has “obscured” these facts, why do Whybray and other scholars still insist that Deutero-Isaiah

denied the existence of other gods? This study suggested earlier that the answer to this question is that the

assumption of an evolutionary progression to intolerant monotheism has achieved the status of guiding

hermeneutic in much of biblical scholarship. The consensus assumption lacks explanatory power with respect to

Deuteronomy. The remainder of this chapter suggests that the “traditional Israelite view of God” referenced by

Whybray is monolatry—and was in fact preserved by Deutero-Isaiah.

          To begin, scholars of the book of Isaiah have long recognized the presence of the divine council in the

book of Isaiah, particularly Isa 40:1-8:413 As C. Seitz has recently contended, one’s understanding of the

redactional whole of the book of Isaiah depends to a large extent upon discerning the presence of the divine

council in Isa 40:1-8.414 Seitz argues that Isa 40:1-8 is not a call narrative proper, since it lacks several elements

most often found in that genre, but is best understood as a renewal of the Isaianic commission.415 He then goes

412
    Whybray, The Heavenly Counsellor, 82-84.
413
    See, for example, H. H. Rowley, “The Council of Yahweh,” JTS 45 (1944): 151-157; Kingsbury, “Prophets and the Council of
Yahweh,” 279-286; Polley, “Hebrew Prophecy Within the Council of Yahweh,” 141-156; Christopher R. Seitz, “The Divine Council:
Temporal Transition and New Prophecy in the Book of Isaiah,” JBL 109:2 (1990): 229-247; Frank Moore Cross, “The Council of
Yahweh in Deutero-Isaiah,” JNES 12 (1953): 274-277; M. Nissinen, “Prophets in the Divine Council,” 4-19.
414
    Seitz, “Divine Council,” 229, 243-247.
415
    The similarity between Isaiah 6 and 40 is heightened if neither chapter is a call narrative proper. Seitz’s arguments are summarized
above, while M. Sweeney notes in detail the problems associated with seeing even chapter 6 as belonging to the call narrative genre (=
on to draw the conclusion that the use of the divine council motif in Isa 40:1-8 is the literary device for fusing

the Former things and the Latter things in “a single divine horizon.”416 While it is not necessary to embrace

Seitz’s conclusions about conceived temporal significance of Isa 40:1-8, recognition of the divine council in

these verses is indeed critical for perceiving how the rationale of Deutero-Isaiah is propelled.

          Two features of Isa 40:1-8 demonstrate the presence of the divine council. First, there are several plural

imperatives in verses 1 (Wmx]n: Wmx]n:; “console”) 2 (War.qiw> . . .  WrB.D;; “speak . . . and call”) and 3 (WrV.y: . . .
WNP;; “prepare . . . make straight”) as well as plural suffixes (v.1, ~k,yhela/, “your God”; v.3, Wnyhelale, “for our
God”). The commands are issued to an unseen audience,417 and require actions that cannot be fulfilled by

earthly addressees.418 Second, there is an unequivocal alternation of speakers in verses 1-6. The speaker who

issues the plural imperatives of verses 1-2 is presumably Yahweh (addressing his divine court), due to the fact

that he refers to the inhabitants of Jerusalem as “my people,” and pronounces the sins of those people as having

been pardoned. The speaker changes in verse 3, where a voice from the assembly who has just heard the

instruction of Yahweh calls out (to plural addressees again) to make preparation for the arrival of Yahweh and

his glory (v.5). This heavenly voice then addresses another personage with a singular imperative (v. 6a, . . .

ar'q. rmeao lAq; “a voice said, ‘call . . .’”). The exchange is reminiscent of the council intercourse of Isaiah
6, a correlation often used as support for seeing Isa 40:1-8 as the call narrative of Deutero-Isaiah. Such a

correlation is inconclusive, however, since Isa 40:1-8 may just as well have been composed to reference Isaiah 6

rather than to signal a change in prophetic voice.

          Seitz and other scholars argue that Isa 40:1-8 is not a call narrative due to its departures from the

elements of that genre, namely the absence of the crucial elements of an acceptance of the charge and ensuing

reassurance.419 Instead of a first person acceptance of the commission charge, such as is found in Isa 6:8 (“here

am I, send me”), the objection to the singular imperative is not voiced by the prophetic author of Isaiah 40, but




vocation account). See Marvin A. Sweeney, Isaiah 1-39 (FOTL XVI; Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 1996), 134-136.
416
    Seitz, “Divine Council,” 245.
417
    Seitz and others have pointed out that interpreting ym2i(a as a vocative is ruled out by the parallel ~l;iv'Wry> ble-l[; , which is clearly the
intended object and not a vocative.
418
    See especially hL'sim. hb'r'[]B' WrV.y: and the ensuing description of this activity in verses 4-5.
419
    Seitz, “Divine Council,” 238-246.
another angelic voice: “. . . and he said, what shall I say?”420 In fact, there is no first-person speech in Deutero-

Isaiah that can be distinguished from Yahweh until 48:16b, speech that is attributed in 49:3 to “servant Israel.”421

Consequently, Isa 40:1-8 is an example of deliberation amid the divine council to "renew the Isaianic

commission,"422 and not a prophetic call.

          This denial notwithstanding, the fact that the divine council motif used here by the prophetic

author/redactor is used only previously in Isaiah 6 signals to the reader that Yahweh is now ready to act once

again. Whether the material conforms to the call genre completely or not, the prophetic author/redactor, living

on the cusp of the time of deliverance, employs the divine council motif as a persuasive rhetorical technique to

motivate the people to action. The sentence of exile having been served (40:2), the glory of Yahweh is returning

to Zion (40:5). Reviving the motif telegraphed the message to the captives of Israel that their redemption was

drawing nigh, but they must not give in to unbelief (40:12-31). The people must believe that Yahweh is about to

subdue Babylon and its impotent idols as he did Syria, Ephraim, and Assyria the last time the council

deliberated (chs. 41-48; cp. Isa. 7:1-14, esp. v. 8). Yahweh and his council have chosen a promised servant for

just such a task (49-55).

          But if the third person verb of Isa 40:6 is to be taken as a second heavenly figure answering the first

such personage, and not the prophet himself, who is the herald of verses 9-11? Does the author/redactor forsake

the motif in these critical verses – verses that outline the message of comfort to Zion (see below on the difficult

genitive) commanded in 40:1? Some scholars argue that the herald (the                       tr,F,b;m.) of verses 9-11 is in fact
Deutero-Isaiah,423 and so the chapter may still be a call narrative despite the above incongruities. If the herald is

indeed Deutero-Isaiah, then the divine council fades into the background as a literary device, but is not




420
    Seitz (234ff.) discusses the text-critical issues in identifying the questioner in terms of the third person or first person. The latter is
reflected in the LXX and 1QIsaa, which fact has been used to mark chapter 40 as a call narrative for Deutero-Isaiah. Seitz’s discussion of
the variant readings and the variants themselves have nothing to do with the issue of the divine council, only departures from genre. Both
scholars who side with Seitz in agreeing that the departures from the call genre he notes are important and those who still see Isa 40:1-8
as a call accept the plural imperatives of Isa 40:1-8 as pointing to the heavenly host, Yahweh’s council. If the first person verb is
original, the divine council is still present in view of the plural imperatives in 40:1-2. The person of the verb affects only the potential
identification of the herald.
421
    Seitz, “Divine Council,” 245.
422
    Ibid.
423
    R.W. Fisher, “The Herald of the Good News in Deutero-Isaiah (40:9; 41:27; 52:7),” PTMS 1 (Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh Theological
Seminary, 1974), 123ff.
eliminated in view of the plural imperatives. That is, the issue of a herald and the plural imperatives are separate

issues. The identity of the herald is most conveniently dealt with in connection with Isa 52:7-9 (cp. 40:9).424

                                                                                                          Isa 52:7-9 and Isa 40:9
                        h['Wvy> [;ymiv.m; bAj rFeb;m. ~Alv' [;ymiv.m; rFeb;m. yleg>r; ~yrih'h,-l[; WwaN"-hm; 7
                         !yI[;B. !yI[; yKi WnNEr;y> wD'x.y: lAq Waf.n" %yIp;co lAq 8 `%yIh'l{a/ %l;m' !AYcil. rmeao
                            hw"hy> ~x;nI-yKi ~l'iv'Wry> tAbr.x' wD'x.y: WnN>r; Wxc.Pi 9 `!AYci hw"hy> bWvB. War.yI
                                                                                              `~l'iv'Wry> la;G" AM[;
                        7 How welcome on the mountain are the footsteps of the herald announcing happiness,
                        announcing good fortune, announcing victory, telling Zion, "Your God is King!" 8 Hark!
                        Your watchmen raise their voices, as one they shout for joy; for every eye shall behold
                        Yahweh’s return to Zion. 9 Raise a shout together, O ruins of Jerusalem, for Yahweh will
                        comfort his people, he will redeem Jerusalem.

                             ~l'iv'Wry> tr,F,b;m. %leAq x;Kob; ymiyrih' !AYci tr,F,b;m. %l'-yli[] h;boG"-rh; l[; 9
                                                   `~k,yhel{a/ hNEhi hd'Why> yre['l. yrim.ai yair'yTi-la; ymiyrih'
                        9 Ascend a lofty mountain. O herald of joy to Zion; raise your voice with power, O herald of
                        joy to Jerusalem—raise it, have no fear; announce to the cities of Judah: Behold your God!

         Clearly there are unmistakable parallels between Isa 40:9 and 52:7, but is the focus of these texts

the rousing of the divine council to activity or the ministry of the prophet? There are several features of

the text of 40:9-11 that must be engaged.

         To begin with,     tr,F,b;m. is feminine, and the commands issued to the herald in 40:9 are feminine
singular. Many would object that these forms rule out the prophet as being the herald. Others also

contend that divine council members are not in view here either, since heavenly beings are never depicted

or described in female form in the Hebrew Bible, and since the form is singular. In reality, neither

candidate for the identification of the herald is eliminated by the morphology of                    tr,F,b;m.. Grammatical
gender of nouns need not designate the actual gender of its referent, and there are occasions in the

Hebrew Bible where a plainly male figure is described via a feminine participle.425 The feminine verb

forms of 40:9-10 are not determinative as well, since they would be feminine for sake of grammatical

424
   The translation is that of the Jewish Publication Society Tanakh, except for the rendering, “Yahweh.”
425
   Fisher, 120-122. Another examples of a male figure described with a noun having the feminine t-e ending is tlhq (Ecc 1:1;
“speaker of an assembly”). However, it is not certain that tlhq is a participle. See Paul Joüon, A Grammar of Biblical Hebrew, Part
One: Orthography and Phonetics (trans. T. Muraoka; Rome: Pontifical Biblical Institute, 1993), 266-267, par. 89b; E. Kautzsch, ed.,
agreement only.426 Hence the feminine form here may point to a masculine figure. Those who would

argue that the herald is the prophet also note that the only other occasions in Isaiah in which the

participle of r#ob appears has a masculine singular form (r#o'2bam; ; 41:27 and 52:7). On the other hand,

feminine nouns morphologically singular can be used to denote a collective noun, a status that renders the

gender issue moot.427 In fact, one scholar has noted that one of the semantic values of the Semitic -(a)t is

to create a collective from a participle.428 The singular of Isa 40:9, then, may actually indicate a group of

heralds (the divine council).

         Faced with this interpretational ambiguity, some scholars argue that                  tr,F,b;m. is an appositional

genitive to "Zion" and "Jerusalem" (          !AYci tr,F,b;m. and ~l'iv'Wry> tr,F,b;m.), thereby making
Zion/Jerusalem the herald.429 These genitives have long puzzled commentators as to whether there is a

messenger of (to) Zion/Jerusalem, or if Zion/Jerusalem is the messenger (an appositional genitive). This

question is perhaps best answered by Isa 52:7, which, alluding back to Isa 40:9, unequivocally takes the

herald as an individual sent to Zion (       !AYcil.), not as Zion herself. The appositional understanding would
also have Zion/Jerusalem speaking to the cities of Judah, which, while not impossible, is awkward.

         Are there then any other clues that might break the hermeneutical deadlock of the identity of the

herald? R.W. Fisher, while recognizing the indeterminate nature of the evidence noted above,

nevertheless opts for a lone masculine figure (Deutero-Isaiah) for the herald because he believes Isa 40:1-

8 is a call narrative describing Deutero-Isaiah standing before the divine council to obtain his

commission, a position rendered dubious by Seitz's later work.430 That the form r#obm is subsequently

used in 41:27 and 52:7 clinches his argument in his mind, for the masculine participle (and without the


Gesenius’ Hebrew Grammar (trans. G. W. Collins, 1898, and A. E. Cowley, 1909; Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988), 393, Par. 122r.
426
    Fisher, 120.
427
    Ibid., 199. See also Bruce K. Waltke and M. O'Connor, Introduction to Biblical Hebrew Syntax (Winona Lake, Indiana: Eisenbrauns,
1990), 101-104 (esp. par. 6.3.2; 6.4.1-2).
428
    E. A. Speiser, "Studies in Semitic Formatives," in Oriental and Biblical Studies: Collected Writings of E.A. Speiser (ed. J.J.
Finkelstein and Moshe Greenberg; Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, 1967), 416-432.
429
    See John D. W. Watts, Isaiah 34-66 (WBC 25; Waco, Texas: Word Books, 1987), 78, 82. On the appositional effect for the genitive
construct, see Gesenius’ Hebrew Grammar, Par. 128.
430
    Fisher, 123.
article at that), unlike its feminine counterpart, does not function as a collective. Building on the

masculine singular of 52:7, Fisher confidently states that, "52:7 is actually an exact description of the

execution of the commission given in 40:9," which commission in turn is the fulfillment "of Yahweh's

command to speak comfortably to Jerusalem found in the opening verse (40:1)."431 Fisher's extrapolation

overlooks one significant detail, however - the commands given in 40:1 are not singular, they are

masculine plural. Had they referred to the       tr,F,b;m., one would expect feminine singular forms, as in the
case of all the other imperatives of 40:9-11. In effect, his observation does not support his argument, and

actually contradicts his own admission that 40:1-8 occurs in the presence of the divine council. It does,

however, open the door for another possibility.

            I believe that the answer to whether the herald is an individual or group is that both perspectives

are valid. In Isa 40:9, the herald does fulfill the commands of 40:1, but that herald is a collective (in

concert with the use of the feminine participle), the divine council itself. The masculine singular

participles of 41:27 and 52:7 do indeed refer to an individual, a person who was commissioned to assist in

the carrying out of the mandate issued to the council in 40:1,9. If this individual is human, this would be

another example of the symbiotic human-divine council relationship seen elsewhere in the Hebrew

Bible.432 A likely candidate for this individual who assists the divine council in carrying out its mandate

would be one who stood in the prophetic office, since such human-divine collaboration most often

involved such individuals.433 This can be asserted without assenting to the notion that 40:1-8 is a call

narrative. Whoever inherited the "renewed Isaianic commission" would suffice.

            Whether or not Deutero-Isaiah saw himself performing this role is beyond the scope of this

examination. There are several other ways to possibly identify the herald, but space allows only brief

comments.

            Aside from the prophet himself, one could postulate an unidentified member of the divine council

heralds the coming of the glory of the Lord. As this study has pointed out several times in other passages,

431
      Ibid., 122, 124.
432
      Mullen, The Divine Council, 209-226.
this proposal also has precedent, and an attempt will be made to develop the idea as the study continues.

It is noteworthy that at Qumran (11QMelchizedek) Isa 52:7 is linked to an exalted Melchizedek, who is

considered the Myhl) of Ps 82:1. Melchizedek is also linked at Qumran to the Prince of Light, who is in

turn correlated with the “Prince of the host” and “Prince of princes” of Daniel, a figure of importance for

divine vice regency in that book.434

          Whether the individual herald was the prophet or an unnamed divine council figure, the

prophetic author/redactor of 52:7-10 is clearly reintroducing divine council terms and themes in those

verses. Isa 52:9 ("Break forth! Sing aloud together, O waste places of Jerusalem: for Yahweh has

comforted [Mx'ni] his people, he has redeemed [l)ag2f] Jerusalem") serves as the content of the message of

comfort to captive Israel commanded earlier in 40:1. Not only do the perfect tenses indicate this

pronouncement succeeds the initial commands, but 52:7 goes much farther than 40:9, for in it the herald

is one who proclaims peace (          ~Alv' [;ymiv.m;) and deliverance (h['Wvy> [;ymiv.m;). The author/redactor of
Isa 52:7-9 has elaborated on his earlier use of the council motif to heighten the anticipation of his

audience. Yahweh has not only directed his heavenly court to prepare for His return of captive Israel,

but for his reign in Zion (       %yIh'la/ %l;m').
          On the day this occurs, Zion’s “watchmen” will lift up their collective voices for joy (Isa 52:8;

WnNEr;y> wD'x.y: lAq Waf.n" %yIp;co lAq; “your watchmen shall lift up a voice; together they will lift up a
voice”). F. M. Cross, in his article on the divine council in Deutero-Isaiah, included Isa 52:8 on account of the

verse’s opening phrase,        Waf.n" %yIp;co lAq (“your watchmen shall lift up a voice”), which he contended
referred to members of the heavenly council.435 Against Cross’ suggestion is the fact that “watchmen” often in

Isaiah (and outside that book) refers to the human prophets appointed by Yahweh as spiritual sentries over His


433
    Examples include Isaiah 6; Hag 1:13 [cf. Mal 3:1]; Jer 23:18, 22; Amos 3:7 (cf. the use of dws there).
434
    All of these titles are related to each other, as Chapters Six and Seven detail. That Michael is not the referent of these titles in either
Daniel or Qumran texts is also demonstrated in these chapters. The view of this study is that these titles speak of the exalted divine vice-
regent of the council.
435
    Cross, “Divine Council in Second Isaiah,” 275, 277.
people, not divine beings. However, certain apocalyptic texts do make mention of unidentified “watchmen”

having a role at the time of the Day of Yahweh. Heavenly beings are associated with the final judgment in First

Isaiah (cf. Isa 24:21). Other passages that may be taken to refer to watchmen as heavenly beings are Mic 7:4,

Jer 31:6, and Jer 51:12. In the contextual setting of Isa 52:8, there are no human watchmen waiting in Jerusalem

as it is in ruins. It appears that a group of angelic watchmen-heralds are in view.

         In addition to the shadowy activity of the divine council in Deutero-Isaiah, scholars have also pointed to

familiar mythological motifs in the book associated with Yahweh’s assembly. Isa 40:22-26 contains a number

of familiar divine council features:

                                                                                                                        Isa 40:22-26
                                              ~yIm;v' qDok; hj,ANh; ~ybig"x]K; h'yb,v.yOw> #r,a'h' gWx-l[; bveYOh; 22
                                         WhToK; #r,a, yjep.vo !yIa'l. ~ynIz>Ar !teANh; 23 `tb,v'l' lh,aoK' ~xeT'm.YIw:
                                                           vrevo-lB; @a; W[r'zO-lB; @a; W[J'nI-lB; @a; 24 `hf'['
                                                             vQ;K; hr'['s.W Wvb'YIw: ~h,B' @v;n"-~g:w> ~['z>GI #r,a'B'
                                                            `vAdq' rm;ayO hw<v.a,w> ynIWyM.d;t. ymi-la,w> 25 ~aeF'Ti
                                        ~a'b'c. rP's.mib. ayciAMh; hL,ae ar'b'-ymi War.W ~k,ynEy[e ~Arm'-Waf. 26
                                                rD'[.n< al{ vyai x;Ko #yMia;w> ~ynIAa brome ar'q.yI ~veB. ~L'kul.
         22 (It is) he that sits / is enthroned upon the circle of the earth, and its inhabitants (are) as grasshoppers;
         he stretches out the heavens as a curtain, and spreads them out as a tent in which to dwell. 23 He brings
         princes to naught; the rulers of this world he makes as nothing. 24 No sooner are they planted, no
         sooner are they sown, no sooner do they take root in the ground, than he blows on them and they
         wither, and a whirlwind sweeps them away like chaff. 25 "To whom will you compare me? Or who is
         my equal?" says the Holy One. 26 Lift up your eyes on high and see: who created these? He who brings
         out their host by number, calling them all by name; by the greatness of his might, and because he is
         strong in power not one is missing.

         This passage is intriguing on several levels. The reference to the “circle of the earth” (v. 22;

Cr)h-gwx) and “stretching out (h+wnh) the heavens as a tent (lh)k) in which to dwell” (v. 22) are overt

references to the mythological dwelling of El.436 Likewise the imperative to lift up the eyes on high (Mwrm) in

context with these references speaks of the dwelling of El, the place where the old council gods meet with the

high God. The same language occurs elsewhere in Deutero-Isaiah:

                                                                                                                              Isa 42:5


436
    Habel notes, “The heights of that horizon [h[u,g] are the cosmic North, the traditional mythological abode of the gods” (Norman C.
Habel, "He Who Stretches Out the Heavens," CBQ 34:4 [1972]: 417-418). See also, Stadelmann, The Hebrew Conception of the World,
42-43, 126.
                                 !tenO h'ya,c'a/c,w> #r,a'h' [q;ro ~h,yjeAnw> ~yIm;V'h; areAB hw"hy> laeh' rm;a'-hKo
                                                                        `HB' ~ykil.hol; x;Wrw> h'yl,[' ~['l' hm'v'n>
                             Thus says the God, Yahweh, who created the heavens, and stretched them out
                             (~h,yjeAnw>); he that spread forth the earth, and that which comes out of it; he that gives
                             breath to the people on it, and spirit to them that walk in it:

                                                                                                                             Isa 44:24
                                     ~yIm;v' hj,nO lKo hf,[o hw"hy> ykinOa' !j,B'mi ^r.c,yOw> ^l,a]GO hw"hy> rm;a'-hKo
                                                                            `yTiaime yTiai ymi #r,a'h' [q;ro yDib;l.
                             Thus says Yahweh, your redeemer, and he that formed you from the womb: I (am)
                             Yahweh who makes everything; who stretches out (hj,nO) the heavens alone; who
                             spreads abroad the earth by myself.


                                                                                                                         Isa 45:11-12
                                            yn:B'-l[; ynIWla'v. tAYtiaoh' Arc.yOw> laer'f.yI vAdq. hw"hy> rm;a'-hKo 11
                                             ytiar'b' h'yl,[' ~d'a'w> #r,a, ytiyfi[' ykinOa' 12 `ynIWUc;T. yd;y" l[;Po-l[;w>
                                                                          `ytiyWEci ~a'b'c.-lk'w> ~yIm;v' Wjn" yd;y" ynIa]
                             11 Thus says Yahweh, the Holy One of Israel, and its Maker of things to come:437 Will
                             you question me about my sons,438 and concerning the product of my hands will you
                             command me? 12 I have made the earth, and created humankind upon it: I have
                             stretched out (Wjn") the heavens with my hands and all their starry host have I
                             commanded.
                                                                                                                             Isa 51:13
                                       ~AYh;-lK' dymiT' dxep;T.w: #r,a' dseyOw> ~yIm;v' hj,An ^f,[o hw"hy> xK;v.Tiw:
                                             `qyciMeh; tm;x] hYEa;w> tyxiv.h;l. !nEAK rv,a]K; qyciMeh; tm;x] ynEP.mi
                             13 You have forgotten Yahweh your creator, who stretched out (hj,An) the
                             heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth, and you live in constant dread
                             because of the fury of the oppressor, who is ready to destroy. Yet where is the
                             fury of the oppressor?


         The wording of Isa 40:23 is of special interest: “He brings princes to naught; the rulers of this world he

makes as nothing.” The word for “princes” here is not the familiar Myr#o, but Mynzwr, a word that it is certainly

within the semantic range of royal sons.439 The parallelism may equate these princes with the Cr) y+p#$ (“rulers

/ judges of the earth”) who may be human rulers, thus arguing against divine plurality here. However, the reader

should recall that at Ugarit royal divine sons bore the title t`pt[,440 and so this verse may be referring to divine sons


437
    For the translation, see the textual note in Watts, Isaiah 34-66, 151, 153.
438
    The preceding context informs the reader that human beings as creations of God are in view here, not Yahweh’s divine sons.
439
    The word Mynzwr is a Qal masculine plural participle from Nzr. The verb occurs elsewhere for royalty in Judg 5:3; Ps 2:2; Prov 8:15;
31:4; Hab 1:10.
440
    Handy, Among the Host of Heaven, 113; J. Gray, The Legacy of Canaan, 87; C. Gordon, “t`pt[,” Ugaritic Textbook; Wyatt, “Titles of
exercising geographical rule as described in Deut 4:19-20 and 32:8-9. Benjamin Sommer, in his study of

scriptural allusions in Isaiah 40-66, notes that, “A number of themes in the pericope in Isaiah 40 restate those of

Psalm 82.”441 Note the description of the gods of Psalm 82, the royal sons of the Most High, who judge the

earth:

Psalm 82:5-8

          “Judge (  Wjp.vi
                         ) the poor and the orphaned; vindicate the the afflicted and the needy. Rescue the
          poor and the destitute; deliver them out of the hand of the wicked. They don’t know, they don’t
          understand (Wnybiy" al{w> W[d.y" al{ ). They go round and around in darkness – and all the
          foundations of the earth totter (#r,a' ydes.Am-lK' WjAMyI)! I said, ‘You are gods, you are all sons
          of Elyon.’ But in fact you will die like humans; you will fall like any of the princes. Rise up, O
          God, and judge the earth (      #r,a'h' hj'p.v'
                                                     ), for you possess all the nations (              ~yIAGh;-lk'B.
                                                                                                     ).”

Isa 40:17-23

          “All the nations (   ~yIAGh;-lK'
                                         ) are like nothing before Him. . . . To whom would you compare God,
          and what likeness would you set up in comparison to Him? . . . A skilled artificer seeks to establish
          for himself an idol that will not totter (     jAMyI al{           W[d.te aAlh]
                                                              ). Don’t you know (              )? Did you not
          hear? Was it not told to you from the beginning? Don’t you understand (~t,nOybih] aAlh]) the
          foundations of the earth (#r,a'h' tAds.Am)? The one who sits enthroned above the vault of the
          earth so that its inhabitants are like grasshoppers . . . who overturns leaders – He has made the rulers
          of the earth ( #r,a, yjep.vo) into nothing.”

          The mythologically-charged language in Deutero-Isaiah’s text (“sits enthroned [                   bveYOh;] above the
                                                                                                                      442




vault [  gWx-l[;] of the earth”) is quite evident, particularly since the context is Isaiah 40’s divine council /
                   443




divine herald scene. Benjamin Sommer, in his study of scriptural allusions in Isaiah 40-66, comments:

          In Psalm 82 we read the following statement about the Myhl) (divine beings) who are judged. . .
          . A number of themes in the pericope in Isaiah 40 restate those of Psalm 82. The passage in
          Deutero-Isaiah shares with the psalm a concern for the issue of a divine court . . . and an
          additional theme: a concern with human leadership as it relates to the divine. As Matitiahu
          Tsevat has argued, the speaker in Psalm 82 comes to the realization that the other divine beings
          are like mortals, that God can vanquish them as he vanquishes any mortal king. The idea is
          expressed especially in Ps. 82:7-8: ‘All of you will die like humans; you will fall like any of the

the Ugaritic Storm God,” 422. Wyatt in particular notes that t`pt[ may be taken as referring to “ruling” (mlk).
441
    Sommer, A Prophet Reads Scripture, 124.
442
    See also Habel’s discussion of this vocabulary and motif: “The verb ys\b , when applied to Yahweh, frequently means enthronement”
(Habel, “He Who Stretches Out the Heavens,” 421).
443
    Cf. Habel once more: “The heights of that horizon [h[u,g] are the cosmic North, the traditional mythological abode of the gods” (Habel,
“He Who Stretches Out the Heavens,” 421).
         princes. Rise up, O God, and judge the earth (           #r,a'h' hj'p.v'
                                                                      ), for you possess all the nations.’
         Deutero-Isaiah uses this vocabulary as he stresses that YHWH brings leaders and rulers to naught:
         ‘The one who overturns leaders – He has made the rulers of the earth (                #r,a, yjep.vo
                                                                                             ) into
         nothing.’”444

         The point here is that, rather than Smith’s assertion that the divine council collapses in Psalm 82 due to

an emerging exclusivistic monotheism, Deutero-Isaiah uses the divine council scene to argue that, as Yahweh

has power to judge these heavenly beings, so will he judge the nations they rule. The plea for Yahweh to “judge

the earth” (82:8; Cr)h h+p#$) once he has pronounced sentence upon the gods who were carrying out their

administrations of the nations corruptly (82:2;         lw<['-WjP.v.Ti yt;m'-d[;; “how long will you judge unjustly”)
may be the referent of Isa 40:26’s “rulers / judges of the earth” (Cr)h-y+p#$). If the starry “host” ()bc) of Isa

40:26 is correctly understood as referring to animate divine beings,445 then little doubt would remain that

Deutero-Isaiah affirmed the worldview of Psalm 82 and its divine sons. Certainty is not possible, however.

         The most significant issue for this study with respect to Deutero-Isaiah is the question of whether the

famous declarations of the prophet reflect monotheism or monolatry. According to Mark S. Smith, the passages

below are the three primary texts in Deutero-Isaiah that convince most scholars that Deutero-Isaiah espouses

true monotheism by denying the existence of other gods:446

                                                                                                                         Isa 43:10-12
                                    yli Wnymia]t;w> W[d.Te ![;m;l. yTir.x'B' rv,a] yDib.[;w> hw"hy>-~aun> yd;[e ~T,a; 10
                                               s`hy<h.yI al{ yr;x]a;w> lae rc;An-al{ yn:p'l. aWh ynIa]-yKi Wnybit'w>
                                     yTi[.v;Ahw> yTid.G:hi ykinOa' 12 `[;yviAm yd;['l.B;mi !yaew> hw"hy> ykinOa' ykinOa' 11
                                                    `lae-ynIa]w: hw"hy>-~aun> yd;[e ~T,a;w> rz" ~k,B' !yaew> yTi[.m;v.hiw>
                   10 “You are my witnesses,” declares Yahweh, “and my servant whom I have chosen, that you
                   may know and believe me, and understand that I am He. Before me no god was formed,
                   neither shall there be after me. 11 I, I am Yahweh, and besides me there is no savior. 12 I
                   declared and saved and I proclaimed, when there was no strange god among you: and you are
                   my witnesses,” says Yahweh, “that I am God.”

                                                                                                                            Isa 44:6-8
                            !Arx]a; ynIa]w: !Avari ynIa] tAab'c. hw"hy> Ala]gOw> laer'f.yI-%l,m, hw"hy> rm;a'-hKo 6
                                 ymiWFmi yli h'k,r.[.y:w> h'd,yGIy:w> ar'q.yI ynIAmk'-ymiW 7 `~yhil{a/ !yae yd;['l.B;miW
444
    Benjamin Sommer, A Prophet Reads Scripture, 124.
445
    Niehr, “Host of Heaven,” DDD, 429; Lelli, “Stars,” DDD, 810, 813.
446
    Mark S. Smith, Origins, 180ff. I exclude Isaiah 46:9 because it more obviously contains the language of incomparability than the
others in the discussion.
                             Whr.Ti-la;w> Wdx]p.Ti-la; 8 `Aml' WdyGIy: hn"aboT' rv,a]w: tAYtiaow> ~l'A[-~[;
                                     yd;['l.B;mi H;Ala/ vyEh] yd'[e ~T,a;w> yTid.G:hiw> ^yTi[.m;v.hi za'me al{h]
                                                                                       `yTi[.d'y"-lB; rWc !yaew>
              6 Thus says Yahweh the King of Israel, and its Redeemer, Yahweh who creates the hosts: “I am
              the first, and I am the last; and beside me there is no god. 7 Who is like me? Let him proclaim it,
              let him declare and set it forth before me. Who has announced from of old the things that are
              coming? Let them tell me what is yet to be. 8 Fear not, neither be afraid; have I not told you from
              of old and declared it? And you are my witnesses. Is there a god beside me? There is no Rock; I
              know not any.”

                                                                                             Isa 45:5-7, 14, 18, 21
                                     `ynIT'[.d;y> al{w> ^r.Z<a;a] ~yhil{a/ !yae ytil'Wz dA[ !yaew> hw"hy> ynIa] 5
                      `dA[ !yaew> hw"hy> ynIa] yd'['l.Bi sp,a,-yKi hb'r'[]M;miW vm,v,-xr;z>Mimi W[d.yE ![;m;l. 6
                      s`hL,ae-lk' hf,[o hw"hy> ynIa] [r' areAbW ~Alv' hf,[o %v,xo areAbW rAa rceAy 7
        5 “I am Yahweh, and there is no other, besides me there is no God beside me: I gird you, though you do
        not know me, 6 that men may know, from the rising of the sun and from the west, that there is none
        besides me; I am Yahweh, and there is no other. 7 I form the light and create darkness; I make
        prosperity and create calamity: I Yahweh do all these things.”

                               %yIl;[' hD'mi yven>a; ~yaib's.W vWK-rx;s.W ~yIr;c.mi [;ygIy> hw"hy> rm;a' hKo 14
                               %yIl;ae WWx]T;v.yI %yIl;aew> Wrbo[]y: ~yQiZIB; WkleyE %yIr;x]a; Wyh.yI %l'w> Wrbo[]y:
                                                             `~yhil{a/ sp,a, dA[ !yaew> lae %B' %a; WlL'P;t.yI
        14 Thus says Yahweh: “The wealth of Egypt, and merchandise of Ethiopia and of the Sabeans, men of
        stature, shall come over to you and be yours; they shall follow you; in chains they shall come over and
        fall down before you; they shall make supplication to you, saying, ‘God is with you only, and there is
        no other, there is no god besides him’.”


                         aWh Hf'[ow> #r,a'h' rceyO ~yhil{a/h' aWh ~yIm;V'h; areAB hw"hy>-rm;a' hko yKi 18
                                         `dA[ !yaew> hw"hy> ynIa] Hr'c'y> tb,v,l' Ha'r'b. Whto-al{ Hn"n>Ak
            18 For thus says Yahweh, who created the heavens – he is God – who formed the earth and made it;
            he hath established it; he did not create it a chaos; he formed it to be inhabited. “I am Yahweh; and
            there is no other.”

                              Hd'yGIhi za'me ~d,Q,mi tazO [;ymiv.hi ymi wD'x.y: Wc[]W"yI @a; WvyGIh;w> WdyGIh; 21
                       `ytil'Wz !yIa; [;yviAmW qyDic;-lae yd;['l.B;mi ~yhil{a/ dA[-!yaew> hw"hy> ynIa] aAlh]
            21 “Declare and present your case; let them take counsel together! Who told this long ago? Who
            declared it of old? Was it not I, Yahweh? And there is no other god besides me; a just God and a
            Savior; there is none beside me.”


        Nearly fifty years ago, James Barr noted that in no case did Deuteronomy deny the existence of other

deities. Barr suggested that, in view of the use of identical phrasings, the same could be said for Deutero-Isaiah.

In a monograph entitled, “The Problem of Israelite Monotheism,” Barr wrote:
            It may also be asked whether the question of mere existence [of other gods] is as important as
            has been commonly held for those later texts such as Deutero-Isaiah which are supposed to
            maintain the fullest type of monotheism. When we read in Psalm 14:1 that the fool has said in
            his heart Myhl) Ny), we are commonly agreed that the foolish man is no absolute atheist
            asserting the non-existence of God; he is denying his significance, refusing to reckon with God.
            Is it not possible to understand in much the same way those places where Deutero-Isaiah uses
            the same negative particle?”447

            Taking up Barr’s suggestion, and noting the syntactical studies cited above that demonstrated the

monolatrous nature of the statements of Deut 4:35, 39 and 32:12, 39, this study argues that the alleged denials of

other gods in Deutero-Isaiah’s could as well express monolatry. The following eleven “denial phrases” can be

drawn from the above passages—phrases that are either identical or nearly identical to those found in Deut 4:35,

39 and 32:12, 39:

                                                                                               `[;yviAm yd;['l.B;mi !yaew> 1
                                                                                              `~yhil{a/ !yae yd;['l.B;miW 2
                                                                        yTi[.d'y"-lB; rWc !yaew> yd;['l.B;mi H;Ala/ vyEh] 3
                                                                                         yd;['l.B;mi ~yhil{a/ dA[-!yaew> 4
                                                                                                    ~yhil{a/ !yae ytil'Wz 5
                                                                                                              ytil'Wz !yIa; 6
                                                                                                               dA[ !yaew> 7
                                                                                             ~yhil{a/ sp,a, dA[ !yaew> 8
                                                                                                      yd'['l.Bi sp,a,-yKi 9
                                                                                                         rz" ~k,B' !yaew> 10
                                                                                                  lae rc;An-al{ yn:p'l. 11
            The first observation is that the three prepositions (yd(lb[m], sp), ytlwz) and the combination

dw( Ny)w in the list above are interchangeable. In Isa 45:6 yd(lbm is juxtaposed with both sp) and

dw( Ny). In like manner, Isa 45:21 has yd(lbm in tandem with ytlwz and dw( Ny). These interchanges

allow an important methodological consideration. In some cases the excluding preposition in Deut 4:35,39 and

32:12, 39 found in the syntactical combination of negative particle plus excluding preposition is identical in

denial phrases in Deutero-Isaiah. On other occasions the preposition differs, but it is always a preposition that is

used interchangeably in Deutero-Isaiah with those prepositions shared by Deuteronomy and Deutero-Isaiah. In

447
      J. Barr, The Problem of Israelite Monotheism (TGUOS 17; Glasgow: Glasgow University, 1957-1958), 53-54.
order for one to argue that the denial phrases indicate monolatry in Deuteronomy but monotheism in Deutero-

Isaiah, one would have to produce prepositional vocabulary that cannot fit the “negative particle plus excluding

preposition” construction. This study argues this cannot be done in such a way that Deutero-Isaiah’s rhetoric is

shown to be divergent from Deuteronomy. It appears that only prior assumptions about the progression of

monotheism lead to a differentiation in meaning for these phrases.

          Phrases 1 through 4 in our listing each have the negative particle Ny) and the preposition yd(lbm in

common (save for number 3, where #$yh forms a rhetorical question with an expected negative answer instead

of Ny)). Deut 4:35 utilizes this same combination (wdblm dw( Ny); “there is none beside him”). Deut 32:39

echoes the same thought, albeit with a different preposition (ydm( Myhl) Ny)w; “there is no God beside me”).

In view of the earlier discussion that the wording of Deut 4:35, 39 and 32:39 does not mean the existence of

other gods is denied, on what grounds must we conclude that the same language in Deutero-Isaiah means a

denial that other gods exist?

          Phrases 5 and 6 represent Isa 45:5, 21, and point to the use of the preposition ytlwz to describe

Yahweh’s relationship to other gods (Myhl) Ny) ytlwz; “beside me there is no god” and ytlwz Ny); “there is

none [no god] beside me”). Isa 45:21 transparently correlates this phrase with the use of yd(lbm in tandem

with dw( Ny), the same combination as Deut 4:35. This interchange elicits the conclusion that the negative

particle with excluding ytlwz does not mean to tell the reader that no other gods exist, only that Yahweh is


unique.

          Moving on, the phrase dw( Ny) also occurs in numbers 7 and 8 in our list, thereby aligning those

references with the incomparability statements of Deut 4:35, 39. In addition to what has already been said about

this correlation, it should also be noted that in Isa 46:9 dw( Ny) occurs in parallel with Ny) followed by the

comparative preposition k, which implicitly allows for the existence of other gods. The terms in the ninth
phrase in our list, yd(lb sp)-yk, have already been seen to overlaps with terms in Deuteronomy. As a result,

phrases 7 through 9 in our list are no evidence that Deutero-Isaiah denies the existence of other gods.

          Phrase number 10 comes from Isa 43:12, and reads rz Mkb Ny)w (“and among you there were no

strange gods”). The distinct feature here is the word rz coupled with the particle of negation, Ny). This

combination is found in Deut 32:12, which is presupposed in Deut 31:29.448 Due to its correlation with Deut

32:39 and Deut 4:35, 39, it cannot be argued that Deut 32:12 conveys the idea of exclusivistic monotheism. The

syntactical overlaps again compel us to rule out the tenth phrase.

          This leaves only phrase number 11 for consideration: l) rcwn-)l ynpl. The phrase is a claim of

Yahweh’s pre-existence with respect to all other gods; hence Yahweh is incomparable among the gods.

Yahweh, the One who created all the members of the heavenly host (cf. Neh 9:6; Isa 40:26; Ps 33:6) is

ontologically pre-eminent. The phrase does not deny that Yahweh created other gods. There is no other god

who can claim either creative power or chronological priority, and there will never be another like him.


          Finally, one could ask what the author of Deutero-Isaiah (and other canonical authors) could have done

to go beyond the above phrases to communicate a denial of the existence of other gods. Two options come to

mind. First, Deutero-Isaiah could have explicitly equated the other Myhl) with Myk)lm. Given the pre-exilic

Israelite council’s well-defined hierarchy, such an explicit equation would have left no doubt as to a redefinition

of the other nations’ Myhl). Second, the biblical author could have said something along the lines of “the gods

of the council are not gods,” or, “the sons of God are not Myhl).” Phrases that

declare “they are no gods” (      hM'he ~yhil{a/ al{) and “it is no god” (aWh ~yhil{a/ al) do occur, but without
exception they refer to idols made by human hands and not the entities represented by those idols, or speak of

inability in comparison to Yahweh.449

448
    Sanders, Provenance of Deuteronomy 32, 394.
449
    These references are 2 Kgs 19:18; Isa 37:19; Jer 2:11; 5:7; 16:20; Hos 8:6. 2 Chr 13:8-9 could also be included, though the phrasing
is not quite the same (~yhil{a/ al{l. !heko hy"h'w>). All these passages except Jer 2:11; 5:7 are very plainly dealing with objects. As noted
on p. 93 of this study with respect to the work of Y. Hoffman, Jer 2:11 is not a denial of the existence of other gods, but rather speaks of
the feckless nature of the other gods. Jer 5:7 follows in that context. As noted earlier, that Israelite writers could and did distinguish
between the object and the heavenly being it represented is implicit in the claim that Yahweh created the members of the heavenly host
whom he allotted to be worshipped by the other nations (cp. Deut 4:19-20; 32:8-9; 29:25; see also Isa 40:25-26; 45:12; Hos 13:4 (LXX);
Pss 33:6; 148:1-5; Neh 9:6). If these passages referred to idols, the logical result would be that the writer is describing Yahweh as an idol
4.3 Summation

         The goal of this chapter was to demonstrate that the primary evidence for an intolerant monotheism in

the Hebrew Bible—statements drawn from Deuteronomy and Deutero-Isaiah—is at best inconclusive, and very

likely speaks only to the continuity of the monolatrous pre-exilic worldview that embraced a divine council.

The monolatrous context of Deuteronomy, the presence of the divine council and mythologically-charged

vocabulary, and the phraseological overlaps between Deuteronomy and Deutero-Isaiah demonstrate that the

prevailing paradigm for the breakthrough to monotheism in Israel is hardly beyond question. This study

suggests that religious continuity from the pre-exilic to post-exilic periods more coherently accounts for the data

and provides greater explanatory power than the consensus view. The next two chapters will examine the

remaining exilic and post-exilic canonical material relating to the divine council in search of this same

worldview continuity.




maker.
                                                 Chapter Five


                                     The Divine Council in Exilic and
                                     Early Post-Exilic Canonical Texts


        The discussion thus far has challenged the idea that those who composed and fashioned the books of

Deuteronomy and Deutero-Isaiah abandoned Israel’s pre-exilic monolatrous faith in favor of intolerant

monotheism. Brief consideration was also given to Psalm 82, which many proponents of the consensus view of

the evolution of Israel’s religion toward intolerant monotheism place during the exilic or post-exilic periods due

to its allegedly new perspective on Yahweh’s global kingship.

        This chapter resumes this challenge by searching for divine council terminology and motifs in canonical

material considered by most scholars to date to the exilic or post-exilic periods. As was the case with Psalm 82,

some of the most conspicuous references to the council, its members, and its bureaucratic structure are found in

this material, namely Psalms, Job, and Zechariah.450 The clarity of this material once again draws attention to an

important question this study has raised: If, as Mark S. Smith has argued, the divine council was such a threat to

Yahweh’s status during and after the exile that the council had to be erased from Israelite religion, why does the

canonical literature of these periods include such overt mythological language and retain continuity with the pre-

exilic council? As noted earlier, it is one thing to claim that exilic and post-exilic authors refer to a council of

other gods in Psalm 82 so as to rhetorically suggest that Israel’s religion is ridding itself of these gods in a shift

to intolerant monotheism. It is quite another to be consistent with such claims. If the scribes who crafted Psalm

82 had such a goal, one would expect consistency from them when unambiguous references to other divine

beings are found in exilic and post-exilic texts. This chapter contends it is difficult to read passages like Job 1-2

and discern in its divine council scenes a rhetorical argument for intolerant monotheism. Consequently, this

chapter asks the reader to consider the need for consistency in this regard, and contends that the view that

Israelite religion maintained a monolatrous worldview is more consistent and holds greater explanatory power

than the consensus view.
5.1 Divine Plurality and Divine Council Motifs in Late Psalms

          Due to the nature of the Psalms as a corpus, dating any particular psalm is difficult, and the effort really

only pertains to its original form. Scholars have long noted that because all psalms have undergone post-exilic

editing, they could all be dated to that period.451 The primary concern at this juncture, however, is to survey the

final form of the canonical text for mythological material related to the divine council. According to the view

set forth above with respect to the Deuteronomic material, the survival of such material was not due to the

redactors' lack of skill or oversight, but to the fact that the monolatry of the redactor allowed for a divine council

composed of other gods under the unique (“true”) God of Israel.

          There are a number of "incomparability phrases" in the psalms that compare Yahweh to the gods or

place him above the other gods, as opposed to denying the existence of other gods. Such phrases are

inconsistent with intolerant monotheism, and dismissing incomparability phrasing as only a rhetorical device

produces two difficulties. First, any rhetorical value for intolerant monotheism is undermined by such phrases

since they would amount to exalting Yahweh over beings that the authors deny exist. It is difficult to discern

how Yahweh is exalted by being compared to beings that do not exist. Of what use would it be to compare

Yahweh’s power to a vapor? Second, such phrases cannot be merely rhetorical in pre-exilic literature since

Yahweh is still credited with creating the other gods and allotting them to other nations. In other words, they are

part of the very fabric of Israelite belief. While it is true that the Gentiles fashioned idols to represent these

gods, references like Deut 4:19-20 and 32:8-9 do not refer to these idols. Yahweh creates the other beings of the

host of heaven who must serve him—he does not create dumb idols of stone.

          The worldview of the psalmists therefore leaves the reader with the conclusion that these comparative

statements are meant to be true comparisons with other gods. Again, if an exclusivistic monotheism were the

redactional goal, the following texts452 would have been a priority for editorial alteration.

                                                                                                                                 Ps 86:8

450
    This chapter does not include the book of Daniel, which is the focus of Chapter Six.
451
    R. P. Carroll, “Psalm 78: Vestiges of a Tribal Polemic,” VT 21 (1971): 144.
452
    All of these psalms contain evidence for exilic or post-exilic dating, or even late into the Second Temple period. See Marvin E. Tate,
Psalms 51-100 (WBC 20; Dallas: Word Books, 1990), 379-380, 500, 507; M. Buttenwieser, The Psalms (New York: Ktav, 1969), 317-
320, 686-688, 845-847; Hans-Joachim Kraus, Psalms 60-150 (trans. Hilton C. Oswald; Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1993), 181, 246,
252, 257-258, 492, 497-498, 506.
                                                                            `^yf,[]m;K. !yaew> yn"doa] ~yhil{a/b' ^AmK'-!yae
                                                                    Among the gods there is none like you, O Lord; neither
                                                                    [are there any works] like your works.
                                                                                                                      Ps 95:3
                                                                   `~yhil{a/-lK'-l[; lAdG" %l,m,W hw"hy> lAdG" lae yKi
                                                                For Yahweh is a great God, and a great King above all gods.

                                                                                                                      Ps 96:4
                                                         `~yhil{a/-lK'-l[; aWh ar'An daom. lL'hum.W hw"hy> lAdg" yKi
                                          For Yahweh is great, and deserving of exceedingly great praise: he is to be
                                          feared above all gods.

                                                                                                                      Ps 97:7
                                       `~yhil{a/-lK' Al-Wwx]T;v.hi ~yliylia/B' ~ylil.h;t.Mih; ls,p, ydeb.[o-lK' WvboyE
                      All who served images were put to shame; those who boasted in mere idols; even all the gods
                      bowed down to him.453
                                                                                                                      Ps 97:9
                                             `~yhil{a/-lK'-l[; t'yle[]n: daom. #r,a'h'-lK'-l[; !Ayl.[, hw"hy> hT'a;-yKi
                                For you, O Yahweh, are Most High above all the earth: you are exalted far above all
                                gods.

                                                                                                                     Ps 135:5
                                                              `~yhil{a/-lK'mi WnynEdoa]w: hw"hy> lAdg"-yKi yTi[.d;y" ynIa] yKi
                                                        For I know that Yahweh is great, and that our lord is above all gods.

                                                                                                                     Ps 136:2
                                                                           `ADs.x; ~l'A[l. yKi ~yhil{a/h' yhel{ale WdAh
                                                            O give thanks to the God of gods: for his mercy endures for
                                                            ever.
                                                                                                                     Ps 138:1
                                                                        `&'r,M.z:a] ~yhil{a/ dg<n< yBili-lk'b. ^d.Aa dwId'l.
                                                            I will praise you with my whole heart: before the gods will I
                                                            sing praise to you.

            A few observations about the above psalms are appropriate. As with Deuteronomic language, the claim

is not made that other gods do not exist; they are simply ineffectual (Ps 86:8). Several of these psalms relate to

pre-exilic beliefs in the kingship of Yahweh (Ps 95:3, 96:4; 97:9).454 While some of the phrases could be

construed as referencing merely honorific titles of Yahweh without evincing any particular belief (Ps 136:2;

“God of gods”), others would amount to nonsensical utterances in the mouth of the worshipper if the belief in

the existence of other gods were not genuine (Ps 95:3; 96:4; 97:7-9; 135:5; 138:1). When taken in the context of


453
      The translation is Tate’s (Psalms 51-100, 516).
454
      Tate, Psalms 51-100, 507.
the above psalms, late psalms appealed to by some to argue for exclusivistic monotheism are seen to merely

frame an argument for Yahweh’s greater potency, not his exclusive existence. As J. Day notes with respect to

Pss 95:3 and 97:7 above, “in a number of instances in the Psalter, the gods are regarded as forming Yahweh’s

heavenly council, a belief somewhat analogous to that of Canaanite religion . . . [which is] an interesting way of

approaching monotheism!”455

          Aside from references to Yahweh’s incomparability among the gods, there are other texts in the Psalms

that speak of divine council members. Ps 89:9, 37-38 is one such example, 456 and is significant for its reference

to an unidentified “witness,” a feature of other divine council texts and “legal” proceedings of the council (cf.

d( in Ps 89:38).457

                                                `^yt,Abybis. ^t.n"Wma/w< Hy" !ysix] ^Amk'-ymi tAab'c. yhel{a/ hw"hy> 9
                                        O Yahweh, God of hosts, who is like you, Mighty Yah? With your faithfulness
                                        around you?458

                                                                             `yDig>n< vm,V,k; Aas.kiw> hy<h.yI ~l'A[l. A[r.z: 37
                                                                           `hl's, !m'a/n< qx;V;B; d[ew> ~l'A[ !AKyI x;rey"K. 38
                                        36 His seed shall endure forever, and his throne as the sun before me. 37 As the
                                        moon it shall be established for ever, and a witness in the clouds shall be
                                        faithful. Selah.

          As noted earlier, Psalm 89 contains several explicit references to the divine council. Ps 89:6, 8

(Hebrew) refer to the "assembly of the holy ones" (My#$wdq lhq) and the "council of the holy ones"

(My#$wdq dws). Verse 7 expresses Yahweh's incomparability with respect to the "sons of the gods"


(Myl) ynb). To these allusions Dahood would plausibly emend                       ^t.n"Wma/ (“your faithfulness”) in 89:9 to

^yt,n"Wma/w<, understanding the abstract noun "faithfulness" as "faithful ones" in view of the immediately



455
    J. Day, Psalms (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1990), 123-124.
456
    Psalm 89 is considered by many scholars to have been composed by two authors at different times (one pre-exilic, the other exilic or
post-exilic) and then spliced together by an editor during the exilic or post-exilic era. In any case, the references to the divine council
were left intact and quite explicit. See Tate, Psalms 51-100, 413-418, esp. 417.
457
    The word d( is often used in legal accusation and sentencing in the Law. See Num 35:30; Deut 17:6-7 among numerous examples.
458
   See the ensuing discussion regarding Dahood, who argues that ^t.n"Wma/w< should be emended with a plural suffix (^yt,n"Wma/w<) and so
read “your faithful ones,” an allusion to Yahweh’s council.
following plural    ^yt,Abybis. (“surrounding you”). The change evokes imagery of the members of Yahweh's
                                                           459




divine court.

         Ps 89:37-38 has received a good deal of scholarly attention. At issue is the identity of the faithful

witness in the clouds of verse 38. E. Theodore Mullen argues that the witness could be an unidentified member

of the divine council,460 whereas P. Mosca, rejecting Mullen's thesis, contends that the witness is the Davidic

throne itself.461 T. Veijola believes the witness is Yahweh himself.462

         Veijola marshals several convincing arguments against the position of Mosca. Mosca translates the

debated phrase !m'a/n< qx;V;B; d[ew> as "an enduring witness in the sky," a rendering that presupposes the


participle !m'a/n< is not the predicate of a nominal clause, but an attributive adjective modifying d[e, which

would in turn describe the throne.463 Citing Brockelmann, Veijola notes in rebuttal that an attributive adjective

"must follow the noun immediately, with the only exception being the genitive construction, which is not the

case in v 38b."464 As a result, the participle must be taken as the predicate: "And a witness in the clouds shall be

faithful."

         Mullen appeals to Job 16:19-21 as a conceptual parallel to understanding the cloud witness as a divine

council member.465 That passage has Job referring to his "witness" (d() in the heavens, his "guarantor" on high

who mediates his thoughts to God:

                                                                  `~ymiArM.B; ydih]f'w> ydi[e ~yIm;V'b;-hNEhi hT'[;-~G: 19
                                                                            `ynIy[e hp'l.D' h;Ala/-la, y['re yc;ylim. 20
                                                                     `Wh[erel. ~d'a'-!b,W H;Ala/-~[i rb,g<l. xk;Ayw> 21
                                      19 Also now, behold, my witness is in heaven, and my advocate is on high. 20
                                      My friends scorn me, but my eye pours out [tears] to God. 21 O that one might
                                      plead for a man with God, as a man [pleads] for his companion!




459
    Mitchell Dahood, Psalms II, 51-100 (AB 17; New York: Doubleday, 1968), 313.
460
    E. Theodore Mullen, Jr., "The Divine Witness and the Davidic Royal Grant: Ps 89:37-38," JBL 102:2 (1983): 207-218.
461
    P. G. Mosca, "Ugarit and Daniel 7: A Missing Link," Bib 67 (1986): 508-517; idem, "Once Again the Heavenly Witness of Ps 89:38,"
JBL 105 (1986): 27-37.
462
    Timo Veijola, "The Witness in the Clouds: Ps 89:38," JBL 107:3 (1988): 413-417.
463
    Ibid., 414.
464
    Ibid.
465
    Mullen, "Divine Witness," 217. "Guarantor" is Mullen's translation.
          Ultimately, Veijola prefers his interpretation that Yahweh is the witness in the clouds based on three

considerations: (1) While the members of the divine council are in the clouds, Yahweh also dwells there; (2)

Yahweh may be a witness against himself based on the analogy that in certain covenantal contexts (citing Josh

24:22) this is the case; and (3) He rejects Mullen's proposed parallel saying, "I see no reason to conjecture, with

Mullen . . . that the 'heavenly witness' in Job 16:19 would be some mythical divine figure; rather, the passage is

a sign of the internal tension in Job's conception of God."466

          This writer tends to view Mullen's argument as the more coherent of the three since the "council

intercession" motif seems apparent in other Job texts (see Section 5.2) and because of the precedent for the

“unidentified witness” motif in widely recognized divine council passages like Isaiah 40. There is much more to

Psalm 89 with respect to the divine council than this single issue, namely its relationship to the divine council

scene of Daniel 7.467 It is sufficient for now to note that Mullen’s view is quite workable and Veijola’s objection

to the parallel of Job 16:19-21 fails to take the divine council in Job into consideration.

          It has already been noted several times in this study that one of the evidences of divine plurality in the

Hebrew Bible is the presence of the second-tier Canaanite deities P#$r, rbd, and b+q as military members of

Yahweh's retinue.468 A number of scholars of Israelite religion have proposed that the use of P#$r in several

psalms could be construed as mythological, particularly when accompanied by other motifs that have firm

association with the meeting place of the divine council. For example, the word for “arrows” in Ps 144:5-7

derives from *P#$r.

                                                                                                                            Ps 144:5-7
                                        ~ceypit.W qr'B' qArB. 6 `Wnv'[/y<w> ~yrih'B, [G: dretew> ^ym,v'-jh; hw"hy> 5
                                    ~yBir; ~yIM;mi ynIleyCih;w> ynIceP. ~ArM'mi ^yd,y" xl;v. 7 `~Mehut.W ^yC,xi xl;v.
                                                                                                     `rk'nE ynEB. dY:mi
                              5 O Yahweh, stretch out your heavens and come down! Touch the mountains, and let
                              them smoke! 6 Flash forth lightning, and scatter them! Shoot forth your arrows, and
                              destroy them! 7 Stretch forth your hand from on high! Rescue me, and deliver me from
                              the many waters, from the hand of strange children!


466
    Veijola, "Witness," 417, note 28.
467
    The debate over the identity of the witness of Psalm 89 is also discussed in Chapter Six with respect to Daniel 7 and the "Son of Man"
problem.
468
    See Mark S. Smith, Early History of God, 47, 67-68, 149; Sanders, Provenance of Deuteronomy 32, 401; P. Xella, “Resheph,” DDD,
702; W. Fulco, The Canaanite God Resheph.
         J. Day has cogently argued that the lightning and arrows in this late psalm refer to members of

Yahweh's heavenly vanguard.469 The fact that these weapons come from "on high" (Mwrmm) and that Yahweh is

asked to "come down" (drt) speaks to a divine council association. It is also noteworthy that “the tradition of

Resheph as a god of pestilence is attested in Deut 32:24.”470 The god b+q is also referenced in this important

divine council chapter (32:23).

         The motifs of “stretching out (h+n) the heavens like a tent” and the reference to “many waters”

(Mbr Mym) are both reminiscent of El’s abode on the divine mountain.471 The Hiphil imperative (+h) of

the verb h+n ("stretch out") in 144:5 has mythological overtones. As N. Habel has pointed out, Yahweh's

"stretching out" of the heavens speaks to an ancient creation tradition that points to "incontestable

might, both primordial and present," and the "preparing of theophany, the place of celestial appearance,

the shrine for kingship."472 The "stretching out" of the heavens is also "a variant way of expressing the

stretching out of heaven like a tent . . . the preparation of the divine abode."473 These motifs are evident

in pre-exilic expressions of the meeting place of the divine council, the tent of El and the watery abode:

                                                                                                                       Ps 104:1-6
                                     `T'v.b'l' rd'h'w> dAh daoM. T'l.d;G" yh;l{a/ hw"hy> hw"hy>-ta, yvip.n: ykir]B' 1
                                     wyt'AYli[] ~yIM;b; hr,q'm.h; 3 `h['yriy>K; ~yIm;v' hj,An hm'l.F;K; rAa-hj,[o 2
                                      tAxWr wyk'a'l.m; hf,[o 4 `x;Wr-ypen>K;-l[; %Leh;m.h; AbWkr. ~ybi['-~F'h;
                                      `d[,w" ~l'A[ jAMTi-lB; h'yn<Akm.-l[; #r,a,-ds;y" 5 `jhel{ vae wyt'r.v'm.
                                                              `~yIm'-Wdm.[;y: ~yrih'-l[; AtySiKi vWbL.K; ~AhT. 6
                   1 Bless Yahweh, O my soul! O Yahweh my God, you are very great! You are clothed
                   with honor and majesty, 2 covering yourself with light as with a garment, who has
                   stretched out the heavens like a tent, 3 who has laid the beams of your chambers on
                   the waters, who makes the clouds your chariot, who rides on the wings of the wind, 4
                   who makes the winds your messengers, fire and flame thy ministers. 5 You set the
                   earth on its foundations, so that it should never be shaken. 6 You covered it with the
                   deep as with a garment; the waters stood above the mountains.



469
    John Day, "Echoes of Baal's Seven Thunders and Lightnings in Psalm XXIX and Habakkuk III, 9 and the Identity of the Seraphim in
Isaiah VI," VT 39: 2 (1979): 143-151.
470
    P. Xella, “Resheph,” DDD, 702.
471
    H. G. May, "Cosmic Connotations of Mayim Rabbim, Many Waters," 42-43.
         Commenting on Psalm 104, Habel notes:

         The theophanic elements of this text can hardly be avoided. Ho,d and ha4da4r belong to the
         language of divine theophany and cultic epiphany (Pss 29:2; 96:6; Job 40:10). When Yahweh
         makes his cosmic appearance, his glorious presence (ho,d) covers the heavens (Hab 3:3). Light is
         the theophanic mode of self-manifestation which both reveals his presence and veils his holiness.
         As in comparable comings, celestial forces are his attendants. He may ride the clouds (cf. Ps.
         68:4) or fly on the wind like a cherub (Ps. 18:11); he may have ten thousand messengers at his
         side (Dt. 33:2) or have fire, lightning and pestilence in his entourage (Hab 3:4-5).474

Habel's reference to Hab 3:4-5, again a very late text in Israel’s prophetic tradition, links the motifs of the

divine entourage in Psalm 104 to the “lightning” and “arrows” of Ps 144:5-7. There is conceptual

continuity between the descriptions of Yahweh’s weapons and warriors in these three passages.

         The reference to Yahweh stretching forth his hand “from on high” (Mwrmb) in Ps 144:7 is also

important for its divine council association. The term carries several mythological connotations and is

congruent with Micah 6:6:

                                                                                                             Mic 6:6
                        `hn"v' ynEB. ~ylig"[]B; tAlA[b. WNm,D.q;a]h; ~Arm' yhel{ale @K;ai hw"hy> ~Deq;a] hM'B;
                            With what shall I approach Yahweh, and bow before the God of the heights? Shall I
                            approach him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old?


         Yahweh’s dwelling is also described as being Mymwrmb in a late psalm of ascent:475

                                                                                                            Ps 148:1
                                                  `~ymiArM.B; WhWll.h; ~yIm;V'h;-!mi hw"hy>-ta, Wll.h; Hy" Wll.h;
                                               Praise Yah! Praise Yahweh from the heavens! Praise him in the heights.

         The language in Psalm 148 harks back to pre-exilic references to the mythological heights:

                                                                                                         Ps 78:68-69
                                                          `bhea' rv,a] !AYci rh;-ta, hd'Why> jb,ve-ta, rx;b.YIw: 68
                                                             `~l'A[l. Hd's'y> #r,a,K. AvD'q.mi ~ymir'-AmK. !b,YIw: 69
                                68 But [Yahweh] chose the tribe of Judah, mount Zion which he loved. 69 And he
                                built his sanctuary like the heights, like the earth, which he hath established
                                forever.

                                                                                                           Ps 48:2-3
                                                         `Avd.q'-rh; Wnyhel{a/ ry[iB. daom. lL'hum.W hw"hy> lAdG" 2
472
    Norman C. Habel, "He Who Stretches Out the Heavens," 419, 422.
473
    Ibid., 422.
474
    Ibid.
475
    Buttenwieser, The Psalms, 358-359.
                                        `br' %l,m, ty:r.qi !Apc' yteK.r.y: !AYci-rh; #r,a'h'-lK' fAfm. @An hpey> 3
                        2 Great is Yahweh, and worthy of exceeding praise in the city of our God, in his holy
                        mountain. 3 It is beautiful in its loftiness, the joy of the whole earth—Mount Zion, the
                        heights of S[aphon, the city of the great King.

         There are demonstrable references, then, to divine plurality and pre-exilic divine council motifs in

psalms composed during or after the exile, when exclusivistic monotheism was allegedly a foregone

conclusion, and after the divine council had supposedly faded from Israel’s faith.

         Psalm 56:3 is unusual and is perhaps best understood in conceptual parallel to the pre-exilic

psalm, Ps 92:9:476

                                                                                                                              Ps 56:3
                                                              `~Arm' yli ~ymix]l{ ~yBir;-yKi ~AYh;-lK' yr;r.Av Wpa]v'
                                       My adversaries would swallow me up every day: for many fight against me, O
                                       Most High.

         The verse is difficult because it is hard to know how to integrate Mwrm into the translation. While Ps

144:7 undoubtedly speaks of Yahweh’s abode, the Mwrm of Ps 56:3, which is likely exilic,477 describes

Yahweh’s status as Most High god. While the term typically refers to Yahweh’s abode, here it has been taken as

an epithet of Yahweh.

                                                                                                                              Ps 92:9
                                                                                                  `hw"hy> ~l'[ol. ~Arm' hT'a;w>
                                                                            But you, O Yahweh, are most high for evermore.


         Psalm 92:9 clearly has Mwrm as an epithet of Yahweh. If Mwrm in fact describes Yahweh in Ps 56:3,

that text could be viewed as a reference to the council as an extension of Yahweh given the idea of council

intercession for humans described below in the book of Job. This perspective is reminiscent of instances at

Ugarit where references to El and the council as a deliberative body occur in parallel.478




476
    Psalm 92 is considered pre-exilic due to its kingship language. See Tate, Psalms 51-100, 258, 465; S. Mowinckel, The Psalms in
Israel’s Worship (trans. D. R. Thomas; vol. 1; Oxford: Basil-Blackwell, 1962), 142; J. H. Eaton, Kingship in the Psalms (SBT 2.32;
London: SCM Press, 1976), 55-59.
477
    Tate, Psalms 51-100, 68.
478
    Mullen, The Divine Council, 128-130. See KTU 1.2.I:15-16, where the phrase ph}r m(d
 parallels t{r )bh )l.
5.2 Divine Plurality and Council Activity in the Book of Job

         It has long been recognized that Job 1:6-13 and 2:1-7 are explicit divine council scenes. As P. Day

notes, "the imagery of Yahweh surrounded by the celestial court is the traditional setting for council scenes."479

The vocabulary in these two passages (cf. 1:5,6; 2:1) associated with the second-tier deities (Myhl)h-ynb, the

“sons of God”) was noted in Chapter Two, and so commentary in this chapter will be brief to avoid redundancy.

         It is worth emphasizing here that the two references to Myhl)h-ynb occur in a book that most scholars

consider to be exilic or post-exilic.480 The vocabulary of divine sonship is consistent with Psalm 82, where the

Nwyl(-ynb (“sons of the Most High”) are called Myhl) (“gods”). It is surprising that discussions assuming the

triumph of intolerant monotheism so often fail to situate these references in the chronological development of

Israel’s religion. Job 1-2 is an example of transparent usage of the language of divine plurality in a period when

exclusivistic monotheism had allegedly achieved its breakthrough, and yet there is no justification in this

passage to argue that the scenes are used by the author to slay the gods of the nations and vault Yahweh to

global kingship in the midst of the exilic crisis.

         Commentators on Job and other post-exilic divine council texts tend to look for apparent innovations

within the larger council motif rather than raise the question of the chronological disconnect described above.

For example, Mullen asserts that the emergence of the s8at[an (N+#o; “adversary”) as a named, independent

adversarial figure in council scenes was an innovation that came about with the naming of angels or archangels

in Second Temple Jewish texts.481 S. Olyan, in his study of later Jewish angelology, also sees the naming of

angels as novel.482 In both cases it is assumed that the term Myhl)h-ynb underwent a semantic downgrading in

the post-exilic worldview to reflect belief in angels, not the old council gods.


479
    Peggy L. Day, An Adversary in Heaven: S8at[an in the Hebrew Bible (HSM 43; Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1988), 79.
480
    D. J. A. Clines, Job 1-20 (WBC 17; Dallas: Word Books, 1989); J. J. M. Roberts, “Job and the Israelite Religious Tradition,” in The
Bible and the Ancient Near East: Collected Essays (ed. J. J. M. Roberts; Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns, 2002), 112. Linguistic evidence
seems to favor a date in the sixth century B.C.E. or later (see A. Hurvitz, “The Date of the Prose Tale of Job Linguistically
Reconsidered,” HTR 67 [1974]: 17-34).
481
    Mullen, Divine Council, 274-277.
482
    Saul M. Olyan, A Thousand Thousands Served Him: Exegesis and the Naming of Angels in Ancient Judaism (Tübingen: J. C. B. Mohr
- Siebeck, 1993). It is certainly true that later Judaism, especially the rabbinic era, developed an amazingly complex angelology, with
angels grouped into various “brigades,” but the development is one of detail, not creating new tiers of the council or downgrading the
          But point of fact, the possession of a name, the exercise of freedom, and an accusatory council role in no

way evince a semantic downgrading from pre-exilic Myhl)h-ynb to Myk)lm,. As already noted in Chapters

Two and Three of this study, all of these “innovations” can be found in the ancient Ugaritic material and in pre-

exilic Israelite texts. The “prosecutorial” feature of council activity is well known from Zech 3:1-7 and also

outside Israel, and so the activity of the s8at[an is no innovation.483 That second-tier deities exhibited

independence and freedom is also evident from earlier council descriptions. Second-tier council members bear

names at Ugarit and in canonical pre-exilic literature prior to Job – most notably P#$r, rbd, and b+q in

Habakkuk 3. There is nothing in Job 1-2 that argues for a link to later Jewish angelology in terms of innovation.

          The divine council in Job is not restricted to the familiar passages in Job 1-2 and the role of the s8at[an as

one who brings a charge in the council. Several other texts in Job convey the belief that council members can

serve a mediatorial role on behalf of human beings.

                                                                                                                          Job 16:19-21
                                                                     `~ymiArM.B; ydih]f'w> ydi[e ~yIm;V'b;-hNEhi hT'[;-~G: 19
                                                                               `ynIy[e hp'l.D' h;Ala/-la, y['re yc;ylim. 20
                                                                        `Wh[erel. ~d'a'-!b,W H;Ala/-~[i rb,g<l. xk;Ayw> 21
                                                  19 Also now, behold, my witness is in the heavens, and my
                                                  intercessor is in the heights. 20 My friends scorn me, but my eye
                                                  pours out [tears] to God. 21 O that one might plead for a man
                                                  with God, as a man [pleads] for his companion!

          In the discussion of the unnamed witness of Ps 89:38-39, it was noted that Mullen argues that the

witness of those verses is an unidentified council member. I agree, partially on the basis of Job 16:19-21. The

witness is clearly “in the heavens” (Mym#$b) and “in the heights” (Mymwrmb) and is not Yahweh or the throne of

David.484 Mymwrm is part of the stock mythological vocabulary for the location of the divine dwelling,

associated with the meeting place of the divine council. Mymwrm also occurs in Job 25:2 ("Dominion and fear485


council. The possession (and literary disclosure) of a name does not mark a transition from “god” to “angel” with respect to the divine
council.
483
    Mullen, The Divine Council, 228; Parker, “Council,” DDD, 205; Carol L. Meyers and Eric M. Meyers, Haggai, Zechariah 1-8 (AB
25B; New York: Doubleday, 1987), 184.
484
    See the earlier discussion of Psalm 89 in Chapter Three for more detail.
485
    The terms l#$mh and dxp are interesting in this context. The former does not appear in personified form in the Hebrew Bible,
though in the New Testament it occurs in this regard two times to denote a class of angel (kurio,thj; Eph 1:21; Col 1:16). In literature
influenced by the New Testament the term occurs with the same meaning (see P.W. van der Horst, “Dominion,” DDD, 262). dxp, on
are with him, he makes peace in his high places [wymwrmb]") and Job 31:2 ("For what portion of God is there

from above? And (what) inheritance of the Almighty from the heights [Mymwrmb]?"). The semantic equivalent

Mymr occurs in Job 21:22 ("Will any teach God knowledge, seeing that he judges those that are on high?").

         Job 5:1 also refers to some sort of council mediation:

                                                                                                                                Job 5:1
                                                                         `hn<p.Ti ~yvidoQ.mi ymi-la,w> &'n<A[ vyEh] an"-ar'q.
                                                           Call now; is there an answer for you? To which of the holy
                                                           ones will you turn?

         A few observations are appropriate. First, the rhetorical question here is best considered in light of the

twofold sense of “council” in a patriarchal or monarchical context as described in Chapter One. There is the

council proper as deliberative body, composed of the patriarch or Most High and the royal sons, and the council

at large, which is inclusive of the servant-class attendants who lack authority but, since they serve the royal

household, are present at council activities. Job 5:1 most likely is an allusion to the council at large given the

elasticity of My#$dq, both outside and within Job, as illustrated momentarily.

         Second, the idea of the divine council intervening in human affairs is consistent with the pre-exilic

council worldview (1 Kings 22, the fate of Ahab; Isaiah 6, the fate of Judah). Personal mediation on the part of

a divine council member has precedence at Ugarit in the Kirta Epic, where El assists the king in his quest for a

son.486 In the Hebrew Bible Yahweh utilizes his chief agent / vice-regent for personal intervention in an

individual’s life.487 Nevertheless, mediation of council members for the purpose of seeking justice in the council

appears to be an innovation.

         Job 16:19-21 and 5:1 are a convenient backdrop to several other passages in Job that speak of divine

council personnel.




the other hand, may be personified in the Hebrew Bible, but this is speculative. Alt, for example, understood the word this way in the
phrase qxcy dxp (Gen 31: 42, 53) on the basis of other archaic expressions (bq(y ryb); Gen 49:24) and “God of X” pattern (M.
Kockert, “Fear of Isaac,” DDD, 329-331).
486
    KTU 1.14-1.16.
487
    For example, see Gen 16 (Hagar) and 1 Kings 19 (Elijah).
                                                                                                                       Job 15:8
                                                                       `hm'k.x' ^yl,ae [r;g>tiw> [m'v.Ti h;Ala/ dAsb.h;
                                                        Have you listened in the council of God? Are you the only one
                                                        with wisdom?
                                                                                                                       Job 4:18
                                                                `hl'h\T' ~yfiy" wyk'a'l.m;b.W !ymia]y: al{ wyd'b'[]B; !he
                                              Behold, he put no trust in his servants; and his angels he charged with
                                              folly:
                                                                                                                      Job 15:15
                                                       `wyn"y[eb. WKz:-al{ ~yIm;v'w> !ymia]y: al{ wyv'doq.Bi Avdoq.Bi !he
                                          Behold, he puts no trust in his holy ones, and the heavenly ones are not
                                          clean in his sight.
                                                                                                                     Job 25:5-6
                                                           `wyn"y[eb. WKz:-al{ ~ybik'Akw> lyhia]y: al{w> x;rey"-d[; !he 5
                                                                            `h['leAT ~d'a'-!b,W hM'ri vAna/-yKi @a; 6
                                     Behold if even the moon is not bright and the stars are not pure in his sight, 6
                                     How much less man, [who is] a worm, and the son of man, [who is] a worm?

                                                                                                                  Job 33:23-24
                                            Arv.y" ~d'a'l. dyGIh;l. @l,a'-yNImi dx'a, #ylime %a'l.m; wyl'[' vyE-~ai
                                                           `rp,ko ytiac'm' tx;v' td,r,me Wh[ed'P. rm,aYOw: WNN<xuy>w:
                                If he has an angel, an advocate, one among a thousand to declare what is right for a
                                man, then he will be gracious to him and say, “Redeem him488 from going down to
                                the pit, for I have found his ransom.


         Job 15:7 references the first man, Adam, who by implication was believed to have listened to the divine

council (cf. Ezek 28:13 for Eden as the cosmic mountain of God, the place where council was held). The

statement in 15:8 from the mouth of Eliphaz suggests that if Job had "stood in the council" (cp. Jer 23:18, 22

and Isa 6), then he would have the authority to correctly determine the reason for his suffering. Since he has

not, Eliphaz offers his own explanation. Eliphaz's comments are also a pointed criticism: does Job really

imagine he is as wise as Adam?489 Adam's great wisdom, gained by listening in the divine council, did not help

him. D. J. A. Clines comments: "Eliphaz's attitude has been made clear in the previous chapter: Job is

essentially a righteous man, but—like any human (or angel; cf. 4:18)—he has his faults and is suffering for

them. . . . Job shares the frailty of all created things."490 Just because Adam was exceedingly wise because of his

488
    The MT reads wh(dp which Hartley notes is a hapax legomenon (John E. Hartley, The Book of Job [NICOT; Grand Rapids: William
B. Eerdmans, 1988], 445, n. 1). Other commentators prefer to read wh(rp (“let him loose”) supposing graphic confusion. Ps 49:8-10
appears to be a parallel passage, however, having the same vocabulary (rpk, tx#$) including a form of hdp.
489
    Clines, Job 1-20, 350.
490
    Ibid., 137.
admission into the divine council, his knowledge did not help him avoid corruption. His wisdom was not

beyond fallibility. In fact, not even heavenly beings meet these criteria.

         There are two ways one could view the parallel relationships in Job 4:18; 15:15, and 25:5. It is possible

that God views each tier of the council, from his royal sons to the lowly attendants, as possessing flaws. This

new appeal to the “holy ones” in Job 5:1 is seen as a reference only to the council members, the divine sons.

This is unlikely due to the Hebrew Bible’s broad use of My#$wdq. That this objection is warranted follows from

the other generic terms in Job 4:18; 15:15, and 25:5 used in parallel. Job 4:18 very clearly references the

Myk)lm as the attendant class (Mydb() that serves the council. Yahweh is said to distrust (      !ymia]y: al{) these
Myk)lm. The identical wording is used in 15:15, where those heavenly beings who are deemed impure in

Yahweh’s sight (  wyn"y[eb. WKz:-al{) are My#$wdq. The term My#$wdq is in parallel to Mym#$ in 15:15, which
should therefore be taken as personified, much like the reference in Deut 32:43 (Qumran). The Mybkwk of Job

25:5 are likewise described with the same accusatory language (    wyn"y[eb. WKz:-al{). Hence My#$dq, Mym#$, and
Mybkwk are overlapping, generalized terms.

         It should also be noted that if Mark S. Smith is correct that independence is a quality of deity, then the

references in Job to these beings as impure undermine the view that the old council gods have been relegated to

a lower status. The issue is that for a being to be impure or blameworthy requires that being to have a free,

distinct will. This is suggestive of Smith’s deity trait of independence, the ability to act freely (but not

autonomously). Since the word Myk)lm is used in these parallel passages in Job, the possession of a distinct

will would in turn—again depending on the validity of Smith’s observation—perhaps support the notion that

Myk)lm are Myhwl) on errand for Yahweh. As noted in Chapter Two, this possibility is not without its own

difficulties.

         Interestingly, the idea of the futility of an appeal to council seems thematic in Job. As Clines notes,

“there is a lack of specificity in these texts; there is no reason why such intercession should be expected to help
given the council members’ lack of perfection.”491 The point seems to be that Job cannot expect the intercession

to do any good, since it is his responsibility to endure the suffering that has come upon him, and he is suffering

due to the will of the sovereign God.492 It is almost as if Eliphaz witnessed or overheard the council deliberation

of Job 1-2. In fact, to the reader’s surprise, he implies that he has!

          The only possible exception to the apparent futility is likely Job 33:23, which in context appears to

suggest that a heavenly advocate may be able to deliver Job from suffering (“If he has an angel [K)lm], an

advocate , [Cylm], one among a thousand to declare what is right for a man, then he will be gracious to him and

say, “Redeem him from going down to the pit, for I have found his ransom”). Elihu is apparently declaring that

there is a heavenly mediator for each sufferer, specifically a K)lm who serves as advocate and directs his

charge in the right course of action that will help him escape God’s chastening. This K)lm is referred to as

“one among a thousand,” which may mean that an ordinary angel is in view. However, Eichrodt suggests on the

basis of the same phrase in Job 9:3, where he sees a restrictive meaning, that a special K)lm is in view, namely

the hwhy K)lm.493 If his proposal has merit, then Elihu may be singling out the hwhy K)lm as the lone

exception in Job’s case, countering the contention of Eliphaz that there is no one who can help Job. Such divine

mediation by a subordinate deity may be related to “the Mesopotamian belief in a personal god who looked after

the interest of his mortal client in the divine assembly.”494 If this is an Israelite parallel conception to that belief,

it may lend support to Eichrodt’s suggestion of hwhy K)lm as divine mediator, since that figure is cast as

Yahweh’s divine vice-regent.495 Given the human appearance of the hwhy K)lm in pre-exilic texts, the next

passage for consideration is intriguing.

          Job 4:12-17 provides the backdrop to 4:18 cited above. Though it does not overtly reference divine

pluralities, it deserves attention with respect to the theme of the unnamed vice-regent we have seen in several




491
    Clines, Job 1-20, 138.
492
    See D. J. A. Clines, "Job 5, 1-8: A New Exegesis," Bib 62 (1981): 185-194.
493
    W. Eichrodt, Theology of the Old Testament (trans. J. Baker; vol . II; Philadelphia: Westminster, 1967), 23-29.
494
    Marvin Pope, Job (AB 15; New York: Doubleday, 1965), 219.
495
    Recall the earlier discussion on the hwhy K)lm in the Baal vice regent role and Baal’s intercessory activity.
poetic passages. The passage is quite suggestive of the appearance of an anthropomorphized Yahweh, who

speaks of the divine vice-regent. The entire pericope (Job 4:12-21) follows:

                                                                                                                       Job 4:12-21
                               hl'y>l' tAnyOz>x,me ~yPi[if.Bi 13 `Whn>m, #m,ve ynIz>a' xQ;Tiw: bN"gUy> rb'D' yl;aew> 12
                            `dyxip.hi yt;Amc.[; brow> hd'['r.W ynIa;r'q. dx;P; 14 `~yvin"a]-l[; hm'Der.T; lpon>Bi
                                       ryKia;-al{w> dmo[]y: 16 `yrif'B. tr;[]f; rMes;T. @l{x]y: yn:P'-l[; x;Wrw> 15
                            qD'c.yI h;Ala/me vAna/h; 17 `[m'v.a, lAqw" hm'm'D. yn"y[e dg<n<l. hn"WmT. Whaer.m;
                          `hl'h\T' ~yfiy" wyk'a'l.m;b.W !ymia]y: al{ wyd'b'[]B; !he 18 `rb,G"-rh;j.yI Whfe[ome ~ai
                                         `v['-ynEp.li ~WaK.d;y> ~d'Asy> rp'['B,-rv,a] rm,xo-yTeb' ynEk.vo @a; 19
                            ~B' ~r't.yI [S;nI-al{h] 21 `WdbeayO xc;n<l' ~yfime yliB.mi WTK;yU br,[,l' rq,Bomi 20
                                                                                          `hm'k.x'b. al{w> WtWmy"
                   12 A word came to me in stealth; My ear caught a whisper of it. 13 In thought-filled visions of
                   the night, When deep sleep falls on men, 14 Fear and trembling came upon me, Causing all my
                   bones to quake with fright. 15 A wind/spirit496 passed by me, a whirlwind made my flesh
                   quiver.497 16 It halted; its appearance was strange to me; A form loomed before my eyes; I heard
                   a murmur, a voice, 17 "Can a man be righteous before God? Can man be pure in the sight of his
                   Maker?498 18 If He cannot trust His own servants, And casts reproach on His angels, 19 How
                   much less those who dwell in houses of clay, Whose origin is dust, Who are crushed like the
                   moth, 20 Shattered between daybreak and evening, Perishing forever, unnoticed. 21 Their cord
                   is pulled up and they die, and not with wisdom.499

         Several items relevant to this study stand out in this passage. The knowledge that Eliphaz wants to

impress upon Job did not come from a human source. Eliphaz claims here that his message for Job came to him

personally (note the emphatic position of yl)) via a dramatic, frightening experience. Eliphaz’s experience was

auditory (rbd, lwq, vv.12, 16), but he also had a vision (hlyl Nwyzx, v. 16). The use of the word

hmdrt implies some deep sleep or trance-like state that is elsewhere in the Hebrew Bible associated with

divine revelation or intervention (Gen 2:21; 15:12). However, the term is also used of normal sleep that is not

supernaturally induced (Prov 19:15; Judg 4:21; Jonah 1:5-6). Whatever the nature of the sleep, the vision

experience terrified him, and it is in the description of the event that a supernatural context becomes apparent.




496
    See the comments on xwr that follow.
497
    Emending tr(#o to hr(#o for parallelism. In either case, the noun is paired with both masculine and feminine verb forms
498
    On the translation of v. 17, see the textual and grammatical notes in Clines, Job 1-20, 112, nn. 17a-d).
499
    The translation is that of Clines (Clines, Job 1-20, 111).
         Several terms indicate that Eliphaz is describing a theophany.500 In verse 15 both “wind” (xwr) and

“whirlwind” (emending tr(#o to hr(#o in light of the parallelism) are elsewhere strong indications of divine

presence.501 That xwr here is not “spirit” (or the Holy Spirit) is indicated by gender. As Clines notes, when

xwr is used as a masculine noun (note the verbs Plxy and dm(y in vv. 15 and 16), the word “always refers to

a wind or breath.”502 In 1 Kgs 19:11 God speaks to Elijah out of a “great and strong wind (xwr).” In 2 Sam


22:11, Yahweh rides “upon the wings of the wind (xwr).” In the description of the theophany of Ezek 1:4, we

read of the divine appearance in “the wind (xwr) of a storm (hr(#o).” Nahum 1:3 informs us that God’s way is

in “storm and whirlwind (hr(#obw hpwsb).” The other references in Job (38:1; 40:6) where Yahweh speaks

from the “whirlwind” (hr(s) also provide important context for Eliphaz’s experience.

         What distinguishes Job 4:15ff. from other references in the book to God speaking from the “wind” and

“whirlwind” is that, like many other theophanic passages already noted in this study, the speaker (ostensibly

Yahweh himself) is described in anthropomorphized terms. The figure is described as “standing” (dm(y),

which is technical vocabulary for the divine council.503 Interpreting dm( here as a stock council expression is

sustained by the reference to Myk)lm in 4:18, that verse’s overlap with 15:8 and 15:15, and the theophanic

language noted above. A divine council context for this vision and this figure is not only plausible, but is likely.

Eliphaz recalls seeing the figure’s form (hnwmt) “looming before my eyes,” meaning the figure was not

invisible, but had some sort of discernible profile. The shape was unrecognizable, though, as Eliphaz reports not

being able to make out the figure’s appearance (wh)rm ryk)-)l). This is typical of language that is intended

to convey that the experiencer witnesses an appearance (hnwmt) of God himself. Clines notes in this regard:

         Strikingly, hnwmt always refers to God or to some representation of God: in Num 12:8
         Yahweh says that with Moses he speaks “mouth to mouth, clearly, and not in dark speech; and
500
    Clines, Job 1-20, 130.
501
    The references that follow were noted in Clines, Job 1-20, 130.
502
    Clines, Job 1-20, 111, note 15a. Other verses where xwr is masculine are Job 1:19; 41:8 [16]; Exod 10:13; Num 5:14; Eccl 1:6;
3:19). Clines also notes that the Holy Spirit is referred to only once in Job (32:8), where xwr occurs in parallel to yd#$ tm#$n.
503
    Mullen, Divine Council, 230-232; Cross, “The Council of Yahweh in Second Isaiah,” 274, n. 3.
            he beholds the form of Yahweh (hwhy hnwmt).” This is a privilege reserved for Moses; Israel
            at Horeb “heard the sound of words, but saw no form (hnwmt); there was only a voice” (Deut
            4:12; cf. 4:15). In Ps 17:15 the “form” (hnwmt) of Yahweh is parallel with his “face” (Mynp).
            Elsewhere hnwmt refers to representations of God (Exod 20:4; Deut 4:16, 23, 25; 5:8). Thus
            Eliphaz is claiming that he has both seen (v.16) and heard (vv. 15,17) God.504

            If indeed the writer has Eliphaz presenting the truth to Job, the pessimism with which he speaks of

appealing to the divine council is quite understandable. Job’s suffering has been decreed by God, and no

representative of the council at any level may overturn it. The speaker in fact confronts any notion that a man

can challenge God’s decisions on the matter. The issue is not Job’s guilt or innocence, but the divine will.

            Who is this unidentified speaker? It could be argued by implication that elsewhere when Yahweh is

anthropomorphized, the hwhy K)lm fills that role. But is there any instance where the hwhy K)lm is present

in the divine council? This is in fact the case in Zech 3:1-7.


5.3 The Divine Council Scene in Zechariah 3:1-7

            All the major scholarly works on the divine council agree that Zech 3:1-7 is a divine council scene. The

unanimity is due primarily to the passage’s similarity to Job 1-2, where the s8at[an is also present.505 As was the

case with Job 1-2, Zech 3:1-7 shows evidence of some development in the divine council conception, but not a

downgrading of the concept. This text’s importance for the present study relates to its presentation of the activity

of the council and the appearance of the pre-exilic divine vice-regent figure, the hwhy K)lm, the central

character in the subsequent two powers controversy. Discussion here will focus on the council proceedings due

to their implications for divine plurality and the earlier debate on Psalm 82.

                                                                                                           Zech 3:1-7
                                dme[o !j'F'h;w> hw"hy> %a;l.m; ynEp.li dme[o lAdG"h; !heKoh; [;vuAhy>-ta, ynIaer.Y:w: 1
                        hw"hy> r[;g>yIw> !j'F'h; ^B. hw"hy> r[;g>yI !j'F'h;-la, hw"hy> rm,aYOw: 2 `Anj.fil. Anymiy>-l[;
                         ~ydig"B. vbul' hy"h' [;vuAhywI 3 `vaeme lC'mu dWa hz< aAlh] ~l'iv'WryBi rxeBoh; ^B.
                                 rmoale wyn"p'l. ~ydim.[oh'-la, rm,aYOw: ![;Y:w: 4 `%a'l.M;h; ynEp.li dme[ow> ~yaiAc
                              ^n<wO[] ^yl,['me yTir.b;[/h, haer. wyl'ae rm,aYOw: wyl'['me ~yaiCoh; ~ydig"B.h; Wrysih'
                          @ynIC'h; WmyfiY"w: Avaro-l[; rAhj' @ynIc' Wmyfiy" rm;aow" 5 `tAcl'x]m; ^t.ao vBel.h;w>
                         hw"hy> %a;l.m; d[;Y"w: 6 `dme[o hw"hy> %a;l.m;W ~ydig"B. WhvuBil.Y:w: Avaro-l[; rAhJ'h;
504
      Clines, Job 1-20, 131.
505
      Meyers and Meyers, Haggai, Zechariah 1-8, 182-183.
                        yTir.m;v.mi-ta, ~aiw> %leTe yk;r'd.Bi-~ai tAab'c. hw"hy> rm;a'-hKo 7 `rmoale [;vuAhyBi
                            ~ykil.h.m; ^l. yTit;n"w> yr'cex]-ta, rmov.Ti ~g:w> ytiyBe-ta, !ydiT' hT'a;-~g:w> rmov.ti
                                                                                           `hL,aeh' ~ydim.[oh' !yBe
            1 Then he showed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of Yahweh, and the s8at[an
            standing at his right side to accuse him. 2 Yahweh said to the s8at[an, "Yahweh rebukes you, O s8at[an!
            Yahweh, who has chosen Jerusalem, rebukes you! Is not this man a burning stick snatched from the
            fire?" 3 Now Joshua was dressed in filthy clothes as he stood before the angel. 4 And He said to those
            who were standing before him, "Take off his filthy clothes." Then he said to Joshua, "See, I have taken
            away your sin, and I will put rich garments on you." 5 Then I said, "Put a clean turban on his head." So
            they put a clean turban on his head and clothed him, while the angel of Yahweh stood by. 6 The angel
            of Yahweh gave this charge to Joshua: 7 "This is what Yahweh Almighty says: `If you will walk in my
            ways and keep my requirements, then you will govern my house and have charge of my courts, and I
            will give you a place among these standing here.'"


            Before offering my own suggestions on the scene, it is useful to describe the consensus interpretation.

The passage begins with Yahweh506 showing the prophet the vision of Joshua the high priest standing before the

hwhy K)lm, with the s8at[an standing to Joshua’s right, ready to accuse him. That the s8at[an is in fact at Joshua’s

right and not to the right of the hwhy K)lm can be inferred from Ps 109:6, where the s8at[an is clearly positioned

to the right of the accused.507 The s8at[an is rebuked by Yahweh himself in the third person, who either enters the

scene now with the prophet Zechariah, or issues the rebuke at a distance. This rebuke is followed by the

absolution of the apostasy of the nation of Israel, represented by the high priest’s filthy garments (3:2-4). The

clause that begins verse 4 (     wyn"p'l. ~ydim.[oh'-la, rm,aYOw: ![;Y:w:) is typically understood as Yahweh
commanding the unseen council members or (more likely) attendants to remove Joshua’s filthy garments and

replace them with “rich garments” (twclxm). The subsequent clause

(   ^n<wO[] ^yl,['me yTir.b;[/h, haer. wyl'ae rm,aYOw:) is also taken as though Yahweh is the speaker. In verse five
the prophet addresses the heavenly attendants and directs them to place a clean turban on Joshua’s head, and

they comply while the hwhy K)lm stands by. The hwhy K)lm then admonishes Joshua, speaking in the first

person as Yahweh, the One whom he represents. The description of the admonition of the hwhy K)lm is

reminiscent of many pre-exilic instances where the hwhy K)lm acts as the extension of Yahweh. Joshua’s


506
      See Zech 2:1 (Hebrew) and Meyers and Meyers, Haggai, Zechariah 1-8, 179-180.
reward for obedience from this time forth will be entry to the divine council itself

(   hL,aeh' ~ydim.[oh' !yBe ~ykil.h.m; ^l. yTit;n"w>).
           This portrayal of the council proceedings concerning Joshua the high priest is certainly coherent, but in

my mind a key detail is missed that calls for a different analysis. The assumption guiding the consensus view is

that it is Yahweh who is presiding over the proceedings, but this conclusion goes beyond the wording of the text

and the larger context.

           As with passages in Job, commentators have accurately pointed out that dm( is “the most common

word in Hebrew literature for reflecting the technical procedures of participating in the Court. Just as people

appear before the king and enter his court . . . so heavenly figures are admitted to the assembly over which

Yahweh presides.” 508 In this case dm( is an important clue to understanding the vision, as it occurs six times in

these seven verses.509 But as Joshua the high priest stands condemned in the divine courtroom, it is not Yahweh

that he is standing before (ynpl dm() in the position and posture of the accused—it is the hwhy K)lm. In fact,

Joshua is described as standing (hwhy) K)lm(h) ynpl twice (vv. 1,3).510

           In order to discern the importance of this unusual circumstance, it is necessary to understand the

significance of the phrase hwhy ynpl (and so hwhy K)lm ynpl). ynpl of course is formed via the noun

Mynp in construct and prefixed with the preposition l. Though the meaning of ynpl can be abstract,511 a very

common usage bears the nuance “in the presence of, before” a person or object.512 The phrase hwhy ynpl often

takes on a technical meaning that implies some kind of localized representation of YHWH’s presence.513

Mynp without prefixed l is the general word for “face” and is often used in the broad sense of one’s presence or


507
    In Ps 109:6, however, N+#o lacks the article. Meyers (quoting Hurvitz, “Date of the Prose Tale of Job,” 19) contends that the absence
of the article does not weaken the familiar image of the accuser role (Meyers and Meyers, Haggai, Zechariah 1-8, 184).
508
    Meyers and Meyers, Haggai, Zechariah 1-8, 182-183.
509
    Ibid., 182; Thomas Pola, “Form and Meaning in Zechariah 3,” in Yahwism After the Exile: Perspectives on Israelite Religion in the
Persian Era (ed. Rainer Albertz and Bob Becking; STAR 5; Van Gorcum, 2003), 158.
510
    The full phrase, hwhy K)lm ynpl, is used in 3:1, whereas 3:3 reads K)lmh ynpl. That the hwhy K)lm is in view in 3:3 is
indicated by the article as well as context.
511
    Judith Romney Wegner, “Coming Before the LORD: hwhy ynpl and the Exclusion of Women from the Divine Presence,” in Hesed
Ve-Emet: Studies in Honor of Ernest S. Frerichs (ed. Jodi Magness and Seymour Gitin; BJS 320; Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1998), 82.
512
    Mervyn D. Fowler, “The Meaning of lip;ne, YHWH in the Old Testament,” ZAW 99 (1987): 384.
person in biblical Hebrew. For example, in 2 Sam 17:11 Absalom receives counsel from Hushai: “Therefore I

counsel that all Israel be gathered to you, from Dan to Beersheba, as the sand that is by the sea for multitude,

and that you go into battle personally (Kynp).” C.L. Seow adds that “pa4n|,m is closely associated with divine

presence, which is at times symbolized by the presence of cultic objects.” 514 In many instances in the Hebrew

Bible this representation was the ark of the covenant. For example, at the procession bringing the ark back to

Jerusalem David “danced before Yahweh” (2 Sam 6:5ff.). Hezekiah “prayed before Yahweh” as he faced the

cherubim in the temple (Isa 37:14-20; 2 Kgs 19:14-19). The Israelites passed “before Yahweh” when they

crossed the Jordan River bearing the ark of the covenant (Num 32:21ff.).

           There are also many instances where a cultic object is not in view, and Mynp speaks of direct contact

with the presence of Yahweh, which at times meant being “face to face” with an anthropomorphic

representation.515 Seow comments that “in quite a number of biblical texts the pa4n|,m of YHWH is YHWH’s

hypostatic Presence. Thus it serves the same function as S0em (Name) in the Dtr theology, Ka4bo,d (Glory) in the

Priestly tradition, and Shekinah in later Jewish writings.”516 In Exod 33:14-16 Yahweh tells Moses (with whom

he spoke    ~ynIP'-la, ~ynIP') that “My presence (lit., “face”) will go with you and I will give you rest”

(   %l' ytixonIh]w: WkleyE yn:P'). Speiser points out that phrases that juxtapose Mynp with the verb Klh do not
merely mean “to go before” or “to lead” since Yahweh promises he will be “with” the people, the idea being the

immanence of Yahweh among the Israelites as a whole.517 Indeed, the very function of the hypostasis was so

that Yahweh could be simultaneously transcendent and immanent.518




513
    Ibid., 384. Fowler’s article also details how the phrase can amount to general affirmation of Yahweh’s omnipresence, the existence of
a cult center, or refer to Yahweh’s “estimation” of something.
514
    C.L. Seow, “Face,” DDD, 323.
515
    The notion of seeing God’s face or speaking to Yahweh “face to face” is not uncommon in the Hebrew Bible, despite the tradition that
no one could see the face of God and live (Exod 33:10). For the idiom of seeing or speaking to God mynp-l) Mynp or Mynpb Mynp, see
Gen 32:30; Exod. 33:11; Deut 5:4; 34:10; Judg 6:22; Ezek 20:35. For direct conversation with Yahweh in human form, the most notable
passage is Gen 18-19 (cf. 18:22). These situations are rare, since the anthropomorphized Yahweh is typically the hwhy K)lm.
516
    Seow, “Face,” 322.
517
    E.A. Speiser, “The Biblical Idiom pa4n|,m ho4lek|4m,” in The Seventy-Fifth Anniversary Volume of the Jewish Quarterly Review
(Philadelphia: Jewish Quarterly Review, 1967), 516. LXX takes Mynp in this context to refer to God “in person” and so reads
auvto.j su.
518
    Seow, “Face,” 322.
            In Gen 32:25 Jacob wrestled with a “man” until dawn. Although the reader is not told specifically how

Jacob reached the conclusion, Jacob subsequently considers his opponent a divine being (Gen 32:31) and so

names the place of the incident l)ynp declaring, “I have seen God/ a god (Myhl)) face to face”

(   ~ynIP'-la, ~ynIP' ~yhil{a/ ytiyair'). The implication is that the “man” was a deity figure, or given the

idiomatic      ~ynIP'-la, ~ynIP', perhaps the God of Israel himself. The writer of Hosea, reflecting on this incident,
appears to understand Jacob’s opponent to be the familiar angel who represents Yahweh.519

            Consider the overlap of the following verses, beginning with Exod 23:20-23, the text where Yahweh

reveals that his Name resides in the angel he is sending before Israel—the text at the heart of the “two powers in

heaven” controversy. The references to the enemies in the land are identical in terms of the nations named, and

bind the passages together.

            Exod 23:20-23 (Yahweh speaking to Moses)

            20 “See, I am sending an angel (K)lm) ahead of you to guard you along the way and to bring
            (^a]ybih]l;w>) you to the place I have prepared. 21 Pay attention to him and listen to what he says.
            Do not rebel against him; he will not forgive your rebellion, since my Name (ym#$) is in him. 22
            If you listen carefully to what he says and do all that I say, I will be an enemy to your enemies
            and will oppose those who oppose you. 23 My angel (K)lm) will go (%leyE) ahead of you and
            bring you (^a]ybih/w<) into the land of the Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Canaanites, Hivites and
            Jebusites, and I will wipe them out.

In this passage, it is the angel of Yahweh who will go (      %leyE) ahead of Israel and who will bring (^a]ybih/w<)
Israel into the land.

            Exod 32:34 (Yahweh speaking to Moses)

            Now go, lead the people to the place I spoke of, and my angel (yk)lm) will go (%leyE) before
            you. However, when the time comes for me to punish, I will punish them for their sin"
            (~t'aJ'x; ~h,yle[] yTid.q;p'W ydiq.P' ~Ayb.W).

Like Exod 23:20-23, the angel will go (       %leyE) ahead of Israel.
            Exod 33:1-3, 12-15 (Yahweh speaking to Moses)



519
      See pages 56-57 of this study.
         1 Then Yahweh said to Moses, "Leave this place, you and the people you brought up out of
         Egypt, and go up to the land I promised on oath to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, saying, 'I will
         give it to your descendants.' 2 I will send an angel (K)lm) before you and I will drive out the
         Canaanites, Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites and Jebusites. 3 Go up to the land flowing
         with milk and honey. But I will not go with you, because you are a stiff-necked people and I
         might destroy you on the way." . . . 12 Moses said to Yahweh, "You have been telling me, 'Lead
         these people,' but you have not let me know whom you will send with me. You have said, 'I
         know you by name and you have found favor with me.' 13 If you are pleased with me, teach me
         your ways so I may know you and continue to find favor with you. Remember that this nation
         is your people." 14 The LORD replied, "My Presence (ynp) will go (WkleyE) with you, and I will
         give you rest." 15 Then Moses said to him, "If your Presence (Kynp) does not go (~ykil.h) with  o
         us, do not send us up from here.

Once again it is the angel who is sent ahead of Israel (33:2), but it is the Presence (Kynp) that will go (    WkleyE)

and bring (   ^a]ybih/w<) Israel into the land.
         Deut 7:1

         When Yahweh your God brings (^a]ybiy>) you into the land you are entering to possess and
         drives out before you many nations—the Hittites, Girgashites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites,
         Hivites and Jebusites, seven nations larger and stronger than you . . .

         Here Yahweh himself brings (       ^a]ybiy>) Israel to the land, and the parallel is unmistakable in view of the
list of nations. The connection between the Presence and the hwhy K)lm is most explicitly described in a text

roughly contemporaneous with Zechariah 3:

         Isa 63:9 (speaking of Yahweh)

         In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence (wynp K)lm) saved them: in
         his love and in his pity he redeemed them; and he bore them, and carried them all the days of
         old.

         The MT of Isa 63:9 is supported by 1QIsaa, but LXX disagrees, interpreting wynp as Yahweh himself,

as in Exod 33:14 (evk pa,shj qli,yewj ouv pre,sbuj ouvde. a;ggeloj avllV auvto.j ku,rioj e;swsen

 auvtou.j).

         With these observations as backdrop, the scene of Zech 3:1-7 provides an intriguing interplay of

Yahweh and his vice-regent presiding together in council. My own suggestion is that the hwhy K)lm is indeed

seated on a throne presiding over the heavenly court in this scene. I would agree with the consensus that
Yahweh either issues his rebuke of the s8at[an from a distance, or enters the scene in verse 2.520 However, since

Joshua is standing before the hwhy K)lm in verse 3b, it is more natural that the subject of the clause that

begins verse 4 (   wyn"p'l. ~ydim.[oh'-la, rm,aYOw: ![;Y:w:) is the hwhy K)lm, not Yahweh.                 521
                                                                                                                 I suggest translating


verse 4a as, “And the hwhy K)lm answered and said to those who were standing before him . . .” This would

make good contextual sense as well, since it would have another occurrence of dm( capturing the same picture

as Joshua; that is, the heavenly attendants stand before the seated hwhy K)lm as does the accused. That the

hwhy K)lm is the seated presiding deity is also indicated in verse 5 where, immediately after the clean turban

and clothing is placed on Joshua, we find that the hwhy K)lm had stood (repointing dm'(o to dma(f).522

          At this point it may seem shocking to have the hwhy K)lm announce to Joshua, “See, I have taken

away your sin, and I will put rich garments on you," but this is a possibility if the hwhy K)lm is the subject of

the clause that begins verse 4. One must recall that the hwhy K)lm does not speak for himself. In verses 6-7

the hwhy K)lm speaks for Yahweh and refers to Him deferentially as tw)bc hwhy. To say that the

hwhy K)lm is the one pronouncing Joshua’s forgiveness via the first person in verse 4 is no usurpation of

sovereignty; it is to act as the vice-regent normally does, as the mouthpiece of Yahweh. There is nothing

inherently surprising, in lieu of Yahweh’s “absence” in the company of the prophet, that the hwhy K)lm, the




520
    Meyers and Meyers, Haggai, Zechariah 1-8, 179-183. Throughout chapters 1 and 2 of Zechariah, Yahweh, the hwhy K)lm, and
another angel (if indeed “the angel” of 1:9, 13, 14, 19; 2:3 is actually distinct from the hwhy K)lm of 1:11, 12) are talking with each
other and the prophet. Zec 3:1’s statement, “Then he showed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of Yahweh” eliminates
the hwhy K)lm as the one showing Zechariah the scene in the council setting. The one revealing the scene to the prophet is either the
angel of chapter 1, if indeed that angel and the hwhy K)lm are distinct, or Yahweh himself in the event they are the same (see the note
on the “man” of 1:8 in Meyers and Meyers, Haggai, Zechariah 1-8, 110). Elsewhere in Zechariah Yahweh does speak directly to the
prophet (11:13), and in chapter 1 the same is conceivable in light of the phrase “the word of Yahweh came to me” (1:1, 7). Meyers and
Meyers point to 2:8 as implying Yahweh is the speaker, but the reference to the entity “touching” the prophet would require Yahweh in
human form, as though the word that came to Zechariah was corporeal (cp. Jer 1:1 with Jer 1:9 for the “word” of Yahweh as physical).
Taking Zec 1:1, 7 with 2:8 then offers the possibility that one of the figures in these early chapters of Zechariah is the embodied Yahweh,
which is typically the role of the hwhy K)lm.
521
    Vanderkam apparently understands the subject of the verb to be the angel as well (James C. Vanderkam, “Joshua the high Priest and
the Interpretation of Zechariah 3,” CBQ 53 (1991): 556.
522
    The LXX translator apparently did not take the text as a participle either, given the use of the perfect (ei`sth,kei).
being “who stands at the head of the entourage of the divine council,”523 is the one before whom Joshua stands,

and who will charge Joshua to obey.

         If this portrayal is the more accurate of the two options, the implications are noteworthy. There is

obvious divine duality in a very late canonical text. The same “theology of interchangeability” that

characterized pre-exilic texts and that led Second Temple scholars to posit a second power in heaven, is present

in an obviously post-exilic text, Zech 3:1-7. When Joshua the high priest stands hwhy K)lm ynpl, it is

tantamount to standing hwhy ynpl. To be sure, my suggested reconstruction is not needed for divine plurality

in the passage, since the presence of the hwhy K)lm, the being in whom Yahweh’s Name dwells, is undeniable.

My suggestion merely heightens the second power in the heavenly court scene. Second, since the

hwhy K)lm acts as Yahweh’s representative in the scene no matter how the roles are parsed, the effect is that

Yahweh’s will is done—Joshua (the nation) is forgiven and re-commissioned. Technically the hwhy K)lm is

at once the person wronged (the plaintiff) and the judge, and Yahweh’s role is advocate or defender of Joshua,

the one who clears Joshua of his crimes via absolution. Though Yahweh and the hwhy K)lm can be separated,

the two act as one, as is the case in so many pre-exilic examples. Yahweh is never eclipsed by the hwhy K)lm;

the latter functions as the former because the Name is present within him. In this way, Yahweh can be both

judge and accuser in Psalm 82 as well, via the presence of an unnamed plaintiff. It seems the only difference

between Psalm 82, Psalm 89’s cloud witness, the figure of Job 4:12-19, and Zech 3:1-7 is that the second actor

is identified only in Zech 3:1-7.

         Two other items in Zech 3:1-7 deserve comment. First, it is clear that the prophet Zechariah, like

Adam, Enoch, Moses, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, and Micaiah ben Imlah, gains access to the throne council room

to witness the divine council in session.524 This is apparently an important rite of passage for prophets, and




523
   Meyers and Meyers, Haggai, Zechariah 1-8, 183.
524
   See Job 15:7-8; Gen 5:22 (cf. Myhl)h and the Enoch tradition), Exod 24, Isaiah 6, Jeremiah 23, Daniel 7, and 1 Kings 22. See also
Pola, “Form and Meaning,” 160, 164; Meyers and Meyers, Haggai, Zechariah 1-8, 194-198. Many commentators consider the scene of
1 Kings 22 as intentionally contrived by the prophet, but the overwhelming majority of the works on the divine council cited in Chapter
One’s introduction to this study include the description as a heavenly throne room scene.
Zechariah has his moment, like the prophets of old, “among the courtiers of God.”525 Second, the promise and

invitation of Yahweh in verses 6-7, spoken through the hwhy K)lm, that Joshua would be given entry and

membership in the divine council is perhaps the biblical precedent for this feature of Second Temple religion.

The idea that the faithful could join the divine council without occupying the office of prophet is most explicitly

articulated in Qumran sectarian texts, particularly the Shabbat Shirot, but is found elsewhere, such as Enoch. In

this regard as well Zech 3:1-7 would evidence an innovation in the divine council theology.


5.4 Divine Council Terms and Motifs Elsewhere in Zechariah

         The apocalyptic vision of Zechariah 12-14 also contains instances of divine council vocabulary. Aside

from numerous references to Myk)lm (4:1ff.; 5:5ff.; 6:4-5) the familiar My#$dq appear in Zech 14:5.

                                                                                                                         Zech 14:5
                         v[;r;h' ynEP.mi ~T,s.n: rv,a]K; ~T,s.n:w> lc;a'-la, ~yrih'-yGE [;yGIy:-yKi yr;h'-ayGE ~T,s.n:w>
                                           `%M'[i ~yvidoq.-lK' yh;l{a/ hw"hy> ab'W hd'Why>-%l,m, hY"ZI[u ymeyBi
                             5 And you shall flee to the valley of the mountains; for the valley of the mountains shall
                             reach unto Azal. You shall flee, like you fled from before the earthquake in the days of
                             Uzziah king of Judah, and Yahweh my God shall come, (and) all the holy ones with
                             you."

         This verse and the four verses that precede it have a number of interpretational problems that are usually

solved by small emendations of the text.526 It is not the purpose here to catalogue these issues and address them,

only to point out the terminology associated with the divine council. Whatever the textual solutions, this

passage was understood by the Qumran sect (cf. 1QM) as indicating the presence of divine beings in the final

apocalyptic war. Another text from the prophets that puts forth the same thought is Joel 3:11 (4:11, Hebrew).

                   `^yr,ABGI hw"hy> tx;n>h; hM'v' WcB'q.nIw> bybiS'mi ~yIAGh;-lk' Wabow" WvW[
                   Come quickly, all you nations from every side, and assemble there. Bring down your warriors,
                   O Yahweh!

         Finally, the curious text of Zech 12:8 could be (and was in Second Temple contexts) considered to

depict divine plurality within the council.

                                                                                                                         Zech 12:8
525
    Vanderkam, “Joshua in Zechariah 3,” 560. See also Nissen, “Prophets and the Divine Council,” and Kingsbury, "The Prophets and
the Council of Yahweh.”
526
    Eibert J. C. Tigchelaar, Prophets of Old and the Day of the End: Zechariah, the Book of the Watchers, and Apocalyptic (OtSt 35;
Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1996), 226-228.
                                       ~AYB; ~h,B' lv'k.NIh; hy"h'w> ~l;iv'Wry> bveAy d[;B. hw"hy> !gEy" aWhh; ~AYB; 8
                                               `~h,ynEp.li hw"hy> %a;l.m;K. ~yhil{aKe dywID' tybeW dywId'K. aWhh;
                                In that day Yahweh shall defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and he that is feeble
                                among them at that day shall be as David; and the house of David (shall be) as God, as
                                the angel of the Lord before them.

            Our interest here is not focused on what the writer meant by prophesying that at the Day of Yahweh the

house of David will be "like (a) God.” More significant is the appositional relationship between                       ~yhil{aKe and

hw"hy> %a;l.m;K. in the line ~h,ynEp.li hw"hy> %a;l.m;K. ~yhil{aKe dywID' tybeW.                   527
                                                                                                         Like the parallelism in Hos


12:4-5 (Hebrew), this text identifies the hwhy K)lm as a second-tier deity and, as Yahweh’s special agent,

marks him once again as the divine vice-regent about whom Jewish thinkers and rabbis in later periods would

become so fascinated and concerned. One wonders how such a potentially uncomfortable text could have

escaped the attention of the exilic and post-exilic redactors, whose intolerant monotheism is presumed. This

study suggests that the second power in heaven with its divine duality was acceptable in this stage of Israelite

religion and later eras because Israel’s faith was monolatrous.


5.5 Summation

            This chapter had a twofold emphasis. Its first goal was demonstrating the pervasive presence of divine

council terminology and motifs in canonical texts that most scholars agree were either composed or substantially

redacted during the exilic period or afterward. It also asked the reader to consider the need for the consensus

view to defend the position that passages dating to these eras which contain references to divine plurality do so

only as a rhetorical device to convey intolerant monotheism. If intolerant monotheism was characteristic of

official Israelite religion of the day, as the majority of scholarship contends, then the burden of proof is upon

that view to demonstrate that many texts that reflect divine plurality or heavenly vice regency do so for the sake

of monotheistic rhetoric. The consensus case must be built on more than Psalm 82, which, in the view of this

writer, lacks monotheistic rhetoric as well. The chapter therefore charges the consensus view with a lack of

consistency in this regard. It is more coherent to posit that Israel’s religion after the exile reflects the monolatry


527
      The JPS Tanakh translates, “the house of David [will be] like a divine being—like an angel of the Lord—at their head.”
of the pre-exilic era, not a militant monotheism that rejected the reality of the lesser gods of the nations. As the

study moves into the heart of the Second Temple period, the divine council is no less conspicuous.
                                                   Chapter Six


                              The Divine Council in the Book of Daniel

            The two previous chapters argued that the editorial work of the redactors of the exilic and early post-

exilic eras was focused neither on articulating nor enforcing an exclusivistic monotheism and that, in point of

fact, the monolatrous worldview of pre-exilic Israel was still in force, complete with a divine council of gods

and a divine vice-regent under the headship of Yahweh. As we shall now see, this worldview remains unaltered

in the mid-second century B.C.E. canonical book of Daniel.

            Perhaps no canonical book led to more debate on the nature and number of the powers in the heavenly

host. As Segal has demonstrated, the contents of Daniel expressed divine plurality so explicitly that discussion

of Daniel 7 had to be suppressed by the rabbis.528 In view of the fascination with Daniel in non-canonical

Second Temple texts, including the sectarian material from Qumran, it should come as no surprise that some of

the clearest and boldest references to plural Myhl) and exalted divine mediators (as explanations of the Son of

Man figure in Daniel 7) are found in these very late biblical texts in contexts that allude to material in Daniel.

As has been noted already, these references to plural Myhl) seem so aberrant that most contemporary scholars

feel compelled to relegate council members to the status of angels. If we reject the idea that the divine council

has been diluted in this manner, however, the anomalous becomes the anticipated.

            This chapter argues that the contents of the book of Daniel created no religious trepidation among

Second Temple Jews, as would be logically expected within the context of a zealous, intolerant monotheism.

Daniel represents continuity and expansion of the pre-exilic Israelite divine council and divine vice-regency in

Judaism. The book's contents bear no resemblance to a religious outlook that presumably had long since seen

the rejection of divine plurality.

6.1 Preview and Approach




528
      Segal, Two Powers in Heaven, 148-149.
             If the goal of the religious power-holders and scribes from the time of Deutero-Isaiah onward was to

eliminate or disguise the divine plurality of the council, it is shocking that the religious establishment would

bestow canonical status upon a book that overtly describes multiple thrones in heaven and a divine vice-regent

that bears an epithet of Yahweh. This chapter will utilize several lines of argument in demonstrating that the

pre-exilic divine council of Israelite monolatry survived well into the second century B.C.E. An overview of

these arguments will be followed by more substantive analysis.

             First, in the divine council scene of Dan 7:9ff., Yahweh-El is not depicted as the lone heavenly

authority. There is more than one throne in heaven, and members of the divine council occupy these thrones.

This observation is certainly not new, but it must be understood in light of the Yahweh-El merger that had taken

place in Israelite religion centuries before Daniel’s composition. Daniel 7 also distinguishes the high god who

presides over the council, Yahweh-El, from a second figure who bears Yahweh's title of "Cloud Rider”—

significantly, the only time in the Hebrew Bible where another entity receives a Yahweh attribution.529 As the

later rabbis understood quite clearly when confronting the two powers problem, Daniel 7 depicts a second power

in heaven who is given everlasting dominion and power. The fact that Daniel 7 follows the flow of the Baal

Cycle so closely allows us to draw the conclusion that Daniel 7 evinces the pre-exilic vice regency structure of

the divine council in unmistakable terms. Following this literary relationship to the Baal Cycle and its

descriptions of the vice-regency and princely status of Baal, it is coherent to argue that this second figure in

Daniel 7 is Yahweh-El's vice-regent, the "king of the gods" of the council, the "prince of the host" and "prince of

princes." Daniel 7 is thus quite consistent with the bureaucracy described earlier in this study.

             Second, scholars of Israelite religion have tended to downplay or perhaps overlook the significance of

the description of the bestowal of sovereignty over the Gentile nations to the second power in Daniel 7. By

virtue of this grant of dominion from the high God, the second deity figure, the Son of Man, also receives

authority over the second-tier Myhl)h-ynb who govern the Gentile nations. As noted earlier in this study

(Sections 3.4, 4.1) scholars have long recognized that this religious outlook is drawn from pre-exilic divine




529
      See the ensuing discussion with respect to this title.
council texts such as Deut 4:19-20 and 32:8-9.530 It is significant in this regard that this second divine figure is

not described as David or a member of the Davidic line. In fact, David and his dynasty are never mentioned in

Daniel 7 or anywhere else in the book.531 This conceptual vacuum undermines a messianic explanation for the

second divine power.

           Identifying the vice-regent as Michael is likewise negated. Michael is referred to as a "prince" (r#o;

Dan 10:21), the same terminology for those royal divine sons that govern geographic territory in the worldview

of Deut 32:8-9 and Psalm 82. The fact that Michael is also called lwdgh r#oh (Dan 12:1) does not mean that

Michael is the lord of all the divine princes (and thus the second figure of Daniel 7) since lwdgh r#oh is

identified as Israel’s prince in Dan 12:1, who is elsewhere described as merely one of the chief princes in Dan

10:13 (   ~ynIvoarih' ~yriF'h; dx;a;). This interplay of terms and the fact that there is more than one “chief
prince” suggests that the terms “prince,” “great prince,” and “chief prince” could be used of various beings of

the second-tier princely class of the heavenly hierarchy. Hence “chief prince” and “great prince” are synonyms

referring to the single divine prince who governs Israel, but who is one of an undetermined number of chief

princes.532 In any event, the nomenclature tells us that Michael is merely a member of an exalted class of divine

viceroys.533 Michael is therefore not the single authority over the divine royal princes; he is not, in pre-exilic

divine council terms, the “king of the gods.” By definition there is only one "Prince of the princes" (Myr#o r#o;

Dan 8:25) or “Prince of the host” ()bch-r#o).534 Michael therefore cannot be the second deity figure in Daniel

7, the vice-regent of Yahweh.535 As this chapter demonstrates, the correlation of Daniel 7 with the Baal Cycle

not only warrants this elimination of Michael as the vice-regent, but suggests an alternative identification noted

earlier in this study.

530
    John J. Collins, Daniel: A Commentary on the Book of Daniel (Hermeneia; Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1993), 374-375.
531
    Ibid., Daniel, 309.
532
    This is consistent with Second Temple texts where there is more than one archangel (See Chapter Eight). It should also be noted that
the archangels of Second Temple texts are also referred to as Watchers, who are in turn equated with the divine royal sons, the
Myhl)h-ynb who govern the nations in the pre-exilic biblical worldview.
533
    The term “viceroys” is de Boer’s (“The Counsellor,” 49).
534
    Note again the correlation between Dan 8:25’s )bch-r# and Josh 5:14’s hwhy-)bc-r#o. The description of Daniel hearkens back
to the divine vice-regent figure of the hwhy K)lm, not one of the divine geographic princes.
535
    Subsequent Second Temple and early rabbinic speculation as to the identity of the "Son of Man" included the idea that this figure was
         The heavenly bureaucracy in the book of Daniel is consistent with the pre-exilic divine council and a

religion of monolatry, but not with an imploded council and exclusivistic monotheism. It is difficult, if not

impossible, to do justice to the use of the Baal Cycle and the hierarchical terminology for divine beings in

Daniel 7 and simultaneously argue that the divine council of earlier Israelite religion has "collapsed." In

keeping with the emphases of preceding chapters, predominant attention in this chapter will be paid to divine

plurality and vice regency motifs as these lines of argument are developed in more detail. Toward that end,

discussion will concentrate on the divine council scene of Daniel 7 and the references to heavenly beings

(“princes”) in Daniel 8-10.


6.2 The Divine Council Meeting in Daniel 7

         Dan 7:1-14 contains a vision of four creatures described by the prophet Daniel in five distinct sections,

each introduced by a formulaic expression containing the Aramaic phrase tywh hzx ("I watched") or

wr)w ("and behold"), often in tandem.536 Dan 7:15-18 then supplies the interpretation, followed in turn by an

elaboration (7:19-28) regarding the fourth beast. Although the entire chapter has relevance for the divine

council context and overlaps with other passages in the Hebrew Bible that speak to the divine council, verses 9-

14 are the focus here:

                                   rW"xi gl;t.Ki HveWbl. btiy> !ymiAy qyTi[;w> wymir. !w"s'r.k' yDi d[; tywEh] hzEx' 9
                                     `qliD' rWn yhiALGIl.G: rWn-yDi !ybiybiv. HyEs.r.K' aqen> rm;[]K; Hveare r[;f.W
                                      HNEWvM.v;y> !ypil.a; ~yIp;l.a; @l,a, yhiAmd'q\-!mi qpen"w> dgEn" rWn-yDi rh;n> 10
                                              `WxytiP. !yrip.siw> btiy> an"yDi !WmWqy> yhiAmd'q' !b'b.ri !w"B.r; ABriw>
                             tywEh] hzEx' hl'L/m;m. an"r.q; yDi at'b'r.b.r; aY"L;mi lq'-!mi !yId;aBe tywEh] hzEx' 11
                                                 `aV'a, td;qeyli tb;yhiywI Hm;v.GI db;Whw> at'w>yxe tl;yjiq. yDi d[;
                           `!D'[iw> !m;z>-d[; !Ahl. tb;yhiy> !yYIx;b. hk'r.a;w> !Ahn>j'l.v' wyDi[.h, at'w"yxe ra'v.W 12
                                   hw"h] htea' vn"a/ rb;K. aY"m;v. ynEn"[]-~[i Wra]w: ay"l.yle ywEz>x,B. tywEh] hzEx' 13
                                          !j'l.v' byhiy> Hlew> 14 `yhiWbr.q.h; yhiAmd'q.W hj'm. aY"m;Ay qyTi[;-d[;w>
                                     !j'l.v' HnEj'l.v' !Wxl.p.yI Hle aY"n:V'liw> aY"m;au aY"m;m.[; lkow> Wkl.m;W rq'ywI
                                                              @`lB;x;t.ti al'-yDi HteWkl.m;W hDe[.y< al'-yDi ~l;['

Michael, but many Jewish teachers and writers found this explanation dissatisfying since Michael and the "Prince of the princes" are
treated as separate characters in Daniel.
536
    John J. Collins, Daniel, 277.
         9 As I looked on, thrones were set in place, and the Ancient of Days took His seat. His garment was like
         white snow, and the hair of His head was like lamb's wool. His throne was tongues of flame; its wheels
         were blazing fire. 10 A river of fire streamed forth before Him; thousands upon thousands served Him;
         myriads upon myriads attended Him; the court sat and the books were opened. 11 I looked on. Then,
         because of the arrogant words that the horn spoke, the beast was killed as I looked on; its body was
         destroyed and it was consigned to the flames. 12 The dominion of the other beasts was taken away, but
         an extension of life was given to them for a time and season. 13 As I looked on, in the night vision, one
         like a son of man came with the clouds of heaven; he reached the Ancient of Days and was presented to
         Him. 14 Dominion, glory, and kingship were given to him; all peoples and nations of every language
         must serve him. His dominion is an everlasting dominion that shall not pass away, and his kingship,
         one that shall not be destroyed.

         The divine council setting of Daniel is not disputed among scholars, and is readily noted by J. Collins as

belonging to "the tradition of biblical throne visions," and the "[widespread] idea of a heavenly court and

council of divine beings."537 A plurality of thrones (       !w"s'r.k') is clearly described in the vision. Contrary to the
view that the plurality is incidental since only one individual is seated for judgment,538 or the rabbinical

interpretation that the plurality here denoted one throne for God and another for David,539 the text plainly states

that the council as a whole was collectively seated (       btiy> an"yDi) along with the Ancient of Days.
         The setting of this meeting of the divine council is apparently in heaven, but these thrones are not

located in clouds. This observation is important since it rules out the idea that the plurality refers to a second

throne upon which the Son of Man (        vn"a/ rb;K.), who receives everlasting dominion, was seated. This figure
comes with the clouds later in the scene, after the court has already been seated. Although the later tradition that

has the Son of Man occupying an elevated throne in heaven is logical, having been drawn on the basis of this

figure's reception of everlasting rule, the text never states that this individual was seated. Rather, this figure is

brought before the Ancient of Days (       yhiWbr.q.h; yhiAmd'q.W), apparently by some of the "thousand thousands"
who were "serving" the enthroned sovereign, who in turn bestowed everlasting dominion upon the Son of Man.

This division of status among these heavenly beings is subtle, but significant. Just as in Ugaritic and earlier

537
    Ibid., 300, 303. Among other scholars of Israelite religion and commentators on Daniel who recognize Daniel 7 as a divine council
scene (patterned in part on the Ugaritic council scene in KTU 1.2) are Mullen (Divine Council, 120-128), Christopher Rowland, "The
Visions of God in Apocalyptic Literature," JSJ 10 (1979): 137-154; Matthew Black, "The Throne-Theophany Prophetic Commission and
the 'Son of Man,'" in Jews, Greeks, and Christians: Essays in Honor of W. D. Davies (ed. Robert Hamerton-Kelly and Robin Scroggs;
Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1976), 57-73; J. Emerton, "The Origin of the Son of Man Imagery," JTS 9:2 (October, 1958): 227-242; P. Mosca,
"Ugarit and Daniel 7: A Missing Link," Bib 67 (1986): 496-517.
538
    James A. Montgomery, A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Book of Daniel (ICC; Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 1927), 296.
canonical Hebrew literature, there appears a hierarchy of an upper tier of beings (those seated in council), a

servant class of heavenly beings, and a vice-regent who is given authority over the earth and, by extension, over

all the sons of God who were thought to rule the earth in light of Ps 82:1,6 and Deut 4:19-20; 32:8-9.

           In Dan 7:9 the Ancient of Days occupies a throne ablaze with fire (            rWn-yDi !ybiybiv. HyEs.r.K'), a
"standard element in biblical theophanies."540 The "wheels" on the fiery throne were also blazing with fire

(   qliD' rWn yhiALGIl.G:). The imagery here matches the description of Ezekiel's vision of the divine fiery chariot
(Ezek 1:15-21; 10:2), so it is no surprise that the vast majority of scholars recognize that Daniel 7 draws its

throne chariot motifs from Ezekiel's vision.541

           That the visions of Ezekiel and Daniel both contain the same motifs is noteworthy, for they speak not

only to an appearance of Yahweh, but of the divine council. In his study on fire in Canaanite and Israelite

mythology, P. Miller notes that in the divine council scene that precedes the conflict of Baal with Yamm, the

divine messengers of Yamm are fiery beings ()is\tm).542 The association of fiery beings in a council scene is

paralleled by Ezek 1:5, where the writer notes that four living creatures came out of the fire. Miller goes on to

draw attention to the Israelite conception of Yahweh's divine warriors as bearing flaming swords in Eden to

block the way back into the cosmic meeting place of the council. Likewise in Psalm 104, a psalm containing

familiar divine council imagery, Yahweh's servants (           wyt'r>v'm. - in parallel to wyk'a'l.m;) are referred to as "fiery

flames (   jhe(l{ vae).   543




           Another striking overlap between Ezekiel 1 and Daniel 7 concerns the seated figures. In Ezekiel the

throne chariot is associated with both El (      yD;v;-lae ; 1:24; cf. 10:5) and Yahweh (1:28; 10:4), evincing the
expected Yahweh-El fusion by the time of the exile. The author of Daniel 7, following Ezekiel, assumed the

same Yahweh-El correlation, thereby identifying Yahweh-El as the Ancient of Days. The Son of Man in the


539
    This was the judgment of Rabbi Akiba (b. H[ag. 14a; b. Sanh. 38b; cited in Collins, Daniel, 301, note 210).
540
    John J. Collins, Daniel, 302. See also Patrick D. Miller, "Fire in the Mythology of Canaan and Israel," CBQ 27 (1965): 257-258.
541
    John J. Collins, Daniel, 302. See also David Halperin, The Faces of the Chariot: Early Jewish Responses to Ezekiel's Vision (TSAJ
16; Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 1988), 77ff.
542
    P. Miller, "Fire in the Mythology," 258.
543
    Ibid., 260.
council scene is distinct from Yahweh-El, but is also associated with the Baal motif of the fiery chariot in the

heavens.

         The overlap with Ugaritic fire mythology and the chariot throne raises the question of the background of

Daniel 7. This vision has long been considered to have originated outside the Hebrew Bible, and the debate

over its religio-historical background has produced a plethora of positions, most of which are summarized

succinctly by J. Collins.544 This writer concurs with Collins' carefully argued rejections of an Iranian or

Babylonian background for the visions in favor of a Canaanite provenance, specifically that of the Ugaritic Baal

Cycle.545 This is no idiosyncratic conclusion, for scholars prior to Collins' work had reached the same verdict.546

Although a few scholars still oppose a Canaanite mythological background,547 most would agree with Collins'

comments that "[n]o other material now extant provides as good an explanation of the configuration of imagery

in Daniel's dream,"548 and "[t]he background of this scene lies in ancient traditions about the council of )El,

where the gods sit on their 'princely thrones.'"549

         One of the major obstacles that has impeded consensus on this identification (or any identification of a

foreign background) is the tendency among scholars to either expect or insist upon complete congruence

between the presumed background material and the pious Judaism of Daniel's author. In this regard, Collins'

comments are fitting:

         Appropriation of foreign motifs and thought patterns requires that some aspect of the presumed
         background be congenial to the author but does not require identity of outlook. . . . The use of
         imagery associated with Marduk or Ba(al may serve to make the claim that Yahweh, not the
         pagan deities, is the true deliverer. Whether pagan myths constitute the background to Daniel 7
         must be judged by the light they throw on the text, not prejudged by modern assumptions about
         what is permissible for an ancient Jew. . . . No one suggests that the author of Daniel knew the
         Ugaritic texts directly or tried to reproduce the Ba(al cycle fully. . . . When a Canaanite myth is
         used in the Hebrew Bible, it is inevitably torn from its original context and given a new meaning.



544
    John J. Collins, Daniel, 280-294. H. Kvanvig enumerated nearly two dozen proposed answers in his study of the Son of Man
tradition. See Helge S. Kvanvig, Roots of Apocalyptic: The Mesopotamian Background of the Enoch Figure and the Son of Man
(Neukirchen-Vluyn: Neukirchener Verlag, 1988).
545
    Ibid., 286-291.
546
    Emerton, "The Origin of the Son of Man Imagery," 228; A. Bentzen, Daniel (HAT 19; 2d ed.; Tübingen: J. C. Mohr, 1952); idem,
King and Messiah (Oxford: Blackwell, 1952)
547
    One of the more insistent objectors to the Ugaritic provenance is Arthur J. Ferch, The Son of Man in Daniel 7 (AUSDDS 6; Berrien
Springs, Michigan: Andrews University Press, 1979); idem, "Daniel 7 and Ugarit: A Reconsideration," JBL 99 (1980): 80-81. For
Collins' response to Ferch, see John J. Collins, "Apocalyptic Genre and Mythic Allusions in Daniel," JSOT 21 (1981): 83-100.
548
    John J. Collins, Daniel, 291.
549
    Ibid., 301 (Collins cites KTU 1.2.I:19-27). See also Cross, Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic, 98-99.
           . . . Daniel 7 is not simply a reproduction of an older source, Canaanite or other. It is a new
           composition, which is not restricted to a single source for its imagery.550

           These assertions are significant in the context of this study. One must not assume that a foreign motif

such as the divine council would be inappropriate for a pious Second Temple Jew. The assumption that the

belief in a feature of Canaanite religion—a divine council—is incompatible with exilic or post-exilic Jewish

religion presumes both an inability on the part of biblical authors and scribes of those periods to adapt the

concept in their own way.

           The identification of a specifically Ugaritic provenance and a divine council milieu for Daniel 7 is based

on a number of considerations. For example, Ugaritic El is referred to as )ab s\nm, which is translated by many

scholars as "father of years" and considered a parallel to the meaning of "Ancient of Days."551 This translation

of the Ugaritic phrase has been disputed on the basis that the Ugaritic plural "years" is spelled s\nt, not s\nm.

Defenders of the translation “father of years” counter in a threefold manner: (1) other nouns have variant plural

spellings; (2) no other translation has proven coherent or free from similar problems; and (3) El is often

portrayed at Ugarit as an aged god with a gray beard.552 One could also add that, although the phrase in Daniel

(   !ymiAy qyTi[;) has no precise parallel elsewhere in the Hebrew Bible, there are conceptual equivalents such as

d[;ybia] ("eternal father"; Isa 9:5) and ~l'A[ %l,m, ("everlasting king"; Ps 24: 7,9). Isa 40:28’s

#r,a'h' tAcq. areAB hw"hy> ~l'A[ yhel{a/ ("the eternal God, the Lord, creator of the ends of the earth") is

strikingly similar to the El epithet     #r,a'w" ~yIm;v' hnEqo !Ayl.[, lae ("El Elyon, creator of heaven and earth")
in Gen 14:19, 22.

           The argument for an Ugaritic provenance in Daniel 7 is dramatically strengthened by congruencies with

the Baal Cycle. Shortly after the discovery of the Ugaritic texts, it was suggested that the fourth beast of

Daniel's vision should be interpreted against the backdrop of the Ugaritic chaos monster Lo,ta4n or Liwyata4n /




550
    Ibid., 282, 286, 289.
551
    Ibid., 290. See also Mullen, Divine Council, 22-23; John Day, God's Conflict with the Dragon and the Sea, 161.
552
    John J. Collins, Daniel, 290, 301.
L|4ta4nu ,553 described in the Baal cycle as bt`n brh[ ("the twisting serpent"), bt`n (qtln ("the coiled serpent"), and

s\lyt d.s\b(t. r)as\m ("S0ilyat of the seven heads").554 Although these suggestions are not exact matches to the

terminology used in Daniel 7, the pervasiveness of the Ugaritic Leviathan tradition in the Hebrew Bible has led

numerous scholars to conclude that it is in that light (correlated by other evidences for Ugaritic provenance) that

Daniel 7 should be understood.555 The divine council motif in Daniel 7 is also bolstered by the correlation with

the divine council context of Ps 89:9-11, where Yahweh conquers the sea and its monster Rahab.

         The battle of Baal and Yamm in KTU 1. 2.i and 1.2.iv probably offers the strongest set of conjunctions

with Daniel 7. The specific context of this struggle is a banquet at El's abode, the traditional meeting place of El

and his council. El is present at the feast with various members of his retinue, most significantly, Baal, who is

depicted as standing beside El. Yamm sends messengers to El demanding that Baal be surrendered. El

expresses a willingness to do so, a move that angers Baal. Soon thereafter, the story describes Yamm and Baal

in combat with each other. When Baal appears to be losing the battle, the craftsman-god Kot`ar-wa-

H;asis fashions two clubs with which Baal is able to subdue and kill Yamm.

         As M. Smith notes, the major focal point of the Baal cycle is "a competition among the gods for

kingship."556 In this myth, the defeat of Yamm ("sea") leads to Baal's declaration as king of the gods at the

approval of El. Early studies of divine kingship among the gods at Ugarit typically saw this struggle as the

deposition of El as the high god.557 More recent scholarship, however, has refuted this view in favor of the

bestowal of kingship upon Baal (including the title, "king of the gods") under the continuing authority of El.558

Baal continues to appear in willing subordination to El as his vice-regent in Ugaritic texts outside the Baal

Cycle, such as KTU 1.108: 2b-3a:559

                   )il yt`b b(t`trt              El sits enthroned with (At`tart,
                   )il tpt bhd r(y               El sits as judge with Haddu (Baal) his shepherd.

553
    The two forms derive from two different noun stems (lawt and lawyat). C. Uehlinger, "Leviathan," DDD, 511-515.
554
    KTU 1.5.i:2; KTU 1.5.i:1-3; KTU 1.3.iii:38 respectively. Compare Job 26:13 (x;yriB' vx'n") and Isa 27:1 (!AtL'q;[] vx'n" !t'y"w>li).
555
    John J. Collins, Daniel, 288-289.
556
    Mark S. Smith, "Interpreting the Ba(al Cycle," UF 18 (1986): 323.
557
    See Pope, El in the Ugaritic Texts; Oldenburg, The Conflict Between El and Baal.
558
    See C. L'Heureux, Rank Among the Canaanite Gods: El, Ba(al, and the Repha)im, 3-28; Mullen, The Divine Council, 22-45; Gibson,
"The Theology of the Ugaritic Baal Cycle," 202-219 (esp. 207ff.).
559
    L'Heureux, Rank Among the Canaanite Gods, 43. See also A. J. Ferrara and Simon B. Parker, "Seating Arrangements at Divine
Banquets," UF 4 (1972): 37-39. As Collins (Daniel, 287) adds, "There are also some possible references to El's appointment of Ba(al as
king in fragmentary texts."
           Likewise in Daniel 7, the defeat of the beasts which rise from the great sea (              aB'r; aM'y:l.) results in
kingship being granted to the Son of Man by El, the Ancient of Days. Though the human-like figure's dominion

is everlasting, it is at the behest of the high God. The Son of Man is never considered to have usurped the

authority of the Ancient of Days, either in Daniel or in later Second Temple literature.

         Several explicit parallels between the Baal Cycle's account of Baal's struggle against Yamm and Dan

7:9-14 have led to the widespread endorsement of an Ugaritic provenance.560 KTU 1.2.IV:7-9 reads:561

                 lrgmt lk lzbl b(l                  Indeed I say to you, O Prince Baal
                 tnt lrkb (rpt                      I repeat, O Charioteer/Rider of the Clouds;
                 ht )ibk b(lm                       Now your enemy, O Baal
                 ht )ibk tmhs[                      Now your enemy you will smite,
                 ht ts[mt s[rtk                     Now you must smite your foe.
                 tqh[ mlk (lmk                      You must take your everlasting kingdom,
                 drkt dt drdrk                      Your eternal dominion.

         Baal’s stock epithet, "Rider of the Clouds,"562 occurs in Dan 7:13:

hj'm. aY"m;Ay qyTi[;-d[;w> hw"h] htea' vn"a/ rb;K. aY"m;v. ynEn"[]-~[i (“one like a Son of Man was coming
upon the clouds of heaven, and reached the Ancient of Days”). In his commentary on the book of Daniel,

Montgomery argued that the choice of the preposition M( in the verse denoted a theological adjustment on the

part of the author, who allegedly would not wish to convey the impression that the scene contains a second

deity.563 He has been followed in this argument by Hartman and DiLella in their commentary.564 This presumed

distinction has been shown to be imaginary. The inquiry of R.B.Y. Scott into the issue has demonstrated that

the prepositions M( and b are interchangeable and can mean "on" or "in," appealing to Dan 2:43 and 7:2 as

examples.565 J. Collins follows Scott, noting that "there is no basis for the distinction," since the act of coming


560
    John J. Collins, Daniel, 290.
561
    Collins cites this portion, but the translation is adapted from Wyatt (Religious Texts, 65). The speaker is Kot`ar-wa-H;assis. Wyatt
prefers the translation “charioteer” noting, “the chariot itself would be the clouds,” but any distinction seems negligible.
562
    Wyatt, "The Titles of the Ugaritic Storm-God," 417-419.
563
                                                                      /
    Montgomery, Commentary on Daniel, 303. Theodotion reads meta, while LXX has e0pi/. The LXX reading, “he came as an Ancient
of Days,” removes any hint of a second divine being. J. Lust argues that the Son of Man was already identified with the Ancient of Days
in the Vorlage, but the reading is “probably to be explained as a mechanical error (reading w9j for e9wj, followed by grammatical
hypercorrection) . . . [n]o confidence can be placed in the theological rationale when a simple mechanical explanation is possible” (J.
Lust, “Daniel 7,13 and the Septuagint,” ETL 54 [1978]: 62-69; John J. Collins, Daniel, 311, 8).
564
    Louis F. Hartman and Alexander A. DiLella, The Book of Daniel (AB 23; Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1978), 206.
565
    R. B.Y. Scott, "Behold He Cometh with Clouds," NTS 5 (1959): 127-132.
upon or in the clouds, or with an "entourage of clouds" denoted divine status in ancient Israel and Canaan.566 As

J. Emerton noted in his influential article on the subject, "The act of coming with the clouds suggests a

theophany of Yahweh himself. If Daniel vii.13 does not refer to a divine being, then it is the only exception out

of about seventy passages in the Old Testament."567 The passages below bear this out, for all references to the

one "riding" (   bkero) upon clouds or through the heavens in the Hebrew Bible speak of the God of Israel.                      568




           Ps 68:5 (Hebrew) exhorts the reader to "Extol the Rider upon the clouds by his name, Yah"

(   Amv. Hy"B. tAbr'[]B' bkerol' WLso) and to "(Sing praises) To Him who rides on the ancient high heavens"

(   ~d,q,-ymev. ymev.Bi bkerol' [Wryvi]). In this passage Yahweh's titles are tAbr'[]B' bkero(l) and

~d,q,-ymev. ymev.Bi bkerol'. Hebrew twbr( in the phrase tAbr'[]B' bkerol means "wilderness" or "desert,"
which would be an appropriate translation given the context, but the word is considered by scholars as evincing

a linguistic b/p interchange of the Ugaritic phrase rkb (rpt ("Rider of the Clouds"), an epithet of Baal.569 Later

rabbis understood an interchange here as well.570

           The argument for a b/p interchange is strengthened by the reference to Yahweh as

~d,q,-ymev. ymev.Bi bkerol' and by explicit references to Yahweh in other texts as the "Cloud Rider" using
heavenly terminology instead of twbr(. Isa 19:1 reads: "The oracle against Egypt: Behold, the LORD

(   hwhy) rides upon a swift cloud (lq; b['-l[;)." Yahweh "makes the clouds his chariot”

566
    John J. Collins, Daniel, 311, 290.
567
    J. Emerton, "The Origin of the Son of Man Imagery," 231-232.
568
    Some would argue that Elijah's transportation in 2 Kgs 2:11 would be an example of a human being (and hence not a divine being)
riding upon the clouds. The phraseology is reminiscent, but there is clearly no divine epithet in the passage. The work of Galling is
important here, for his study demonstrates that ro4ke4b denotes a charioteer, not merely a passenger (K. Galling, "Der Ehrenname Elisas
und die Entruckung Elias," ZTK 53 [1956]: 129-148). Other studies have argued forcefully that the preposition b; in the context of the
heavenly chariot "shows that God is the driver of the nubilous vehicle" (W. Herrmann, "Rider Upon the Clouds," DDD, 703-705, citing
the work of S.E. Loewenstamm, "Grenzgebiete ugaritischer Sprach- und Stilvergleichung," UF 3 [1971]: 93-100). Hab 3:8 would affirm
such an analysis, where bK;r.ti is used of both horses and chariots in parallel. Additionally, the context of 2 Kgs 2:11 informs us that
Elijah is not to be considered divine, and is not associated with divine activity or rule, unlike the Son of Man figure in Daniel 7, who is
given everlasting dominion over the earth.
569
    See S. Moscati, An Introduction to the Comparative Grammar of the Semitic Languages (2d ed.; Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1980), 25-
26.
570
    In the Talmud twbr( is mentioned as one of the heavens. H[ag. 12b-13a reads: “(Arabot is that in which there are Right and
Judgment and Righteousness . . . the souls of the righteous and the spirits and the souls which are yet to be born . . . And from where do
we derive that it is called heaven? From the word ‘riding’ which occurs in two passages. Here it is written: ‘Extol him that rides upon
(   AbWkr. ~ybi['-~F'h;) and "walks on the wings of the wind" (x;Wr-ypen>K;-l[; %Leh;m.h;) in Ps 104:1-3.

Finally, in Deut 33:26, we read, "O Jeshurun, there is none like God (             la), who rides the heavens

(   ~yIm;v' bkero) to help you; (who rides) the clouds (~yqix'v.) in His majesty."
           Some scholars have disputed the b/p interchange.571 In light of the contextual support in Psalm 68 for a

meaning of "desert" for twbr( and the equally evident motif elsewhere that Yahweh was considered a deity

who drove a heavenly throne chariot, scholars have concluded that the title               tAbr'[]B' bkero(l) in Ps 68:5 is in
fact a borrowing from Ugaritic Baal language, but that the epithet has been adapted to Yahweh's march from the

South (Sinai) through the desert described in Hab 3:3; Judg 5:4-5; Deut 33: 23.572 The effect would be a subtle

distinguishing of Yahweh from Baal while simultaneously appropriating one of Baal's titles.

           It is important to note that whereas Psalm 68 referenced Yahweh as the heavenly charioteer, Deut 33:26

utilizes the familiar Baal imagery to describe El. As was briefly noted above, the late canonical book of Ezekiel

maintained this fusion (1:24, 28; cf. 10:4-5). Given that all scholars would assign a later date of composition to

Daniel than Psalm 68, Deuteronomy 33, and Ezekiel 1, it can only be coherently argued that by the time of the

book of Daniel, the El-Yahweh connection was assumed.

           This fusion may seem obvious, but it has been overlooked in some treatments of Daniel 7's divine

council scene and its central figures, the Ancient of Days and the Son of Man who comes to the Ancient of Days

with the mythological cloud entourage. A few modern scholars argue that Daniel 7 is hearkening back to a

formerly polytheistic division between El and Yahweh as divine Father and Son. These scholars argue that the

imagery of authoritative sovereign and co-ruler evoked by the Ancient of Days and the Son of Man scene

parallels the relationship between the El and Baal at Ugarit and has nothing to do with Yahweh. However, the

fact that both the Ancient of Days and the Son of Man are associated with heavenly Baal throne-chariot imagery

mars a strict El and Baal model for Daniel 7, and with it an El and Yahweh separation. The conspicuous


(Arabot’ (Ps 68:5). And elsewhere it is written: ‘Who rides upon the heaven as your help’ (Ps 18:12).”
571
   L. L. Grabbe, "Hebrew pa4(al / Ugaritic b(l and the Supposed b / p Interchange," UF 11 (1979): 307-314.
572
   W. Herrmann, "Rider Upon the Clouds," DDD, 703-705; Miller, The Divine Warrior in Early Israel, 41; S. Mowinckel, "Drive and /
or Ride in the Old Testament," VT 12 (1962): 278-299; E. Ullendorff, "Ugaritic Studies Within Their Semitic and Eastern Mediterranean
attribution of Baal's stock throne-chariot imagery to an El figure convincingly demonstrates an El-Yahweh

fusion of the high god in the book of Daniel, and therefore a being other than El or Yahweh played the Baal role

of vice-regent under the high god. That an El and Yahweh separation in Daniel 7 is a misguided explanation is

also undermined by Jewish speculation of two powers in heaven based on this very passage during the Second

Temple period.573

         The implications of an El-Yahweh fusion for understanding the divine status of the Son of Man in

Daniel 7 are illustrated below:

             Ugarit / Baal Cycle                                                 Daniel 7
      (A) El, the aged high God, is the         (A) The Ancient of Days, is the ultimate sovereign
      ultimate sovereign in the                 in council, and thus plays the El role in the scene.
      council.
                                                However, he is also seated on the fiery, wheeled
                                                throne-chariot, which is a Baal motif. The Ancient
                                                of Days therefore appropriates both El and Baal
                                                features, and represents the Yahweh-El fusion of
                                                earlier canonical literature, where this well-known
      (B) Baal defeats Yamm                     Baal motif was attributed to both Yahweh and El,
                                                even in the same passage at times, as here.
                                                (B) The Ancient of Days also fulfills a Baal role here, since he,
                                                along with the council, decide that the fourth beast from the sea
      (C) El bestows kingship upon
                                                (aM'y:) must be killed. He also plays an El role, by withdrawing
      the god Baal, the Cloud-Rider.
                                                kingship from the other three beasts.574
                                                (C) Yahweh-El, the Ancient of Days, bestows kingship upon
      (D) Baal is king of the gods and          the Son of Man who rides the clouds. Yahweh is thus not the
      El's vice-regent. His rule is             Cloud-Rider, since Yahweh was fused with the El character, the
      everlasting.                              high sovereign, the Ancient of Days.
                                                (D) The Son of Man is given everlasting dominion as a deity-
                                                level vice-regent to Yahweh-El. He is king of all the nations
                                                and so also over their gods (cf. Deut 32:8-9). He is “king of the
                                                gods” by virtue of his global dominion over the nations.


         In effect, Daniel 7 utilizes the Canaanite imagery to both reinforce the El-Yahweh fusion and draw

attention to Israelite religion's own version of the divine vice-regent pattern under Israel's high God. The

bureaucratic structure of the divine council has neither, in Smith's words, "collapsed," nor has it been obscured

or censored. On the contrary, the literary reality of Jewish speculation in Second Temple writings concerning a



Setting," BJRL 46 (1963-64): 236-249.
573
    Segal, Two Powers in Heaven, 148-149.
574
    See KTU 1.2.III:17-18 and 1.6.VI:26-29, where Athtar and Mot respectively are threatened by El with the withdrawal of their
kingship.
second tier of gods under the high God of Israel and his first-tier divine vice-regent is comprehensible precisely

because the idea of divine plurality was familiar to those writers due to the retention of such categories in

canonical texts.575

          Not unexpectedly, as Segal’s work on the two powers controversy details, there were Jewish exegetes

who resisted the implication of two divine beings in Daniel 7.576 One common answer to the language of Daniel

7 was that Yahweh-El's vice-regent was the Davidic king, a view that was taken up by the messianic

predilections of many pre-critical scholars. This interpretation might be expected in view of several passages in

the Hebrew Bible that speak to the universal rule of the Davidic king.577 The assumption of two thrones in

Psalm 110 (one for the Davidic king) would also appear to support such an answer. Even more noteworthy is

the relationship of the Baal Cycle to Psalm 89, where the flow of verses 7-19 follow the Baal Cycle in

describing the enthronement of Yahweh-El, but verses 20-38 apply Baal motifs to the Davidic throne:




575
    As Chapter Eight will detail, there was no shortage of interpretive options among Jewish writers who sought to explain this divine
vice-regency.
576
    Dan 7:9ff. was placed on a list of forbidden passages by the rabbis (i.e., one had to have the assistance of one’s rabbi to read them).
See Segal, Two Powers in Heaven, 148-149.
577
    Cf. 2 Sam 7:8-16; 23:1-7; Isa 9:6-7; Psalm 110.
                    The Baal Cycle                                             Psalm 89
    •       El and his council are confronted with     •        Celebration of Yahweh's incomparability in the
      the revolt of Yamm.                                divine assembly and its members (7-9).
    •       Yamm is defeated by Baal.                  •        Yahweh's superior status is based on his
                                                         control over the swelling of the sea (~Y"h; tWagE) and
                                                         his primeval victory over Rahab (10-11) and other
    •         Baal moves to S[aphon and is               enemies.
        enthroned.                                     •        The psalm moves to the establishment of the
                                                         world (12-14), an allusion to Zaphon (s[aphon, v. 13), a
                                                         description of the divine throne (v. 15), and the
                                                         reaction of Yahweh's people, Israel (16-18).
    •         Baal is proclaimed king.                 •        Verse 19 is a triumphant shout of Yahweh's
                                                         kingship: " For the Lord is our shield, and the Holy
                                                         One of Israel our king."
                                                       ______________________________________________
                                                       •        In 89:26 King Yahweh promises to "set the
                                                         hand" of the Davidic king "upon the sea (My)” and
                                                         "upon the rivers (twrhn)."
                                                       •        The Davidic king is God's son (89:28-29), his
                                                         rwkb, whom he declares to be Nwyl( over the kings of
                                                         the earth forever (89:30, 38a).

                                                       Baal imagery transferred to David; David’s throne
                                                       plays the role of Baal, since he:

                                                       •       gains victory over Yamm / Nahar;
                                                       •       is son to Yahweh as Baal is to El; and
                                                       •       appropriates Baal’s title of Nwyl(.

         There seems little doubt that Psalm 89 follows the flow of the Baal Cycle, and that the Davidic king’s

eternal rule is articulated in the language of the eternal nature of Baal’s rule. But does Psalm 89 utilize the Baal

Cycle in the same way and for the same reason as Daniel 7? Asked another way, while the author of Psalm 89

uses the Baal Cycle’s language of divine vice regency when speaking of the Davidic dynasty, does the author of

Daniel 7 have the Davidic king in mind when he describes the Son of Man?

         Such a perspective of Daniel 7 would require that the Davidic king be considered a god, an idea usually

connected to the concept of the king as Yahweh’s son. Scholars have disagreed as to whether this terminology

speaks of an adoption of the king as God's son or whether the king was to be regarded literally as a god on earth

(deus incarnatus) from birth (hieros gamos). Those who favor the incarnational view point to texts in the

Hebrew Bible that confirm the Davidic king as God's son (Ps 2:7; 110:3) and which regarded him as an
Myhl) under Yahweh (Ps 45:7).578 The famous passage in Isaiah 9 also comes to mind, where the titles

rwbg l) and d(yb) occur with respect to the child who was most likely Hezekiah. John Day points out that

at Ugarit the king was apparently considered a god and the son of the god El. For example, each of the names of

the dead kings in the Ugaritic king list is preceded by the word )il.579 The king was also considered a god prior

to death. In the Keret Epic, when King Keret is ill, his son says, "Is then Keret the son of El, the offspring of

Lt[pn and the Holy One? . . . Shall you then die, father, as men? . . . How can it be said that Keret is the son of El,

the offspring of Lt[pn and the Holy One? Shall gods die?"580

          This evidence notwithstanding, Psalm 89 should be viewed against the Baal Cycle, not the Keret Epic,

for the biblical author follows the former, not the latter. A Baal Cycle backdrop would argue for sonship in

adoptive terms. It is conceivable that Baal could be understood in such terms, recalling the patrimonial

approach to the Baal Cycle. Baal becomes El's son (i.e., the crown prince) after his defeat of Yamm and in

conjunction with the reception of kingship. At the point of Baal’s victory, he is called "his [El's] son" (bnh) and

El is now "my [Baal's] father" ()aby). Nevertheless, that Baal is indeed a god is unquestioned. The point here is

that the biblical authors of Psalm 89 and Daniel 7 are utilizing the Baal Cycle for divergent reasons to make

divergent points.

          Aside from these literary allusions, there is evidence in the Hebrew Bible against an incarnational

understanding of the king’s divinity. Other human beings besides the Davidic king were referred to as divine

sons, but were not thought of as gods.581 Moreover, the divine status of the Davidic king in the Hebrew Bible

appears to have been bestowed at a definite point in time. The king was "taken" from the sheep (2 Sam 7:8) and

appointed   dygn at that time.     582
                                         The wording of Ps 2:7 suggests the same:           ^yTid.liy> ~AYh; ynIa] hT'a; ynIB..

578
   The statement above takes Myhl) as the vocative. Some scholars argue against this by contending that an original prefixed k; has
been omitted from the text on the grounds of euphony, or translate the verse "Your throne is God's forever and ever." The vocative is
more natural here, however, as many scholars have recognized. The vocative is also conveyed by LXX:
o9 qro/noj sou o9 qeo/j ei0j to\n ai0w=na tou= ai0w=noj.
579
    John Day, "The Canaanite Inheritance of the Israelite Monarchy," in King and Messiah in Israel and the Ancient Near East:
Proceedings of the Oxford Old Testament Seminar (ed. John Day; JSOTSup 270; Sheffield: Sheffield University Press, 2000), 72-90
(esp. 82). See KTU 1.113.
580
    KTU 1.16.i.10-25.
581
    See Exod 4:23 and Hos 1:10, where the people are referred to in such terms.
582
    The term dygn is taken by scholars as referring to the crown prince. See the lengthy treatment of this issue in Tryggve N.D. Mettinger,
King and Messiah: The Civil and Sacral Legitimation of the Israelite Kings (ConBOT 8; Lund: C.W.K. Gleerup, 1976), 151-184, 254-
As Mettinger states, in Psalm 89 the king remains "manifestly a human being,"583 since he was chosen from

among the people (89:20).

          The above discussion points to the conceptual difficulties of arguing that the Son of Man in Daniel 7,

who bears an epithet of Yahweh, is the earthly Davidic king.584 The chief obstacle to this position, though, is

the book of Daniel itself. The Davidic line is never mentioned in Daniel 7, and is entirely absent from the book

of Daniel as a whole.585 The imagery of Daniel 7 is never linked to a restored Davidic dynasty, and a restoration

of the dynastic family of David is never described or alluded to. One might also argue that the outlook of the

post-exilic redactor of Psalm 89 correlates to the author of Daniel 7, since the redactor explicitly noted the

absence of the Davidic line (89:45; see below). In the absence of God’s earthly vice-regent, a heavenly vice-

regent would continue the promise of global sovereignty over the nations. Second Temple period authors

recognized the heavenly nature of Daniel 7’s Son of Man, since they embraced the notion of two powers in

heaven, not just the bestowal of sovereignty to an earthly ruler, however divine.586



6.3 Divine Plurality, the “Princes” of Daniel, and Yahweh’s Vice-Regent

          Before offering my own suggestion as to a non-Davidic vice-regent Son of Man and his relationship to

Psalm 89, some comments are necessary relative to post-critical scholarship’s two most common identifications

of the Son of Man: corporate Israel and an angel, usually the archangel Michael.587




293.
583
    Mettinger, King and Messiah, 263.
584
    Many interpreters prior to the advent of critical scholarship merged Daniel 7 and Psalm 89 in defense of a messianic identity for the
Son of Man and thus a divine-human messiah. This view persisted among Jews into the rabbinic era. Collins notes several “undisputed
examples” of this: b. Sanh. 98a; Num Rab. 13:14; )Aggadat Be#r)e4s\|=t 14:3; 23:1 (John J. Collins, Daniel, 307, note 264). Akiba’s notion
that the (presumed) two thrones in Daniel 7 were for God and King David also suggest the messianic view (see W. T. Horbury, “The
Messianic Associations of ‘The Son of Man,’” JTS 36 [1985]: 46). With respect to the “exalted human” category, some scholars have
sought to identify Judas Maccabee with the figure of Daniel 7 on the grounds that Judas was the ruler who followed the fourth beast,
identified as Antiochus IV Epiphanes. The comment in Dan 11:34, that the mas8`k|,l|,m received "little help" when persecuted is usually
taken as an off-handed comment against the Maccabees, and so this interpretation has not gained a following (John J. Collins, Daniel,
309). It is also unclear how Judas could be conceived of as being the one to whom everlasting dominion over the nations is given.
585
    John J. Collins, Daniel, 309.
586
    As Alan Segal documents in Two Powers in Heaven, the view that the passage evinces two divine beings or manifestations of God
was condemned only after the rise of Christianity. As examples, he references Mekilta of R. Simeon bar Yohai, Bas]alah 15; and
Mekilta of R. Is]mael, Bah[odes] 5, S0irta 4 (cf. Two Powers in Heaven, 33-59). Chapter Eight of this study will demonstrate that this view
was present and permissible in Judaism prior to that time. My own view is similar, that the “Son of Man” is an unidentified
Myhl) member of the divine council, and therefore above the rank of angel.
587
    John J. Collins, Daniel, 308-310.
         The weakness of the corporate view is that it requires equating the Son of Man with the

!ynIAyl.[, yveyDiq; (7:18) and the !ynIAyl.[, yveyDiq; ~[;(l) (7:27). The two phrases are not synonymous and, as
Collins observes, two thousand years of exegesis has noted that fact repeatedly.588 Nevertheless, there is some

sort of relationship between the Son of Man and both groups. This study departs from a “corporate only”

interpretation of the scholarly mainstream, that the Son of Man is a symbol of Israel.589 The view taken by this

study dovetails a corporate explanation with the second predominant view, that the Son of Man is an unnamed

heavenly figure. The result is an interpretive alternative that utilizes well-established divine council imagery

and the pre-exilic worldview of Deut 32:8-9. Before offering this suggestion, some discussion of the

identification of the Son of Man as an angel is necessary.

         The idea that the Son of Man is an angel or divine being is typically articulated in terms of Michael,

who is called the prince of Israel (10:21; 12:1), though Z. Zevit has tried to argue for Gabriel as the Son of

Man.590 The weakness of Zevit's view is that it requires the phrase "the man Gabriel whom I had seen in the

vision at first" (9:21) to refer to the Son of Man in Dan 7:13 rather than the angelic interpreter of 7:16. The

latter is more coherent since Gabriel serves as an interpreter in 8:15 and 9:21. It would also seem odd that

Gabriel, a being of equal rank with Michael, Israel's prince, should inherit everlasting dominion over beings of

equal status.591 By definition "the Prince of the host" (8:11) and the "Prince of princes" (8:25) is a being who

rules over Michael and the other princes.

         As noted earlier, the title “chief prince” borne by Michael is no equivalent to "the Prince of the host"

and the "Prince of princes" since there is more than one "chief prince" according to Dan 10:13. Nevertheless,

many scholars seek to identify Michael with these titles, particularly scholars who also desire to see Michael as

the referent of the Son of Man descriptor. Aside from the fact that such a view does not fit the plurality of chief

princes noted above, there are other obstacles to the attempt to equate Michael with these titles.

         First, the descriptions of Daniel’s interaction with heavenly beings in chapters 8 and 10 do not correlate

Israel’s patron prince with the exalted prince above all the other princes. In Dan 8:13 we read of two holy ones

588
    Ibid., 309.
589
    See for example: Montgomery, Commentary on Daniel; Hartman and DiLella, The Book of Daniel; Bentzen, Daniel.
590
    Z. Zevit, "The Structure and Individual Elements of Daniel 7," ZAW 80 (1968): 394-396.
(sg., #$wdq) conversing about the vision Daniel had just witnessed. As Daniel pondered the vision and their

words, a different divine being appeared to him (8:15) described as having “the appearance of a man”

(   rb,g"-haer.m;K.). In the very next verse Daniel notes that he heard “a man’s voice from between the banks of
the Ulai (River)” calling to the divine being who had just appeared to him. The voice referred to the divine

being as Gabriel and commanded him to assist Daniel in understanding the vision. Gabriel is also mentioned by

name in Dan 9:20-21, where he is described as “the man Gabriel” (               laeyrib.G: vyaih'). In Dan 10:5-6 we then
read:

                   `zp'Wa ~t,k,B. ~yrigUx] wyn"t.m'W ~yDiB; vWbl' dx'a,-vyai hNEhiw> ar,aew" yn:y[e-ta, aF'a,w" 5
                        wyt'l{G>r.m;W wyt'[oroz>W vae ydeyPil;K. wyn"y[ew> qr'b' haer.m;K. wyn"p'W vyvir.t;k. AtY"wIg>W 6
                                                                 `!Amh' lAqK. wyr'b'D. lAqw> ll'q' tv,xon> !y[eK.
           5 Then I lifted up my eyes, and looked, and behold, a man clothed in linen, whose loins were girded
           with fine gold of Uphaz: 6 His body also was like beryl, and his face as the appearance of lightning, and
           his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms and his feet like shining brass, and the voice of his words like the
           voice of a multitude.

           Many scholars have noticed that the description given here of “a man” (              dx'a,-vyai) whom readers
know to be a heavenly being, differs markedly from the book’s prior descriptions of heavenly “men,” 592

particularly in that the description of this “superterrestrial character . . . is a combination of various passages

from the book of Ezekiel (chs. 1, 9, and 40).”593 This same divine being is later described as “one in the likeness

of the sons of men” (10:16;      ~d'a' ynEB. tWmd.Ki) and “one having the appearance of a man” (10:18;

~d'a' haer.m;K.). Daniel’s reaction to the presence of this “man” is quite different as well, and is very similar to
the reactions of individuals to theophany. His physical strength disappeared (10:8), he fell into a deep sleep

(10:9; Mdrn), and he trembled (10:11).




591
    As already noted, this is a glaring problem with identifying Michael with the Son of Man as well.
592
    Gillian Bampfylde, “The Prince of the Host in the Book of Daniel and the Dead Sea Scrolls,” JSJ 14:2 (1983): 129-134.
593
    Benedikt Otzen, “Michael and Gabriel: Angelological Problems in the Book of Daniel,” in The Scriptures and the Scrolls: Studies in
Honor of A.S. van der Woude on the Occasion of his 65th Birthday (ed. F. Garcia Martinez, A. Hilhorst, and C.J. Labuschagne; Leiden:
E. J. Brill, 1992), 115. Otzen nevertheless identifies the figure as Michael, despite his admission of the problems. He also overlooks
several of the observations in the discussion above.
          Who is this heavenly “man”? The author could easily have identified him as Gabriel but does not, and

does not have Daniel recognize him. Daniel’s reaction to him tells us he is not Gabriel, whom Daniel had been

in the company of earlier. He is not Michael either, since the mysterious figure tells Daniel that when he was

fighting the princes of Persia (10:21) only Michael “your prince” assisted him. The only clue that the reader has

encountered this figure before in any way comes in the phrase                ~d'a' haer.m;K.. In Dan 8:16, Daniel heard a
voice command Gabriel from between the banks of the Ulai River that came from a figure described with the

phrase   rb,g"-haer.m;K.. Later in 10:18 the mystery figure is likewise described as being ~d'a' haer.m;K.. An
equation of the figure of 8:15-16 and chapter 10 is made apparent in Dan 12:6, where Daniel sees the now

familiar man “clothed in linen” standing “above the waters of the stream.” The figure of 12:6 is therefore the

man whose voice Daniel had heard coming between the banks of the Ulai when he first saw Gabriel. Whoever

this figure was, he had the authority to command Gabriel, widely considered an archangel in Second Temple

literature, and had been assisted by Michael, Israel’s prince, in some cosmic battle. His superior status to

Gabriel and Michael, the fact that he does not appear to be in charge of any particular nation but is above the

geographic princes (and an opponent of Gentile nations at that), the theophanic language used to describe him,

and the frightened human reaction to his presence, especially when no such reaction came with respect to the

archangel Gabriel, have cumulatively prompted scholars to identify him as the “Prince of the host” (8:11) and

“Prince of princes” (8:25).594 Though absolute certainty of this equation is not obtainable, it makes the most

sense of the options. One thing is quite clear from these descriptions, though—this figure is neither Gabriel nor

Michael.595

          Despite these problems, J. Collins (among many others) defends the identification of the Son of Man

with Michael. However, it is quite noteworthy that Collins does not equate Michael with the titles “Prince of the

host” and “Prince of princes.” This marks a change in Collins’ position from earlier writings on this issue, and

594
   Bampfylde, “The Prince of the Host,” 130.
595
   Appeals to the Qumran War Scroll for this equation also fail, as will be noted in Chapter Seven. Put simply here, the fact that the
Prince of Light in the War Scroll (who is never named as Michael) so closely parallels the Prince of the host and Prince of princes of
Daniel means the same tests of consistency apply. The militaristic context of the role of the Prince of Light and the fact that Michael is
not the chief archangel in Second Temple literature also weighs decisively against a Michael/Prince of Light correlation (cf. Bampfylde,
“The Prince of the Host,” 130). The connection between the Prince of Light and Melchizedek, who is identified as the Myhl) of Psalm
the reasons are unclear. Collins at one time argued that “the figure of Michael must be seen as a development of

the Prince of the host of Yahweh who appears in Joshua 5,13 and of the angel of the Exodus.”596 Collins’

change of position is all the more startling since this triangulation between the           hw"hy>-ab'c.-rf;, Daniel’s Prince

of the host (   ab'C'h;-rf;), and the angel who bears the name of Yahweh in Exod 23:20-23 is precisely how many
Second Temple authors saw matters, not to mention later rabbis who dealt with the two powers controversy.597

That the hwhy K)lm of Exod 23:20-23 and the hwhy-)bc-r#o of Josh 5:13 are to be identified was made clear

in Chapter Two via the precise parallel phrasing in the description of the hwhy K)lm between Num 22:23 and

Josh 5:13 (cf. the phrase     Ady"B. hp'Wlv. ABr.x;w> in both descriptions).
           Collins divorces the Son of Man (and Michael in his view) from the Prince of princes and Prince of the

host in Daniel because he is troubled by his astute observation that these titles in Daniel do in fact point to a

deity in the top tier of the council, and the fact that these titles cannot refer to Michael, as noted above. Collins

identifies Michael and the Son of Man of Daniel 7 on the grounds of analogy (angels are elsewhere described as

having a human appearance598) and his position as prince of Israel.599 He argues that Michael is, in his words,

the "leader of the heavenly host," a phrase which he believes equates Michael with the Son of Man in Dan

7:13.600

           Significantly, by Collins’ own admission, his phrase "leader of the heavenly host,” is not referring to the

titles "Prince of the host" or "Prince of princes." 601 His phrase is merely a pragmatic designation, for it does not

appear in the text; that is, it is not a title Daniel uses. Collins apparently feels constrained to simultaneously

create this designation and yet divorce it from the titles of Dan 8:11 and 8:25 because those references are

paralleled in Dan 11:36 by phrases that clearly reference the top tier of the divine council:



82 in 11QMelchizedek is also of great importance for this issue.
596
    John J. Collins, “The Mythology of Holy War in Daniel and the Qumran War Scroll: A Point of Transition in Jewish Apocalyptic,”
VT 25 (1975): 601.
597
    See Otzen, “Michael and Gabriel,” 121 and Bampfylde, “The Prince of the Host,” 130-131.
598
    See for example Gen 18:2; Josh 5:13; Ezek 8:2; 9-10; Zech 1:8; 2:5.
599
    John J. Collins, Daniel, 309-310, 318-319.
600
    Ibid., 318.
601
    Ibid., 332-333.
                             Dan 8:11, 25                                       Dan 11:36
             8:11 - He (the little horn) was magnified        11:36 - And the king shall do as he wishes;
             even up to the Prince of the host, from          and he shall magnify himself above every
             whom the daily sacrifice was taken away,         god, and he shall speak wondrous things
             and whose sanctuary was cast down.               against the God of gods . . .

             8:25 – He (the little horn) will grow great in
             his own mind, and shall destroy many off
             guard. He will stand against the Prince of
             princes . . .

             These parallels lead Collins to argue that the titles of 8:11 and 8:25 are epithets that refer to God

himself.602 I would agree with this observation insofar as the parallels speak to the rulership of the high God,

but not God himself. Collins’ interpretive shortcoming in this regard is that he fails to consider God’s rulership

through a divine vice-regent in the divine council. Collins argues that Dan 11:36 informs us that when the little

horn opposes the "Prince of the host" and the "Prince of princes," he is actually opposing God. He defends

applying the princely nomenclature to the high God on the basis that the title "prince" is applied to an angel in

Josh 5:14.603 In Collins' interpretation, to argue for any other figure than Yahweh bearing these titles contradicts

the operating assumption about the exclusivistic monotheism of Israel during the Second Temple period—that

by the time of Daniel's composition there were no other gods in Israel's religion.

             The problems with Collins' position should be apparent. It is far from clear how the phrasing of Josh

5:14 identifies Yahweh as a prince, since Yahweh is not an angel and "prince" implies subordination to a

superior. These ideas have no biblical precedent. While I agree that Dan 8:11, 25 and 11:36 and the titles

"Prince of the host" / "Prince of princes" clearly point to a deity figure above all other princes, concluding that

this figure can only be Yahweh is unwarranted.

             In the view of this writer, the only lucid alternative is that these titles, along with Josh 5:14, refer to

Yahweh’s co-ruler, his vice-regent. It is Collins' assumption about the rejection of divine plurality in Second

Temple Judaism that has forced him into this unworkable position, that Yahweh is his own high prince. This is

not only illogical, but fails to take note of the divine council context of Daniel 7 and its description, in concert

with the Baal Cycle, of the divine vice-regent. As a deity level being with authority over all other divine beings


602
      Ibid., 333.
603
      Ibid., 375.
(the "princes"), the "Prince of the host" of Dan 8:11 and the "Prince of princes" of 8:25 should be identified as a

being of highest rank under the high God: the vice-regent. If one waives the assumption of exclusivistic

monotheism in the Second Temple period, the difficulties disappear and the context for the subsequent two

powers controversy becomes clear.

         Returning to the larger question of Daniel and the divine council, it is the Baal Cycle that provides the

operative paradigm for interpreting the heavenly bureaucracy in Daniel. As Baal was elevated to kingship with

El, effectively functioning as the high sovereign over El's sons while remaining "ontologically" inferior to El, so

the "Prince of the host" and the "Prince of princes" need not be identified with Yahweh-El. The vice-regent Son

of Man in Daniel 7 functions precisely as the Baal figure under Yahweh-El. Baal's assorted lordship titles—

namely “most high” ((ly),604 “king, sovereign”(mlk),605 “[the one] who rules over the gods” (d ymlk (l )ilm),606

“ruler” (yw),607 and "Prince Baal" (b(l zbl )608—all aptly describe the rulership of the Son of Man, who is given

everlasting dominion over the Gentile nations and the gods who rule them. Baal was king over El's sons as his

vice-ruler, yet he did not outrank El. To oppose Baal's role as king was to assault El's authority. When the little

horn vaunts himself against the "Prince of the host" / "Prince of princes," he opposes the high God who granted

the vice-regent this sovereignty.

         But questions remain. What are we to make of the dominion of the                !ynIAyl.[, yveyDiq; ~[;? If the high
prince of Daniel is not Michael, how may he be identified? If a human messiah-king is not in view, what is the

relationship between Daniel 7 and Psalm 89? My own suggested answers to these problems combine the view

that the Son of Man is the vice-regent of the divine council under Yahweh with a corporate explanation drawn

from the pre-exilic religion of Israel that faithful Israelites were “sons” of God.




604
    DULAT 1:169. KTU 1.16.III:6,8. See Wyatt, “The Titles of the Ugaritic Storm God,” 419.
605
    DULAT 2 :550. KTU 1.3.V: 32; 1.4.IV:43
606
    KTU 1.4.VIII:50. This title was also used of Yamm before he was defeated by Baal (KTU 1.1.IV.11-14).
607
    KTU 1.1.IV:10-11. Wyatt suggests that Ugaritic yw “is probably a Sanskrit loan word (yau<dyaus) occurring in various Near Eastern
contexts, including, perhaps, the DN Yahweh” (Wyatt, Religious Texts from Ugarit, 48, note 51). Wyatt’s idea regarding the divine
name derivation is supported by few (cf. J.C. de Moor, The Rise of Yahwism, 113-118). See Karel van der Toorn, “Yahweh,” DDD, 911;
idem, “Anat-Yahu, Some Other Deities, and the Jews of Elephantine,” Numen 39 (1992): 88-92.
608
    M. Dietrich and O. Loretz, "Die Ba(al-Titel b(l )ars[ und )aliy qrdm," UF 12 (1980): 391-393; W. Herrmann, "Baal Zebub," DDD,
154-156. See DULAT 2:998.
            Considering the issue of the vice-regent first, we return to the "faithful witness in the clouds" discussion

of Ps 89:37-38. This earlier discussion is now profitable for demonstrating parallels between the cloud witness

and the figure of Daniel 7, and for suggesting they are the same bureaucratic vice-regent.

            An identification of the Son of Man as a deity in the clouds is possible in view of the fact that, like

Daniel 7, Psalm 89 is a passage that concerns the divine council and follows the flow of the Baal Cycle's

establishment of everlasting dominion. In Daniel 7 Yahweh-El and his council decreed the death of the fourth

beast (or kingdom) and the removal of the dominions of the other three beasts so as to elevate the Cloud Rider to

vice-regent status. In Psalm 89, at least prior to 89:39, the high God Yahweh-El, incomparable in council (89:7-

9) and holder of all power in heaven and the earth (89:10-19), decrees that the line of David will have an

everlasting rule over Israel, the chosen people (89:4-5; 20-37). After 89:39, the line of David is seen as “fallen”

(89:45), but the promises cannot fail completely. The covenant of eternal rule is still guaranteed by a faithful

witness in the clouds (89:38). Thus Psalm 89, like Daniel 7 which ignores the Davidic line, does not require a

human Davidide to fulfill the promise of global sovereignty. In Daniel 7 the high God and his council grant

everlasting rule to Israel by means of a divine being in the clouds whose power to rule can never be taken away,

but who in turn shares dominion with Israel in 7:21, 22, and 25. The difference between the two is that in Psalm

89 a divine cloud acts as witness to the covenant, whose original Davidic referent has been lost in the wake of

exile, whereas in Daniel 7 the divine cloud figure becomes the covenant’s fulfillment to a people who have long

understood the demise of David’s dynasty.

            Comparative data for divine "cloud witnesses" testifying to ancient covenants are extant. Mullen's work

on the cloud witness argues persuasively that the language of Ps 89:37-38 is that of ancient royal-grant

covenants.609 Expressing agreement with Mullen, Tate notes in his own study of the Psalm, "[I]n these

covenants a deity unilaterally establishes and empowers a king or other favored person. Gifts and privileges are

bestowed on faithful servants by a divine suzerain (as with Abraham in Gen 15:17)." Mullen's treatment of the

matter includes verse 36, and so taken together the passage would read:


       36 Once I swore by my holiness –                                             yvid.q'b. yTi[.B;v.nI tx;a; 36
609
      Mullen, "The Divine Witness," 207-218.
         I do not lie to David;                                                                  `bZEk;a] dwId'l.-~ai
      37 His offspring will continue forever                                                   hy<h.yI ~l'A[l. A[r.z: 37
        And his throne as the sun before me;                                                 `yDig>n< vm,V,k; Aas.kiw>
      38 As the moon it will be established forever.                                              ~l'A[ !AKyI x;rey"K. 38
        And a witness in the clouds will be faithful. Selah                                `hl's, !m'a/n< qx;V;B; d[ew>

         Mullen's study and Veijola's interaction with his work produced several important observations and

textual analogies to the structure of the covenant with David's house in Psalm 89. In several texts clouds

function as witnesses to the treaty-covenant and, as Veijola admits, this is a common feature in Hittite treaties.610

For example, in the Hittite copy of the treaty between Mursilis II and Duppi-Teshub of Amurru the treaty

invokes a list of gods and personified natural forces as witnesses, stating: " . . . the mountains, the rivers, the

springs, the great Sea, heaven and earth, the winds, and the clouds – let these be witnesses to this treaty and to

the oath."611 Mullen, citing the reference to the divine assembly in Ps 89:6-9, argues that the expression

qx#$b in verse seven brings the witness into the heavenly court.612 Veijola's objection to this comparative

evidence is only that the beginning of the psalm "does not derive from the same author as the following oracle

(vv. 20-38) . . . [and so] we cannot be certain that the expression qx#$b conveys exactly identical connotations

in v. 7 and v. 38."613 There are a number of studies on the psalm, however, that dispute the view of disparate

composition, and even if this observation were correct, it is very dubious that the redactors would have used

vocabulary that draws the parts together without intending connections.614

         The function of the cloud witness in Ps 89:37-38, as with the royal grant treaty, is to guarantee the terms

of the covenant, which specifically concern the creation of a dynastic line from David. As Weinfeld has

demonstrated, this type of covenant protected the rights of the recipient of the covenant rather than the rights of

the superior party.615 Here the cloud witness obligates Yahweh to keep the terms of the covenant with David's




610
    T. Veijola, "The Witness," 415.
611
    Ibid., 415.
612
    Mullen, "The Divine Witness," 215-217.
613
    T. Veijola, "The Witness," 415-416.
614
    For a survey of the scholarship on the psalm's composition, see M. Tate, Psalms 51-100, 413-418.
615
    M. Weinfeld, Deuteronomy and the Deuteronomic School (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972), 75ff.
line. When the promises of restoring the glory of Davidic kingship to Israel fail after the return from exile, the

unnamed cloud witness / vice-regent himself becomes the recipient of earthly sovereignty in Daniel 7.

         It is significant that the Ugaritic material on the divine council’s vice-regent illumines this aspect of

divine intercession in another way. Specifically, the role of Baal as intercessor in Ugaritic texts provides

another striking correlation to Psalm 89.

         Though more commonly recognized as a warrior or fertility god, Baal is also depicted as an intercessor,

and as the examples below reveal, the context for Baal's intercession for dynastic succession is the divine

council.616 The argument here is that this role of Baal should be considered in the backdrop of Psalm 89, and

thus the cloud witness’s guarantee of the dynastic succession to David and thus Israel. If this relationship be

noted, the correlation of Daniel 7’s Son of Man with the cloud witness argues anew that Daniel 7 and Psalm 89

are contextualized in complementary ways.

         The idea of dynastic succession being mediated with El by Baal is found in the epics of Kirta and

Dan)il. As Mullen points out, the central concern in these texts is "the insurance of progeny for the king so that

dynasty might be continued."617 In the case of Dan)il one reads:

         Then on the seventh day, Baal drew near with his supplication. "In need is Dan)il, man of Rapi).
         Moaning is the Hero, the Harnamite, who has no son in his house like his brothers, nor scion like
         his kindred. He has no son like his brothers, nor scion like his kindred. (He has given) offerings
         for the gods to eat, oblations that the sons of Quds\u might drink! Will you not bless him, O Bull
         El, my father; strengthen him, O Creator of created things? Let there be a son in his house, a
         scion in the midst of his palace!"618

The intercession of Baal for King Kirta is similar:

         Then the council of El arrived and )Al)iyan Baal spoke: "Come now, O Kindly One, El the
         Compassionate. Will you not bless Kirta, the noble? Will you not strengthen Nu(ma4n, lad of
         El?"619

         The terminology for Baal's supplication is noteworthy given this context. In several places Baal "stands

beside El" (qm (l )il) to obtain promise of dynastic offspring for King Kirta.620 The verb qm is part of the stock

vocabulary of the divine council, where a member of the council "stands" before the high God to perform some


616
    Mullen, The Divine Council, 249-252.
617
    Ibid., 244. The texts in question are KTU 1.17.I:16-44 (Dan)il) and KTU 1.15.II:1-28 (Keret).
618
    KTU 1.17.I:16-27. The translation is Mullen's.
619
    KTU 1.15.II:11-16. The translation is Mullen's.
620
    See KTU 1.15.II:11-28; 1.17.I:16-27, 35-37, 43-44. The phrase comes from KTU 1.2.I:21.
function.621 It is quite clear then from these texts that the intercession of Baal is made to the supreme authority

in the Ugaritic pantheon, El, and in the instance of the Kirta text, the pleas are situated in the divine council.

Thus not only is the divine council context evident, but the continuation of royal dynastic rule and divine

intercession on the part of El's vice-regent are as well. When compared with the cloud-riding vice-regent figure

of Daniel 7 who secures and extends the rule of Yahweh on earth through David's people Israel, an equation of

the witness in the clouds in Psalm 89 and the Son of Man in Daniel 7 deserves serious consideration. This

equation, along with the various difficulties with identifying the cloud figure of Daniel 7 with Michael, produces

a sound basis for arguing that an exalted, unidentified member of the divine council more coherently accounts

for the functions of the figure of Daniel 7 and his association with the holy ones and the people of Yahweh-El.

          This is not to say that national Israel is to be entirely divested of the dominion described in Daniel 7.

Dan 7:21, 22, and 25 link the rule of the Son of Man with the rule of Israel, the “people of the holy ones.”

                                           am'l.['-d[; at'Wkl.m; !Wns.x.y:w> !ynIAyl.[, yveyDiq; at'Wkl.m; !WlB.q;ywI 18
                                                                                                  `aY"m;l.[' ~l;[' d[;w>
                                         But the holy ones of the most High shall receive the kingdom, and possess the
                                         kingdom forever, even for ever and ever.

                                         tb;yhiy> aY"m;v.-lK' tAxT. tw"k.l.m; yDi at'Wbr.W an"j'l.v'w> ht'Wkl.m;W 27
                                            Hle aY"n:j'l.v' lkow> ~l;[' tWkl.m; HteWkl.m; !ynIAyl.[, yveyDiq; ~[;l.
                                                                                            `!W[M.T;v.yIw> !Wxl.p.yI
                                         The kingdom and dominion and the greatness of the kingdom under all
                                         heaven, shall be given to the people of the holy ones of the most High,
                                         whose622 kingdom is an everlasting kingdom . . .

          The language in these verses does not mean that Israel is the Son of Man, nor is it contradictory. A

more careful look at these passages reveals that Dan 7:18, 27 link the Son of Man and his dominion with the

holy ones of the divine council and the people of Israel.623 The reception of rule by Israel’s holy ones does not

mean that the dominion of the Son of Man has been usurped or replaced, for 7:27 concludes that the reign of this


621
    See especially in this regard the discussion in Chapter Three of the imperatival phrase (~yhil{a/ hm'Wq) in Ps 82:8.
622
    The reference is to the people, not God, since the most logical antecedent of the suffix is the grammatically singular noun M(, not
Nynwyl(.
623
    As Collins notes, the "holy ones" in Daniel 7 are in all probability heavenly beings (John J. Collins, Daniel, 313-317). Collins' work
follows several foundational studies of the term: Martin Noth, "The Holy Ones of the Most High," in The Laws of the Pentateuch and
Other Essays (ed. Martin Noth; London: Oliver and Boyd, 1966; reprint, London: SCM, 1984), 215-228; L. Dequeker, "The Saints of
the Most High," OtSt 18 (1973): 108-187; J. Goldingay, "'Holy Ones on High' in Daniel 7:18," JBL 107 (1988): 497-499. The “people of
the holy ones” speaks to Israel’s pre-exilic worldview that the nation was overseen by Yahweh and his council.
figure is still in view:      !W[M.T;v.yIw> !Wxl.p.yI Hle aY"n:j'l.v' lkow> (". . . and all dominions shall serve and obey
him [the Son of Man]”).624 The picture that emerges from Daniel's vision and its description is that Yahweh-El's

vice-regent represents the interests of the divine council and Yahweh-El's chosen people, Israel, in such a way

that the everlasting dominion envisioned is shared under the authority of Yahweh-El.

             The implication of the above is that the post-exilic idea that a heavenly vice-regent was the mode of

Yahweh’s sovereignty over the nations—even in the absence of a Davidic king—was acceptable because of the

pre-exilic precedent that Yahweh’s superiority was demonstrated at the division of the nations, the subsequent

election of Abraham/Israel after that division, and the victory of Yahweh and the vice-regent who bore his name

over Egypt in the exodus.

6.4 Summation

            The goal of this chapter was to demonstrate that the canonical book of Daniel, situated in the heart of

the Second Temple period, contains clear references to divine plurality and vice regency in heaven. The picture

of a seated council in heaven and a second being bearing an epithet of Yahweh seems hardly compatible with

the consensus view of the rise of intolerant monotheism. One would expect such material to be quite troubling

to militant monotheism—and it was, but only well into the Common Era when the rabbis felt compelled to

censor the two powers interpretation of Dan 7:9ff. That Daniel was accepted as canonical and the two powers

idea considered acceptable prior to at least the second century C.E. demonstrates that the religion of Israel prior

to that time cannot be cast as a religion intolerant of other gods.625 Monolatry is a more coherent description of

both the post-exilic Second Temple attitude to interpretations of divine plurality and the data of Daniel.

            As the next chapter on the Qumran sectarian material describes, these traditions and the teachings of the

book of Daniel were the backdrop for the numerous references to the divine council and plural Myhwl) /

Myl) (ynb) in a divine council at Qumran. The sectarian community by the Dead Sea was obsessed with the

divine assembly, merkabah exegesis, heavenly liturgies, and the belief that members of the sect were earthly

members of the divine council. As in heaven, so on earth.

624
      Hle may refer to Yahweh-El, but the point is moot since the vice-regent reigns at his behest and the high God's sovereignty was
extended to the vice-regent in Daniel 7.
625
    Segal, Two Powers in Heaven, x, 260ff.
                                                       Chapter Seven


                                        The Divine Council in Qumran
                                            Sectarian Literature

          Scholars of the Dead Sea Scrolls are quite familiar with the attention paid in many of the scrolls to

heavenly beings, and the scholarly work devoted to elucidating the "angelology" of the Qumran sect.626 None of

these studies, however, examines the heavenly beings in the Qumran material with the goal of discerning

whether or not the scrolls show evidence of continuity with the divine council of pre-exilic Israelite religion.

The goal of this chapter is to examine the sectarian literature of Qumran in order to demonstrate that the Qumran

community’s religious worldview was in concert with the monolatrous religion of pre-exilic Israel.627 As we

have seen in previous chapters, this worldview included a divine council composed (in part) of plural Myhwl) /

Myl) (ynb), a divine vice-regent, and the belief that a council hierarchy of divine beings exercised geographical

control of the Gentile nations, the nations set in opposition to Yahweh and his inheritance, Israel.

          Far from articulating a faith that had long ago abandoned the divine council as a vestigial belief, the

Qumran sectarian material displays an acute interest in the council and its relationship to human beings. While

the vast majority of scholars are confident that the Qumran material portrays the pre-exilic council gods as

angels, this simply is not the case. While ambiguous phrases such as “council of the holy ones” occur, there is

no mention of a “council of angels (Myk)lm),” and the terms Myhl) and Myk)lm are never clearly

synonymous.628 Conversely, the Qumran material contains numerous references to the divine council and its


626
    See Maxwell J. Davidson, Angels at Qumran: A Comparative Study of 1 Enoch 1-36, 72-108 and the Sectarian Writings from Qumran
(Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1992); Newsom, The Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice; G. W. Nickelsburg, "The Epistle of Enoch
and the Qumran Literature," in Essays in Honour of Yigael Yadin (ed. G. Vermes; Oxford: Allanheld, 1983); John Strugnell, "The
Angelic Liturgy at Qumran - 4Q Serek S0iro,t (O,lat Has\s\abat," in Congress Volume, Oxford 1959 (VTSup 7; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1960).
627
    By referring to “the angelology of the Qumran sect,” this writer means to restrict the discussion to the sectarian literature produced by
the community. The focus is also on the sectarian Hebrew texts alone, and derives from a computer-assisted search of the scrolls for the
Hebrew terms and motifs associated with the divine council in the Hebrew Bible (The Dead Sea Scrolls Electronic Reference Library,
CD-ROM [edited by Timothy H. Lim in consultation with Philip S. Alexander; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1997]). Unless otherwise noted,
counts used in this study are based on the results of database searches. Other Qumran material that contains many references to angels
and divine beings, such as the “Rewritten Bible” (e.g., 1 Enoch) will be considered in Chapter Eight.
628
    By this I mean that the terms never certainly are identified as synonyms. Finding the two terms at all in proximity is rare (see the
discussion), and such cases can quite easily be interpreted as the identification of each class (second-tier and lowest tier) within the
council, just as is the case at Ugarit or the Hebrew Bible.
Myhl) in precisely the same language and contexts as pre-exilic texts in the Hebrew Bible. Although it is

certainly true that both Myhl) and Myk)lm occur in the sectarian material, the reader must recall that the

existence of both terms in the Hebrew Bible’s pre-exilic texts in no way indicates they refer to the same beings.

          The conclusion that the plural Myhl) in the Qumran sectarian material refers to angels is apparently

driven only by the a priori assumption that by this time, the Myhl) must be mere angels. It is difficult to

understand Newsom’s nomenclature of “angelic elim” and “angelic elohim” any other way.629 Newsom’s

explanation of the terms Myl) and Myhl) (when undeniably plural) seems to be offered without any

consideration of the tiered terminology and hierarchical structure of the ancient pre-exilic divine council

recognized by scholars of Israelite religion:

          Many occurrences of Myhwl) in the Shirot are ambiguous and might refer either to God or to the
          angels, though such expressions as Myhwl) lwk (4Q403 1 I 32, 32-33) and Myhwl) Klm (4Q400 2
          5) unequivocally attest the use of Myhwl) for the angels. A biblical basis for Myhwl) = angels is
          provided by Pss. 8:6; 82:1; 97:8; 138:1, etc., and by the expression Myhwl) ynb in Job 1:6; 2:1;
          38:7.630

          None of the scholarly works on the divine council noted in this study takes these references and these

terms as proof of an Myhl) / Myk)lm equivalence.631 On the contrary, these studies firmly establish that these

passages and the council language therein speak of second-tier deities akin to the Canaanite divine assembly.

Newsom’s comments illustrate how the assumption that intolerant monotheism had arisen by the late sixth

century B.C.E. serves as an interpretive grid for textual data.

          This chapter examines the data of the Qumran sectarian material unencumbered by this grid. The result

will demonstrate the persistence of a pre-exilic monolatrous worldview that contained a fervent belief in a

council of Myhwl) / Myl) (ynb) that was administered by a vice-regent under Yahweh’s sovereignty.


7.1 Terminology for the Divine Council




629
    Newsom, Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 23-24.
630
    Ibid., 24.
631
    See Chapter Five for the pre-exilic flavor of the contexts of Pss 97:8 and 138:1.
          As noted in Chapter Two, there are several terms in the Hebrew Bible for the divine council itself, each

occurring either alone, or in construct with a nomen rectum that designated deity or the holy members of the

divine council: td(, rwd, dws, and lhq. Only td( and dws appear in Qumran sectarian literature in definite

reference to a divine council.

          The most frequent terminology for the divine council in the sectarian texts is td( in construct followed

by a deity noun. These various phrasings occur 28 times in a context that denotes a divine council. The familiar

l) td( of Ps 82:1 occurs six times;632 Myl) (lwkl) td( six times;633 and hwhy td(, Mym#$ ynb td(,

Mytr#om td( (cf. Job 15), Mymlw( td(, and Myryb) td( each once.634 The remaining 11 occurrences635

are the phrase (My)#$wdq td( which, as will be noted, may or may not refer to an assembly of divine beings

headed by Yahweh. Sometimes this phrase is used of the human members of the Qumran community, who

believed that they were, in effect, the divine council on earth. Most of the 11 occurrences cited here likely point

to the heavenly assembly.636 The phrase wryxb td( also occurs many times, but is ambiguous and has no

clear divine council antecedent in the Hebrew Bible.

          The divine council at Qumran is also described by the noun dws in construct with a noun associated

with heavenly bings. These combinations are found 15 times in the sectarian texts in the form of

Myl) dws (three times),637 Mdws rbx Mym#$ ynb (one time),638 Myhwl) dws (one time),639 (My)mlw( dws

(two times),640 Mymlw( dws ynbw (one time),641 and (My)#$wdq dws (seven times).642


632
    1Q33 (1QM), col. IV:9; 1QHa, col. XXVI:top 10; 4Q401 (4QShirShabb b), frg. 11:3; 4Q427, frg. 7, col. I:14; 4Q427, frg. 8, col.
I:10; 11Q13 (11QMelch), frag 1,2i,3i,4, col. II:10.
633
    1Q22, col. IV:1; 1Q33 (1QM), col. I:10; 4Q400, frg.1, col. I:4; 4Q431, frg. 2, col. II:8; 4Q457b, frg. 1, col. I:5; 4Q491, frg. 11, col.
I:12.
634
    Respectively, 4Q466:3; 1QHa, col. XI:22; 4Q405 (4QShirShabb f), frg. 23, col. I:3; 4Q491, frg. 11, col. I:11; 1Q16, frags. 9-10, line
3.
635
    1QS, col. V:20; 1Q28a, col. I:9; 1Q28a, col. II:16; 1Q33 (1QM), col. XII:7; 1QHa, col. III:bottom 10; 1QHa, col. V:14; 1QHa, col.
XXV:3; 4Q181, frg. 1:4; 4Q381, frg. 76-77:7; 4Q428, frg. 20:3; 4Q491, frg. 11, col. I:14.
636
    L. Dequeker, “The ‘Saints of the Most High’ in Qumran and Daniel,” in Syntax and Meaning: Studies in Hebrew Syntax and Biblical
Exegesis (ed. A.S. van der Woude; OtSt 18; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1973), 108-187; C.H.W. Brekelmans, “The Saints of the Most High and
Their Kingdoms,” hk 1940-1965 (ed. P.A.H. de Boer; OtSt 14; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1965), 305-329.
637
    4Q400 (4QShirShabb a), frg. 1, col. II:9; 4Q418, frg. 69, col. II:15; 4Q511 (4QShirShabb b), frg. 10:11.
638
    1QS, col. XI:8.
639
    4Q401 (4QShirShabb b), frg. 5:4.
640
    1QHa, col. XI:21; 1QHa, col. XIX:12.
641
    1QS, col. II:25.
          To summarize, the sectarian material clearly borrows the terminology of the divine council

(l) td() of Ps 82:1 six times. A council (td( / dws) of multiple deities (Myl)), not angels, is referenced

nine times, and in none of these references is the word Myk)lm used to refer to the divine members of the

council.643 If scholars can agree that such language describes a council of Yahweh that accommodated other

Myhl) in pre-exilic texts, on what basis can they deny that the collective terminology reflects monolatry in

post-exilic texts? The numerous references to the meeting place of the council using pre-exilic motifs make this

an even more pointed question.


7.2 The Meeting Place of the Divine Council

          As detailed in Chapter Two, in the Hebrew Bible the sanctuary of Yahweh, the meeting place of his

council, is referred to by a variety of terms: d(wm rh, d(wm lh), Nw(m, and wtnw(mw wks. This sanctuary

houses Yahweh's throne, which is depicted variously as atop an expanse ((yqr) in Ezekiel 1, or as a cloud-

chariot (Nn(h b(). Yahweh's throne and dwelling place were considered to be on a mountain located in the

"heights of the north," the Nwpc ytkry. The "height of Zion" was also a well-watered garden located in the

Nwpc ytkry. These "heights" are also referred to by other Hebrew terms, namely Mymwrm, Mwrm, and Mymr.

All of these terms are found in the sectarian literature of Qumran, most notably the Shabbat Shirot (4Q400-407;

11Q17; Masada 1039-200).644 Additionally, other terms associated with the pre-exilic dwelling place of God in

the Hebrew Bible, such as Nk#$m, rybd, and My#$dqh #$dq are used to refer to council precincts.



642
    1Q22, col. IV:1; 1QS, col. VIII:5; 1QHa, col. XII:25; 4Q259, frg. 2aI,2b-d, col. II:14; 4Q286, frg. 1a, col. II:b:4; 4Q428, frg. 19:7;
4Q502, frg. 19:1.
643
    As noted earlier, this conclusion is based on database searches in The Dead Sea Scrolls Electronic Reference Library and Newsom’s
concordance of the vocabulary of the Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice.
644
    The scholarly critical edition is that of Newsom, Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice. In her critical edition, Newsom affirms that the
Shabbat Shirot belong to the sectarian literature of Qumran (pp. 1-5), but she later retreated from this position. See Carol Newsom,
"'Sectually Explicit' Literature from Qumran," in The Hebrew Bible and Its Modern Interpreters (ed. W.H. Propp, B. Halpern, and D.N.
Freedman; Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns, 1990), 167-187; idem, "'He Has Established for Himself Priests': Human and Angelic Priesthood
in the Qumran Sabbath Shirot," in Archaeology and History in the Dead Sea Scrolls: The New York Conference in Memory of Yigael
Yadin (ed. Lawrence Schiffman; JSPSup 8; Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1990), 103-104. More recently, however, the sectarian provenance of
the Shabbat Shirot has been firmly established by comparative study of terminology in established sectarian documents with the Shirot.
See Devorah Dimant, "The Qumran Manuscripts: Contents and Significance," in Time to Prepare the Way in the Wilderness: Papers on
the Qumran Scrolls by Fellows of the Institute for Advanced Studies of the Hebrew University, Jerusalem 1989-1990 (ed. Devorah
Dimant and Lawrence Schiffman; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1995), 23-58.
           To begin, there are a number of references to the "heights" in the sectarian literature of Qumran.645

Newsom lists 20 occurrences of the word Mwrm (including Mymwrm) in her concordance of the Shabbat Shirot,

646
      several of which are modified by Mwr / Mymr.647 The majority of these instances are clearly associated with

the pre-exilic council. Note the clustering of council terms in the following passage from 4Q403 (ShirShabb d),

frg. 1, col. I:30-34:

           30 . . . Praise the God of the exalted heights (Mymrh Mymwrm) among all the 31 gods (Myl))
           of knowledge. . . . O you chiefs of 32 all the divine beings (Myhwl) lwk) praise the splendid
           praiseworthy God. . . . From it (God's splendor) come the praises of all the 33 divine beings
           (Myhwl) lwk), together with the splendor of his majesty. And exalt his exaltedness to the
           heights (Mwrml), O divine beings (Myhwl)) of the exalted gods (Mwr yl)m) and the
           divinity of his glory above 34 all the exalted heights (Mwr ymwrm lwkl l(m). For he is the
           God of gods (Myl) l)) of all the chiefs of the heights (Mymwrm y#$)r), and king of kings of
           all the eternal councils (Mymlw( ydws lwkl).

           Several observations are appropriate. The phrase above in line 30, "the exalted heights" is also present

four other times in other fragmentary texts. The juxtaposition of the phrase "the God of gods" with either the

"heights" and "the chiefs of the heights" occurs twice more in 4Q405 frags. 4-5: 1-2 and in 4Q405, frg. 6:4.648 A

line of the fragmentary Shabbat Shirot text from Masada (MasShirShab 1.9) also reads “[Praise the G]od of the

gods (the Myl)), O you inhabitants of the height of heights (Mymwr ymwrm).” Other references to the "heights"

are scattered throughout several fragments of the Shirot.649 Lastly, fragments 4Q405, frg. 6, 4Q405 22 8-9, and

4Q403 frg. 1, col. I:40-45 mention divine beings in the heights in proximity to the (yqr, which is either the

throne dais or expanse above the throne.650 The last of these serves as an example:

           4Q403 (ShirShabb d), frg. 1, col. I:43

           43 [Praise him,] divine spirits / spirits of the gods ([My]hwl) yxwr); praising forever and ever
           the highest expanse of the heights (My[m]wrm #$wr (yqr).



645
    Unless otherwise noted, this chapter’s translations of Qumran material are based on The Dead Sea Scrolls: A New Translation (ed.
Michael Wise, Martin Abegg, Jr., and Edward Cook; New York: HarperCollins, 1996). However, translations of the Shabbat Shirot are
based primarily on the work of Newsom (Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice). When I blend my own translation with these sources to bring
out council terminology more clearly, it will be indicated in a footnote.
646
    Newsom, Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 429-430. See the ensuing discussion for scroll citations.
647
    4Q400 frg. 1, col. i: 20; 4Q400 frg. 1, col. ii: 2, 4; 4Q400 frg. 2:4; MasadaShirot frg. 1:9.
648
    The phrasing here may also be rendered "uppermost heaven" (cf. Newsom, Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 269-270).
649
    4Q401, frg. 23:2; 4Q402, frg. 3, col. ii: 9; 4Q405, frg. 23, col. ii: 11-12.
650
    Newsom, Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 213, 40.
         Roughly, then, there are a dozen references to the "heights" in context with a council of divine beings in

the Shabbat Shirot. Again, there is no glossing or overlap of the terms of divine plurality by Myk)lm. This

vocabulary does not merely denote, as Newsom states, "general terms for heaven."651 Rather, these are

mythologically-charged phrases drawn from both pre-exilic divine council texts of the Hebrew Bible and

Ezekiel's own vision of the divine throne.

         Outside the Shabbat Shirot, other sectarian Qumran documents contain phrases using Mymwrm or

Mwrm.652 Many are fragmentary, but appear to reference divine council motifs:

         [My]mwrmb My#$d[wq #$dwq - "holy of holies in the heights"653
         Mwrmh )bcb - "in / among the host of the heights"654
         Mwrmb +wp#$t - "you shall pass judgment / rule in the heights"655

         The term Nw(m for the divine abode and council meeting place is also found at Qumran, and in very

explicit divine council settings. For example, in 4Q400 2:5 we read of "the glory of the king of the divine

beings (Myhl)), do they (the divine beings) declare in the dwelling places where they stand

(Mdmw( ynw(mb)."656 The use of the plural participle Mdmw( is noteworthy since "standing" around the throne

is technical vocabulary used in divine council scenes.657 The same text informs the reader that these dwelling

places are in "the lofty heights" (Mwr ymwrm). The same location, the "lofty heights", is the setting for 4Q403 1,

col. ii: 19, where, in a magnificent council scene with numerous borrowings from Ezekiel 1, the holy ones are

praising Myl) yhwl)l in the )lp Nw(mb ("wondrous dwelling").658 In 4Q405 6 and 7 and 4Q404 5 and 6 the

Myhwl) twxwr are qdcw tm) Klm Nw(ml hbybs ("gathered around the dwelling place of the king of truth




651
    Ibid., 39.
652
    As Dimant points out, cave 4 at Qumran has the highest concentration of sectarian material (Dimant, "The Qumran Manuscripts," 57).
653
    4Q503, frg. 15-16, col. vi: 8.
654
    4Q428, frg. 18, 2.
655
    4Q428, frg. 18, 3.
656
    See Newsom, Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 110-111.
657
    Mullen, The Divine Council, 207, 209-226.
658
    See Newsom, Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 110-111. 4Q403 1, col. ii: 19 = 4Q405 frags., 3.
and righteousness").659 These phrases are repeated in three other fragmentary texts as well.660 Outside the

Shabbat Shirot, Nw(m is used for the divine dwelling place two times: 1QS 8:8 and 1QSb 4:25.

           The terms Nk#$m and rybd were also noted in the discussion of El's abode at Ugarit and the divine

dwelling / meeting place of Yahweh and his council. In the Shabbat Shirot, Nk#$m is used of God's dwelling two

times. In 4Q403 1, col. ii: 6-10 the divine beings (Myhwl)) move in and around the

Mwr #$wr Nk#$m ("tabernacle of highest loftiness"). In 4Q405 22: 7 one reads that in the inner sanctum (rybd)

of God's throne ()skk b#$wm) the varied beings of the council throne room "exalt Him [unreadable] the Glory

in the tabernacle (Nk#$m) of the God of knowledge."661

           The heavenly liturgies of the Shabbat Shirot are of particular interest with respect to the rybd, the inner

sanctum of Yahweh and his council, and the matter of divine plurality in the sectarian texts. It will come as no

surprise that scholars have concluded that the numerous occurrences of merkabah language in the Shabbat

Shirot indicate that the Qumran sect drew upon Ezekiel’s visions of the enthroned “glory of the Lord”

(hwhy-dwbk).662 The wheels (Mynpw)) of Ezekiel’s throne chariot appear three times in the Shabbat Shirot as

descriptive of the merkabah,663 and the "wheelwork" (lglg) of Ezekiel's vision is mentioned once.664 Newsom’s

comparison of Ezekiel 1 and 10 with 4Q405, fragment 22 leaves no doubt as to the Ezekiel connection:665

                                  4Q405 22                                                      Ezekiel

      Line 7                                      dwbkh                1:28                                hwhy dwbk
      Lines 7-8         MMmwrhb wkrby Mybwrkh                     10:16-17        Mhypnk-t) Mybwrkh t)cbw
                         Mhypnk Mwrb hnr Nwmhw                                         wmwry Mmwrbw … mwrl
      Line 8                 hbkrm )sk tynbt                    1:26; 10:1                       )sk twmd
      Line 8              Mybwrkh (yqrl l(mm                    1:26; 10:1       M#)r-l( r#) (yqrl l(mmw
                                                                                Mybwrkh #)r-l( r#) (yqrh
      Line 9                         rw)h (yqr dwhw                    1:22                xrqh Ny(k (yqr

659
    Ibid., 213, 271.
660
    4Q 402, col. 11:4; 4Q403 1, col. ii: 45; 4Q406 1 and 2.
661
    Newsom, Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 306.
662
    Ibid., 45. See also Carol Newsom, “Merkabah Exegesis in the Qumran Sabbath Shirot,” JJS 38 (1987): 14.
663
    4Q403 1, col. ii: 15; 4Q405 20, col. ii-21-22: 3, 9.
664
    4Q405 20, col. ii-21-22: 10.
665
    Newsom, Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 55-56. The chart above includes most, but not all, of the elements in Newsom’s chart.
      Line 9                       wdwbk b#wm txtm                       10:20     l)r#y yhl) txt …r#) hyxh
      Line 9                          Mynpw)h tklbw                   1:16-17      wkly Mtklb … Mynpw)h h)rm
      Lines 9-10                    wdwbk ylylg Nybm                      10:6                   lglgl twnybm
      Line 10                              #) y)rmk                       1:13      Mydplh h)rmk … #)-ylxgk
      Line 10                           lm#x twmdb                      1:4,27           #)h Kwtm lm#xh Ny(k
      Lines 10-11                         hgwn y#(mw                   1:4,27;                    bybs wl hgnw
                                                                          1:28
                                                                                            bybs hgnh h)rh Nk
      Line 12                               Mtkl Nwmhb                    1:24     hlmh lwq Mtklb Mhypnk lwq


           Another sectarian text, 4Q385 fragment 4, includes a condensed version of the vision of Ezekiel 1 and

its throne chariot.666 Line 6 speaks of the “radiance of a chariot” (hbkrm hgn) with four “living creatures”

(twyx) with wings “in the midst of the coals” (Mylxg Kwtb) who were like “coals of fire” (#$) ylxgk).

Adjacent to two of the wheels were “streams of fire” (#$) ylb#$).

           The clear relationship between the merkabah description in the sectarian texts, especially the Shabbat

Shirot, and the description of the throne of the God of Israel in Ezekiel 1 and 10 is noteworthy in that the

Shabbat Shirot applies this imagery to a plurality of thrones. Specifically, the twbkrm are mentioned six

times,667 while plural thrones (y)sk or dwbk yb#$wm) are referenced four times.668 The plural thrones and plural

markabot are located inside seven Myrybd within the heavenly temple, making a connection to the divine abode

and council meeting place explicit.669 Plurality is also reflected by the fact that the heavenly liturgies refer not

only to one divine council, but to a plurality of councils, each headed by a divine prince ()y#on), again under the

headship of the high God.670 Several of these instances are unambiguously in the context of other divine beings,

the plural Myhwl). Representative texts with regard to these plurality motifs are:


666
    J. Strugnell and D. Dimant, “4Q Second Ezekiel (4Q385),” RQ 13 (1988): 45-48.
667
    4Q403 1, col. ii:15; 4Q405 20, col. ii-21:3, 5; 4Q405 22: 11-12; 11QShirShabb 2-1-9:6. Newsom comments that "it is often difficult
to determine whether a plural of majesty or a genuine plurality of chariot thrones is intended," but later decides that the latter, a genuine
plurality, is what the text denotes. This would seem more clear than her comments suggest in view of the multiple councils present in the
Shirot, but her hesitation is due to a minimizing of the significance of the plural Myhwl) and Myl) in these texts. See Newsom, Songs
of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 309.
668
    4Q405 20, col. ii-21: 4; 4Q405 23, col. I: 3; 11QShirShabb 2-1-9: 5-6; 11QShirShabb f-c-k: 5.
669
    Newsom, Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 45. See also Mullen, The Divine Council, 147-169, and M. Barker, The Gate of Heaven:
The History and Symbolism of the Temple in Jerusalem (London: SPCK, 1991), 151-152.
670
    Newsom, Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 23ff.; Morray-Jones, “The Temple Within,” 411. The plural councils are expressed with
plural forms of dws. References to plural councils that do not rely predominantly on reconstructions of the text are 4Q403 1, col. i:34;
col. ii:19, 22; 4Q405 8-9: 2-3; MasShirShab col. ii:25.
         4Q405 20, col. ii-21: 3-5

         3 "His glorious chariots (wdwbk twbkrm) [. . .] holy cherubim, luminous ophanim in the de[bir .
         . . spirits of the divine beings (Myhwl)) . . . purity . . .] 4 of holiness, the construction of [its]
         cor[ners . . .] royal [. . .] the glorious seats of the chariot th[rones (t]wbkrml dwbk yb#$wm) . . .
         wings of knowledge . . . wondrous powers . . .] 5 truth and righteousness, eternal [. . .] His
         glorious chariots (wdwbk twbkrm) as they move . . .671

         4Q405 20, col. ii-21: 11
         ". . . with glorious colors, wondrously hued, purely blended, the spirits of living divine beings
         (Myyx Myhwl[)] twxwr) which move continuously with the glory of the wondrous chariots
         (twbkrm dwbk)."672

         4QBerakhota 1:ii

         “The seat of thy glory and the footstools of thy Honor in the heights of your standing
         (hkdmw( ymwr[m]b) and the treading place of thy holiness; and the chariots of thy glory
         (hkdwbk twbkrmw), their cherubim and their wheels with all their councils (hmhydws).”673

         Scholars have established that this implicit reference to a plurality of divine chariots derives from three

places in the Hebrew Bible. Two of these sources, Daniel 7 and Isa 66:15, are post-exilic, and both of these may

draw on the third source, which is certainly pre-exilic.

         First, Daniel 7 clearly references a plurality of thrones and a merkabah throne in its divine council

scene, and Qumran scholars have noted that the divine markabot in the heavenly liturgies draw upon these

descriptions.674 However, Daniel 7 attributes the imagery of the divine chariot only to the throne occupied by

Yahweh-El. 675

         Second, Isa 66:15 reads:

                                           APa; hm'xeB. byvih'l. wyt'boK.r.m; hp'WSk;w> aAby" vaeB' hw"hy> hNEhi-yKi
                                                                                             `vae-ybeh]l;B. Atr'[]g:w>
                             See, the LORD is coming with fire, and his chariots are like a whirlwind; he will bring
                             down his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire.


671
    The translation is Newsom's, as is the reconstruction, except for my translation "divine beings," substituted for Newsom's "godlike
beings." See Newsom, Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 303-321.
672
    The translation is again Newsom's save again for my adjustment of "divine beings." See Newsom, Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice,
306.
673
    Bilha Nitzan, “4QBerakhot (4Q286-290): A Preliminary Report,” in New Qumran Texts and Studies: Proceedings of the First
Meeting of the International Organization for Qumran Studies, Paris 1992 (ed. George J. Brooke and Florentino Garcia Martinez; STDJ
15; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1994), 56-57. Newsom notes that 4QBerakhot is almost certainly a sectarian composition due mainly to its
reference to dyxyh tc(, “the council / counsel of the community” (Newsom, “Sectually Explicit,” 181).
674
    Newsom, “Merkabah Exegesis,” 17, 26; Nitzan, “4QBerakhot,” 63-71.
675
    L.T. Stuckenbruck, “The Book of Daniel and the Dead Sea Scrolls: The Making and Remaking of the Biblical Tradition,” in The
Hebrew Bible and Qumran (ed. J.H. Charlesworth; N. Richland Hills, TX: Bibal Press, 2000), 135-171.
         This post-exilic text, speaking as it does of the final judgment of Yahweh, may be related to Zech 14:5b,

“and the Lord my God will come with his holy ones” (              %M'[i ~yvidoq.-lK' yh;l{a/ hw"hy> ab'W). Some scholars
have supposed this is the case since the Shabbat Shirot does not have its multiple markabot driven or piloted by

divine beings, but rather seems to depict them as entities themselves in texts such as 4Q403, frg. 1:II:15:676

“And the chariots of his debir (wrybd twbkrm dxy wllhw) give praise together, and their cherubim and their

wheels bless wondrously.”

         The third source for this plurality—and possibly for the idea of plural thrones in post-exilic Daniel677—

is Psalm 68, an unmistakably pre-exilic text that refers to multiple heavenly chariots:678

                                            `vd,QoB; yn:ysi ~b' yn"doa] !a'n>vi ypel.a; ~yIt;Bori ~yhil{a/ bk,r, Ps 68:18
                             The chariots of God are myriads upon myriads, thousands upon thousands; the Lord
                             has come from Sinai into his sanctuary.679


         D. Halperin has established the connection between Ps 68:18 and Ezekiel 1, and thus the markabot

imagery in the Shabbat Shirot.680 Newsom agrees, commenting that “the Sabbath Shirot appears to provide

evidence for the early exegetical association of the merkabah visions of Ezekiel with Psalm 68.”681 Newsom

bases this assessment in part on the observation that in 4Q405, frg. 20, col.II-21-22:12-13, as the cherubim and

the ophanim praise God’s holiness, they are described as follows:

                                                    +yq#h hnr twlyg lwq wdw[m(y] Nkw#bw )lp wmmwry Mmwrhb
                                       “. . . and when they settle, they [sta]nd still. The sound of glad rejoicing falls
                                       silent.”




676
    Morray-Jones, “The Temple Within,” 412.
677
    Since Daniel does not refer to plural markabot, only plural thrones, an explicit connection between Daniel and these pre-exilic texts
cannot be established.
678
    David J. Halperin, The Faces of the Chariot: Early Jewish Responses to Ezekiel’s Vision (TSAJ 16; Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1988),
132-133.
679
    A number of scholars have argued that the hapax N)n#$ is related to an Ugaritic word meaning “warrior” or “bowman” (cf. Cross,
Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic, 102; Mullen, The Divine Council, 193). This alternative does not affect the first half of the verse that
speaks to multiple chariots.
680
    Halperin, Faces of the Chariot, 105-110. Halperin also notes that later rabbinic tradition connected both passages with Exodus 19, a
visionary dream postulated for Abraham during the theophany of Gen 15:17, Deut 33:2, and the LXX of Ezek 43:2.
681
    Newsom, “Merkabah Exegesis,” 29.
             Newsom observes that in Ezekiel’s parallel merkabah description, Ezekiel reads wdw[m(y] Mdmw(bw,

not wdw[m(y] Nkw#bw as in the Shabbat Shirot. She concludes that the allusion must instead come from Palm

68:17-20, where Yahweh ascends from Sinai with his myriad chariotry to “settle forever”

(xcn Nk#$y hwhy P); Myhl) hy Nk#$l) “on high in his sanctuary” (#$dwqb; Mwrmb tyl().682

             The significance of these terms and phrases and their immediate association with the throne room of

Yahweh, the head of Israel's divine council, must not be underestimated. Rather than reflecting a council whose

former second-tier deities have been demoted to the status of angels, the throne room motifs point to a divine

plurality. The plethora of references noted in the next section to Myl) and plural Myhwl) council members, as

well as the royal language of divine princeship and vice regency, point in the same direction and buttress the

contention of this chapter, that Israel’s pre-exilic council of gods was a core belief for the sect at Qumran during

the Second Temple period.


7.3 The Members of the Divine Council

             There are a dramatic number of references—approximately 175— to plural gods (Myl) or Myhwl)) in

the Qumran sectarian literature. Most of these references are not theologically neutral, but reflect beliefs held

by the Qumran sect. That is, when the Qumran sectarian texts speak of divine pluralities, on relatively few

occasions does the author use the words Myl) or plural Myhwl) to speak of idols or the religion of pagans.

Rather, the term often occurs in titles of Yahweh, such as “God of gods,” or in overt divine council contexts. It

is also important to note that the notion of divine sonship (Mynb) is preserved in many of these usages.

             Just under half (approximately 80) of the 175 references to gods use the word Myl), alone or in explicit

divine council phrases like Myl) ynb. Most of these citations occur in the War Scroll (1QM), the Hodayot

(1QH), and the Shabbat Shirot. The following are samples of the phrases in which Myl) is found:

             1QM (War Scroll):
             “the assembly of the gods (Myl) td() and the congregation of men” (1:10)
             “the shout of gods and men” (1:11)

682
      Ibid., 29.
          “the m]ighty ones of the gods are girding themselves for battl[e” (15:14)
          “He (God) will joyfully light up the covenant of Israel . . . to exalt the authority of
          Michael among the gods” (17:7)683

           1QHodayot (Thanksgiving Scroll/Psalms to God):
          “Who is like you among the gods, O Lord?” (15:28)
           “. . . among the sons of the gods and sons of [ . . . ] (1QHf. 2 1:3)
           “[ . . . the so]ns of the gods, to unite with the sons of heaven” (1QHf.2 1:10)
          “You have humbled (11) the gods from the foundation [ . . . ] (24:10b-11)

          Shabbat Shirot
          “Give thanks, all divine beings of majesty, to the king of majesty” (4Q403, col.I:38)
          “In the middle of the spirits of splendor, wonderful embroidered work, the forms of the
          living gods [ ] in the inner sanctuaries of the king, the forms of the gods, and the likeness of
          the holy of holies” (4Q403, frg. 14-15, col. I:7-8)

          Other Fragments:
          “with the sons of the gods” (4Q491f.24 1:4)
          “all the hosts of the gods” (4Q503f.48 50 1:8)
          “the hosts of the gods” (4Q503f.65 1:2)

          Corresponding to the uses of Myl) above, there are roughly 90 instances of Myhwl) (plural) used in

the sectarian material. Eight of these occurrences are in the phrase Myyx Myhwl) found in the Shabbat Shirot.684

Apart from that interesting phrase, Myhwl) is used in phrases that are quite similar to that of Myl):

          “[They sing] wonderful psalms . . . and declare [the surpassing] glory of the King of the
          gods”685 (4Q400 frg. 2 l.5)
          “King of the gods” (4Q401 frgs. 1-2 l.5; 4Q402 frgs. 3-4 l.12)

          “None of the gods understands what He has designed” (4Q402 frg. 3-4 lines 14-15)
          “Lift His exaltation on high, you gods among the exalted gods” (4Q403 frg. 1 Col.1:33)

          At this juncture it is appropriate to remind the reader of a passing comment from Chapter One, for its

significance can now be more appreciated. In Chapter One of this study it was noted that there are only 11

instances in the entire Qumran corpus where Myhwl) / Myl) [ynb] and Myk)lm occur within fifty words of

each other.686 Eight of these occurrences have Myhwl) construed as a singular, referring to the God of Israel.687


683
    The meaning of this phrase will be discussed subsequently, particularly with respect to the earlier discussion of Michael in Chapter
Six of this study.
684
    This count is based not on the DSS database, but on Carol Newsom's concordance of the Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice (Newsom,
The Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 392-395, 411).
685
    This phrase (“king of the gods”) is significant for the concept of vice regency in the sectarian material. See the ensuing discussion.
686
    This statement reflects searches in The Dead Sea Scrolls Electronic Reference Library. The eleven instances where Myhwl) / Myl)
[ynb] and Myk)lm occur within fifty words of each other are: 1Q28b (1QSb), col. IV; 4Q225, frg. 2, col. II; 4Q403, frg. 1, col. I;
4Q403, frg. 1, col. II; 4Q405 frg. 19ABCD, line 7; 4Q405 frg. 20-21-22, col. II; 4Q405 frg. 23, col. I; 4Q510, frg. 1; 4Q511, frg. 2, col. I;
4Q511, frg. 10; 4Q511 frg. 35.
The three instances that remain, all appearing in the fragmentary text of 4Q405, do not clearly indicate that the

terms are synonymous because of the fragmentary or obscure nature of this text.

          4Q405 fragment 23, column 1, lines 1-8 contains references to “the gods/ divine beings” (lines 4,5) who

praise God (line 6) in the heavenly temple. Line 8 reads as follows:688

                           Mtl#mml #dwq yk)lm y)cwm lwkbw dwbk yxtpb t(d yl) y)wbmb hnr lwqb
            “. . . with a voice of a song. Whenever the gods of knowledge enter by the portals of glory, and
            whenever the holy angels go out to their dominion.”

          Newsom notes that the phrases t(d yl) and #dwq yk)lm are in separate but parallel hemistichs,

though she does not consider the terms themselves parallel.689 Part of the difficulty with seeing the terms

themselves as parallel is the larger context of 4Q405, which describes the movement of the myriad heavenly

beings within the complex of the heavenly temple and the merkabah throne that is situated within the temple.

The temple in the Shabbat Shirot is composed of seven sanctuaries with multiple debirim. Complete

understanding of the imagery is impossible, but some comprehension of the description is possible against the

backdrop of Ezekiel 40-48.690

          Since the Shabbat Shirot describes the various sanctuaries as concentric,691 the “goings in and out”

described in line 8 could refer to separate parts of the greater whole, and separate priestly duties of distinct

classes of heavenly beings. In fact, Newsom favors a separation of the activities described, which favors a

separation of these beings according to the kind of hierarchical class articulated in traditional divine council

bureaucracy. She comments on line 8 that “both )wbm and )cwm can mean the act or place of coming in/going

forth, but the verbal nuance is clearly preferable here.”692 Whether such a separation of priestly activities is

justifiable or not, the text as it stands can be read as referring to separate entities “going in” and “coming out” at

separate points of the temple complex, and so it is inconclusive with respect to equating its Myl) and Myk)lm.




687
    1Q28b (1QSb), col. IV; 4Q225, frg. 2, col. II; 4Q403, frg. 1, col. I; 4Q403, frg. 1, col. II; 4Q510, frg. 1; 4Q511, frg. 2, col. I; 4Q511,
frg. 10; 4Q511 frg. 35.
688
    For the establishment of the text, see Newsom, The Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 322ff.
689
    Newsom, The Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 328.
690
    Ibid., 51.
691
    Ibid., 48-55.
         The next fragment of 4Q405 that needs consideration is fragment 19ABCD, lines 5 through 7. Line 5

concerns the “figures of the shapes of divine beings (Myhwl))” which is part of the fragment’s presumed

description of the debirim and the chariot thrones. Lines 6 and 7 then add,

         living divine beings (Myyx Myhwl)) are all their construction, and the images of their figures
         are holy angels (Myk)lm). From underneath (txtm) the wondrous d[ebirim] comes the sound
         of quiet stillness, the div[ine bein]gs (MO[yhw]lO)O) blessing . . .

         Newsom notes immediately that, “the text is so extraordinarily obscure that one can scarcely specify

with any confidence the subject of the passage.”693 Minimally, it is apparent that the lines in question concern

the divine chariot throne. Elsewhere in the Shabbat Shirot “txtm precedes a word for the divine throne.”694

The idea of praise coming from beneath the seat of the chariot throne is echoed in 4Q405 frags. 20-21-22, col.

II:9, where the cherubim are behind the “voice.” This may mean that in the Shabbat Shirot cherubim are

considered Myhwl), which would in turn mean that both the terms Myhwl) and Myk)lm would be used in

way foreign to the Hebrew Bible, where cherubim are not referred to by either term.

         If this is the case, then the text is of little use for arguing an equation of these tiers within the divine

council, since the Canaanite and pre-exilic Israelite councils are not composed of lion-like creatures that support

the chariot throne.695 However, the Myhwl) that Newsom postulates at the end of the line is likely not there.

As noted above, the middle three letters must be supplied, and the rest of the letters are very doubtful. If the

word Myhwl) is not present in the text, a secure correlation between the terms Myhwl) and Myk)lm is not

possible. The fact that the Myhwl) of line 5 are said to be “engraved” (yqqwxm) on heavenly “brickwork” and

yet are “figures” (yndb) in line 1, and the Myk)lm of line 6 are also “figures” (yndb) may point to an internal

inconsistency. More likely, however, “the Sabbath Shirot do not present their conceptions with rationality or




692
    Ibid., 329.
693
    Ibid., 295.
694
    Ibid., 300. See 4Q405, frg. 22, line 9; 4Q405, frg. 46, line 3.
695
    Based on the relevant iconography found in Israel and Canaan, there is considerable agreement that cherubim were thought to be
creatures of (winged) leonine appearance. See T.N. D. Mettinger, “Cherubim,” DDD, 189-192.
sober exposition, or even sequential logic . . . [but rather] allusions to heavenly realia are incidental to

descriptions of angelic praise.”696

            Finally, 4Q405 fragments 20-21-22, column II contains references to a variety of beings moving with

and flitting within and without the divine chariot throne, much like the description in Ezekiel 1 and 10. In the

biblical vision, the creatures who support the throne (cherubim) are quite distinct from the fiery beings

associated with the coals. In the elaboration of that vision at Qumran, it is most likely that beings, including

Myhwl) and Myk)lm, were added to embellish the description, not to equate all the types.

            The point of these brief observations is that the sectarian texts at Qumran that are intact and lucid clearly

distinguish the beings of the heavenly host, thereby retaining the hierarchical tiers of the pre-exilic divine

council of the Hebrew Bible. Were there unmistakable overlap between the words Myhwl) / Myl) [ynb] and

Myk)lm at Qumran, one could argue that the divine council’s second tier of gods either had been downgraded

to the status of angels, or at least that such an interpretive understanding was in the process of emerging. Such

does not appear to be the case.

            The last chapter of this study, relating to non-sectarian texts witnessed at Qumran and other Second

Temple compositions, does in fact indicate that the term Myk)lm eventually evolved into an umbrella

designation for any member of the heavenly host while retaining clear marks of the pre-exilic council hierarchy,

but the sectarian material cannot be said to clearly indicate the same. In fact, the word K)lm / Myk)lm occurs

only ten times in the Shabbat Shirot, which is quite surprising given the subject matter of the heavenly temple

and liturgy.697 This minimal vocabulary, when juxtaposed with the strikingly high number of references to a

council of Myl) [ynb] in the sectarian texts at Qumran argues strongly for pre-exilic council continuity.

Perhaps even more telling is the Qumran community’s belief that its own community of the faithful could join

the heavenly council as members in a mystical process of human deification. This belief in a divinized human

council is based in part on earlier biblical passages and the position of Israelites as divine sons. The particulars



696
      Newsom, The Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 49.
697
      Ibid., 241.
of this theology will be discussed in detail momentarily, but it is sufficient at this point to note that the hope of

the Qumran community was not to become heavenly creatures, but divine sons of the Most High.

         Continuing the terminology found in sectarian texts for council members, the Qumran sectarian material

uses princely titulary of heavenly beings in a number of texts. The familiar term of Daniel 8 and 10, (My)r#o, is

rare in the Shabbat Shirot (three occurrences, and all lack text-critical certainty).698 It occurs nearly two dozen

times in other sectarian texts, but nearly always with respect to the human military hierarchy of the War Scroll

(1QM).

         Of the three occurrences of r# in the Shirot, two occur in relative contextual isolation due to the

fragmentation of the text. 4Q401, fragment 6:4 contains the phrase #dwq yr# (“holy princes”). Though there

is little else to add to the phrase, it is important because, as Newsom notes, the phrase is linked to the heavenly

priesthood and thus provides a parallel to the term as used in the book of Daniel.699 4Q400, fragment 1, col.

1:12 has the reconstructed phrase yr# hm[h . . .] (“they are princes”). Though again merely a scant reference,

other lines in that text describe the activity of the heavenly beings in the heavenly temple (see below). The third

instance of r# is found in 4Q403, fragment 1, col. II:22-24, and is the only example occurring in a line of

reasonable length:

         22 . . . seven priest[hoods] in the wondrous sanctuary ()lp #dqm) for the seven holy councils
         . . . 23 the prince, the angels of the King (Klm yk)lm r#h) in the wonderful dwellings
         ()lp ynw(mb). And the insightful knowledge of the seven . . . 24 chief (#wr) [ . . . ] from the
         priest of the inner sanctum (bwrq Nhwkm). And the chiefs (y#)rw) of the council of the King
         (Klmh td() in the assembly (lhq) [ . . . ].700

         Due to the fragmentary nature of even this sample, it is not possible to determine whether r#h is the

singular chief (#wr) over the angels and other chiefs, or the priest of the inner sanctum. Even if r#h is to be

correlated with the singular chief in this text, it is still not clear whether he is a distinct being above the other

chiefs or one of their number singled out for some unspecified reason in the text. What can be discerned from


698
    Ibid. The singular r#o does occur elsewhere in sectarian material, though. See the ensuing discussion concerning Michael and
Melchizedek.
699
    Ibid., 28. See the ensuing discussion for more on this connection.
700
    Ibid., 230. The translation is Newsom’s.
this text is that there are seven priesthoods of heavenly beings which serve in seven holy councils in the

heavenly temple.701 Other Shabbat Shirot texts inform us that there are seven Myrybd (“sanctuaries”) and one

inner sanctum and seven #wr y)y#n (“chief princes”) within these Myrybd. The above text may suggest that

the inner sanctum has a special, elevated divine priest of the “most holy” inner sanctum. Given that the seven

councils of the Shirot correspond to the seven priesthoods, each headed by its own lead heavenly prince,702 it

appears reasonable that the inner rybd, the sanctuary of the Most High himself, is administrated by an elevated

singular prince (r#h) who is the singular chief (#wr). Nevertheless, the fragmentary nature of the evidence

prevents such a conclusion. The fact that, in Daniel, Michael is called lwdgh-r#oh should also give the reader

pause to argue this broken text allows the conclusion that the rare reference to r#oh speaks of a lone sovereign

under Yahweh, since Michael is also referred to as one among equals (                     ~ynIvoarih' ~yriF'h; dx;a;; “one of the
chief princes”).

          The most common princely or hierarchical titles for heavenly beings in the sectarian literature are

)y#n703 (“prince”) and #)r704 (“chief”), both of which are most frequently used in the plural and in tandem

with each other (e.g., #wr y)y#n, My)y#n y#)r; “chief princes”). These terms are rare outside the Qumran

Shirot.705 Scholars have noticed that these terms (and perhaps the division of the heavenly host into seven

councils and priesthoods) are drawn from the book of Numbers, perhaps as an analogy to the division of Israel

into twelve tribes.706 At Qumran )y#n is adopted as a political or military title for both human and heavenly

leaders at the final conflict. In the War Scroll the terms My)y#n appears in apposition to My#)r, which is also

the case in Numbers.707 Despite being drawn from the book of Numbers, the functions of the groups denoted by

these terms differ in Numbers and the Shirot. The most significant difference is the priestly function of the

701
    The above text is mirrored by 4Q405, fragments 8-9, lines 5b-6a, which forms the phrasing “chief princes, priests of the wondrous . . .
([)]lp twnwh[k] y)y#n y[#)r]). The superscripted letters are a scribal hand.
702
    Morray-Jones, “The Temple Within,” 411; Newsom, The Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 26-34. See page 31 of Newsom for a
collection of the “seven” phrases in the Shabbat Shirot.
703
    4Q400, frg. 1, col. II:14; frg. 3, col. II:2; 4Q401, frg. 23:1; 4Q403, frg. 1, col. I: 1, 10, 21, etc.; col. II:20-21; 4Q405, frg. 13:2-5, 7.
704
    4Q401, frg. 14, col. I:6; 4Q403, frg. 1, col. I:31, 34; frg. 1, col. II:3, 11, 16, 20-21, 24; 4Q405, frg. 23, col. II: 10-12.
705
    Newsom, The Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 32.
heavenly My)y#n / My#)r alongside the military/political task. This combination of priest and military leader

is not uncommon in Jewish angelology, as the traditions of Michael and Melchizedek attest.

          For purposes of comparison to the divine council bureaucracy discussed in Chapter Two of this study, it

is important to note that there are several references in the Shabbat Shirot that indicate that the My)y#n and the

My#)r exercise council rulership, are considered “royal,” and serve as the divine high priests of the heavenly

councils described at Qumran.708

          For example, just as in Daniel, there are plural thrones in the heavenly temple of the Shirot, which is not

at all surprising in light of the plural chariots. In 4Q405, frg. 23, col. I:3-4, we read of “His glorious royal

thrones (wtwklm dwbk hk5y5)sk709) and all the assembly (td( lwkw) of those who serve . . . wondrously.

The wondrous divine beings (Myhwl)) will not be shaken forever.” These same beings are “chiefs of the

heights” (Mwrm)710 and “those who sit upon the heights” (Mymwr ymwrm yb#wy).711

          In regard to the priestly designation, 4Q405, fragment 23, col. II the “chiefs (y#)r) of wondrous

raiment” are described as wearing high priestly dress (Mhydwp)). As Newsom notes, this connection would

explain the pairing of the titles #wr y)y#n and hn#m y)y#n in priestly duties (the only difference being

rank).712 As such, there would be seven chief princes over the seven divine councils within the heavenly temple

in the Shabbat Shirot. Most of the Second Temple literature that ventures angelological speculation has the

number of archangels at seven. This has prompted the conclusion that “it is virtually certain that the seven chief

princes are to be identified with the seven archangels.713 Overt reference is made to “the chiefs of the realm of

706
    Ibid., 31-32.
707
    Ibid., 32. See 1QM col. III: 3, 15, 16; IV: 1; V:1 and Num 1:16; 7:2; 10:14; 36:1.
708
    Ibid., 33. After comparing several lines of Shirot fragments, Newsom concludes that the two phrases are used interchangeably (The
Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 36).
709
    The dots above the two letters in this form indicate scribal corrections (which are plainly visible in a photograph of the scroll). As
Newsom notes, “The scribe originally wrote dwb hky)sk, then corrected to dwbk y)sk, implying an aural misinterpretation of
dwbk )sk or of a masculine plural homonym, dwbk y)sk. In biblical Hebrew the plural form is always tw)sk, but the Sabbath
Shirot not infrequently display a preference for masculine plural forms of nouns where biblical Hebrew knows only the feminine plural”
(Newsom, The Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 325).
710
    4Q405, frg. 4-5:2.
711
    MasShirShabb, col. I:9.
712
    Newsom, The Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 33. In this regard, Newsom notes the existence of deputy priests alongside high priests
in the Hebrew Bible (2 Kgs 23:4; 25:18) and elsewhere at Qumran (1QM col. II:1).
713
    Ibid., 34. Newsom comments that there are sources that have only four archangels, such as 1QM, col. IX:14-16. Some texts also
the holy ones of the king of holiness” (#dwqh Klml My#wdq twklmm twklmm y#)r)714 and “chiefs of the

council of the king in the congregation (lhqb Klmh td( y#)r) . . .”715

         These chief princes are interchanged with the terms Myhl) and Myl) (ynb), but restriction of the

second tier of the council to only seven divine beings seems unlikely, since the book of Daniel, the other major

Second Temple period source for describing Jewish beliefs about the heavenly host, links the princes to

geographic realms. If this is the case with the sectarian material, it would make better sense (there are more than

seven Gentile nations) to see the seven chief princes in the Shirot as holding positions of authority over the other

geographic divine princes.716 Nevertheless, the princes in the Shirot and the rest of the sectarian material are not

linked to geographic rule, likely because the context of the sectarian material is so different than the book of

Daniel. The concern of the War Scroll is the final battle and arrangement of the heavenly army into fighting

ranks, and the Shirot are focused on worship within the heavenly temple. This divergence from what are by

now consistent patterns of council imagery does not threaten the idea that the sectarian material perpetuates the

pre-exilic divine council due to the striking correspondences elsewhere, particularly in the discussion of vice

regency below.

         The last term for council members at Qumran that requires brief acknowledgement is My#$wdq. In a

manner consistent with biblical texts, when My#$wdq appears in the sectarian material with respect to a heavenly

being, it serves as a broad designation for any member of the heavenly council, regardless of rank.717 Moreover,

as was the case with the book of Daniel, My#$wdq in the Qumran sectarian material is used in reference to both




alternate between four and seven archangels (cp. 1 Enoch 9:1 [four] and 1 Enoch 20 [seven]). Newsom speculates that the number seven
predominates in the Shabbat Shirot as part of a general preoccupation with the number seven.
714
    4Q405, frg. 23, col. II:11. Newsom (The Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 339) judges the second twklmm as a dittograph, but adds
that “the repetition of a word may indicate a distributive sense (“every realm”) or a superlative sense (“the highest realm”).
715
    4Q403, frg. 1, col. II:24. Newsom’s edition has the d raised on p. 226, but not on p. 241. The photograph has the raised letter.
716
    In the discussion of 1 Enoch (Chapter Eight) it is noted that the Watchers are grouped by tens into twenty groups, the leaders being
referred to as “dekadarchs” (cf. 1 En. 6:7-8). If the seven archangels of the Enochian literature are also dekadarchs, then the seven
archangels would be responsible for seventy other divine beings, which in turn corresponds to the seventy nations of Deut 32:8-9 (cf. the
list of nations in Genesis 10-11 when the earth was divided). It is interesting to speculate that the seven chief princes of the Qumran
material might be the seven archangels of the Enochian texts.
717
   L. Dequeker, “The ‘Saints of the Most High’ in Qumran and Daniel”; C.H.W. Brekelmans, “The Saints of the Most High and Their
Kingdom,” OtSt 14 (1965): 305-329.
humans and heavenly beings. By way of illustration, consider the uses of My#$wdq in the following sample

texts:

         My#$wdq = heavenly beings:

         “For you have a multitude of holy ones in the heavens, and the host of angels in your
         exalted dwelling to pr[aise] your [name]” (1QM 12:1)
         “and you, O God, are awe[some] in your dominion, and the company of your holy ones is
         in our midst for eternal support . . .” (1QM 12:7)
         “. . . the m]ighty ones of the gods are girding themselves for batt[le, and] the formation[s of
         the] h[o]ly ones [are rea]dying themselves for a day of [vengeance . . .] (1QM 15:14-15)

         My#$wdq = human beings:
         “. . . who is like your people Israel, whom you have chosen for yourself from all the peoples
         of the lands; the people of the holy ones of the covenant” (1QM 10:9-10)
         “and on the trumpets of the camps they shall write: the peace of God in the camps of his
         holy ones” (1QM 3:4-5)


7.4 The Divine Vice-Regent of the Council

         There are a number of vivid phrases in the Shabbat Shirot that speak of a ruler of the plural Myhl) /

Myl), the divine princes of the divine council at Qumran. In 4Q400 one reads of the “king of the princes”

(. . . y)y#n Klm).718 4Q403, frg. 1. col. II refers to a “chief of the divine beings” (Myhwl)) who is over other

“chiefs of the realm of the spirits.”719 Interestingly, this is also the Shirot text that contains the rare reference to

the singular prince (r#oh) and the singular “chief priest of the inner sanctum” (bwrq Nhwkm #wr).720 This

chief of the divine beings is most likely not God, because line 2 references God’s footstool and the plural chiefs

who surround it prior to mentioning this singular chief subsequently in line 5. Other texts speak of the “king of

the heights (Mymwrm),”721 the “king of the holy ones,”722 the “king of the holy ones of the council,”723 and the

“king of kings over all the eternal councils” (Mymlw( ydws lwkl [My]klm Klm).724




718
    4Q400, frg. 1, col. II:14.
719
    4Q403, frg. 1, col. II:1-5 (esp. lines 3, 5).
720
    Line 24 of the same text. The translation is Newsom’s.
721
    4Q403, frg. 3:1.
722
    4Q400, frg. 1, col. I:8.
723
    11QShabShir, frg. q:3. This is my own restoration. See the line in Newsom, The Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 426 (concordance).
724
    4Q403, frg. 1, col. I:34.
          The last reference above is noteworthy due to the multiple use of the royal rulership term, “king.” It is

natural for us to consider that the “king of kings over all the eternal councils” is God Himself. Indeed, Newsom

operates from this assumption, as she inserts “h[e is the God of gods]” ([Myl) l) )]wh) before the phrase

referring to the king of the kings.725 This interpretation could be the case, and such insertions, drawn as they are

from other fragments in the Shirot, have coherence. Nevertheless, in the context of this study it is significant

that the most commonly used designation (seven times)726 for a singular head of the council(s) in the Shirot is a

phrase rich with pre-exilic divine council meaning: the “king of the gods” (Myhwl) Klm).727 Readers should

recall that this is Baal’s title in the council at Ugarit, a title that authorizes his role as vice-regent of the council,

albeit under El’s ultimate sovereignty. While none of the six instances of this title clearly distinguish the “king

of the gods” from God Himself,728 in view of the plethora of references to plural Myhwl) / Myl) in the

sectarian texts, explicit council language in the scrolls, and the other phrases that describe a singular prince or

high priest of the council, it is possible that this title refers to a divine vice-regent ruling at the behest of God.

The question then is, who might this individual be?

          Scholarly discussions of any sort of divine figure (other than the God of Israel) in the Qumran sectarian

material nearly always focus on Melchizedek and the archangel Michael, as well as presumed relationships

between them. Both figures are specifically mentioned in the Qumran material, leading scholars to propose that

either one or the other leads God’s heavenly host, or perhaps the two may be equated. It is the judgment of this

study that Melchizedek and Michael should not be equated in the sectarian texts from Qumran and that

Melchizedek was considered by the Qumran sect to be the shadowy divine council vice-regent of early texts of

the Hebrew Bible.




725
    Newsom, The Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 217.
726
    4Q400, frg. 1, col. II:7; frg. 2:5; 4Q401, frg. 1:5; 4Q402, frg. 3, col. II:12; 4Q405, frg. 23, col. I:13; frg. 24:3; 11QShabbShir, frags.
H-1:6.
727
    Three of the occurrences are partially reconstructed and could read Myl) Klm. However, their surrounding context is always quite
similar or identical to complete readings that have Myhwl) Klm.
728
    That is, there are no texts that clearly have God and the king of the gods as separate beings in one scene.
         There are several texts considered below that relate to these matters. Perhaps the most important is

11QMelchizedek. This fragmentary scroll from Cave 11 draws upon several texts from the Hebrew Bible.

11QMelchizedek, columns 2 and 3, reads:729

         Column 2

         1 [... ] ? [...]

         2 [...] And as for what he said: "In this year of jubilee, [you shall return, each one, to his respective property" (Lev
         25:13), as is written: "This is] 3 the manner (of effecting) the [release: every creditor shall release what he lent [to
         his neighbor. He shall not coerce his neighbor or his brother when] the release for El [has been proclaimed]" (Deut
         15:2). 4 [Its inter]pretation for the last days refers to the captives, about whom he said: "To proclaim liberty to the
         captives (Isa 61:1). And he will make 5 their rebels prisoners [...] and of the inheritance of Melchizedek, for [...] and
         they are the inheri[tance of Melchi]zedek, who 6 will make them return. He will proclaim liberty for them, to free
         them from [the debt] of all their iniquities. And this will [happen] 7 in the first week of the jubilee which follows the
         ni[ne] jubilees. And the day [of aton]ement is the end of the tenth jubilee 8 in which atonement will be made for all
         the sons of [God] and for the men of the lot of Melchizedek. [And in the heights] he will decla[re in their] favor
         according to their lots; for 9 it is the time of the "year of favor" for Melchizedek . . . holy ones of El through the rule
         of judgment, as is written 10 about him in the songs of David, who said: "a divine being (Myhwl)) stands up in the
         assem[bly of El,] in the midst of the gods (Myhwl)) he judges” (Ps 82:1). And about him he said: And concerning
         him He said, 11 “to the heights (Mwrml), return (bw#$)! El judges the peoples” (Ps 7:8-9), As for what he sa[id:
         "How long will yo[u judge unjustly and show partiality to the wicked? Selah” (Ps 82:2). 12 Its interpretation
         concerns Belial and the spirits of his lot, who were rebels [all of them] turning aside from the commandments of El
         [to commit evil]. 13 But, Melchizedek will carry out the vengeance of El's judgments [on this day, and they shall be
         freed from the hands] of Belial and from the hands of all the sp[irits of his lot]. 14 Allied with him (shall be) all "the
         gods of [righteousness" ([qdch] yl)) Isa 61:3). The . . .] is that wh[ich . . . al]l the sons of El. . . . 15 This is the
         day of [peace about which God] spoke [of old through the words of Isa]iah the prophet, who said: "How beautiful 16
         upon the mountains are the feet of the herald who announces peace, who brings [good] news, [who announces
         salvat]ion, saying to Zion: 'your God (Myhwl)) [reigns'”] (Isa 52:7). 17 Its interpretation: The mountains are the
         prophet[s ...] 18 And the herald is [the ano]inted of the spirit (xwrh xw#$m)730 about whom Dan[iel] spoke [. . .] and
         the herald of] 19 good news who announ[ces salvation] is the one about whom it is written, [“to proclaim the year of
         the Lord’s favor, the day of the vengeance of our God;] to comfo[rt all who mourn” (Isa 61:2-3). 20 Its
         interpretation: "he is to inst[r]uct them in all the ages of the worl[d...] 21 in truth. [...] 22 [...] it has been turned away
         from Belial and it [...] 23 [...] in the judgments of El, as is written about him: ["who says to Zi]on: 'your God
         (Myhwl)) reigns'" (Isa 52:7). ["Zi]on" is 24 [the congregation of all the sons of justice, who] establish the covenant,
         those who avoid walking [on the pa]th of the people. "Your God (Myhwl))" is 25 [Melchizedek, who will fr]ee
         [them] from the hand of Belial. And as for what he said: "You shall blow the hor[n in every] land” (Lev 25:9).

         Column 3 (only small pieces)

         1 [Its interpretation ...]
         2 and you know [...]
         3 God [...]
         4 and many [...]
         5 [...] Melchizedek [...]
         6 the law for them [...] the hand [...] and he will announce [...]



729
    Column 1 is not extant, save for one partially illegible line written down the margin. 11QMelchizedek was first published by A.S.
Van der Woude, “Melchisedek als himmlische Erlösergestalt in den neugefundenen eschatologischen Midraschim aus Qumran Hohle
XI,” OtSt 14 (1965): 354-373. The text was later re-examined by E. Puech, “Notes sur le manuscript del XIQMelch|,se8deq,” RQ 12
(1987): 483-512. See also P. J. Kobelski, Melchizedek and Melchires]ha( (CBQMS 10; Washington, D.C.: Catholic Biblical Association
of America, 1981), 3-23.
730
    The reading of xwrh xw#$m rather than xwrh xy#$m was established via computer enhancement by T. H. Lim, “11QMelch, Luke 4,
and the Dying Messiah,” JJS 43 (1992): 91.
         7 they shall devour Belial with fire [...] Belial, and they shall rebel [...]

         As many scholars have noted, the author utilized the pesher of interpretation found so frequently among

Dead Sea Scrolls, quoting passages from Deuteronomy, Leviticus, and Second Isaiah.731 Line 18 may also have

included a quotation of Daniel (“And the herald is [the ano]inted of the spirit (xwrh xw#$m) about whom

Dan[iel] spoke . . . ).” Most scholars hold that the reference is to the anointed prince (dygn xy#m) of Dan 9:25,

but M. Wise understands the reference to speak of Dan 9:26, “an anointed one (xy#m) shall be cut off.” J.

Collins contends, on the other hand, that the phrase xwrh xw#$m is “obviously derived from Isaiah 61,”

apparently suggesting that the author was not intending to quote Daniel, but merely tied the description of Isa

61:1 to Daniel 9.732 In light of the wording that this anointing is of the spirit and 11QMelchizedek’s other uses

of Isaiah 61, Collins’ suggestion seems most cogent.

         Several aspects of the scroll’s contents and pesher exegesis are noteworthy for the purposes of this

study, and provide a backdrop for the concept of divine vice regency in the scroll.

         First, the text quotes Psalm 82 twice, and clearly identifies Melchizedek as a divine being; according to

the author he is the singular Myhwl) of Ps 82:1. Line 11 also references the heights, establishing that the divine

being referenced in the text along with the God of Israel has some connection to the divine council.733 It is also

apparent that, in Qumran theology, the time of the end was when the corrupt gods of Psalm 82 would finally




731
    James R. Davila, “Melchizedek: King, Priest, and God,” in The Seductiveness of Jewish Myth: Challenge or Response? (ed. S. Daniel
Breslauer; Albany: State University of New York Press, 1997), 221; M. Miller, “The Function of Isaiah 61:1-2 in 11QMelchizedek,” JBL
88 (1969): 469.
732
    John John J. Collins, “The Herald of Good Tidings: Isaiah 61:1-3 and Its Actualization in the Dead Sea Scrolls,” in The Quest for
Context and Meaning: Studies in Biblical Intertextuality in Honor of James A. Sanders (ed. Craig Evans and Shemaryahu Talmon;
Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1997), 230.
733
    Although the manuscript clearly reads a waw in this verbal form (from bw#$), its sense in the context (“return . . .”) has given
commentators difficulty. It is possible that the form was originally hby#$, meaning "sit" or "preside (upon the heights)," a picture
consistent with the divine council imagery in Psalm 82. Dahood speculated that bw#$ might be a bi-form of b#$y, but there is little
evidence for this. This writer's own opinion of this command is that it is less problematic if one understands the "heights" to be a
metaphor for Zion, and not for Melchizedek's point of origin in the heavens. That Zion is spoken of in these terms is apparent from
passages like Isa 33:5; Ezek 17:23; 20:40; and 34:14. To these verses one needs to compare the references to Zion as being on the
Nwpc ytkry to complete the divine council imagery (e.g., Ps 48:3). While it is true that one also comes across references where
invaders come upon Israel from the Nwpc ytkry, it is possible to view both types of passages as referring to the same thing: Zion is the
earthly city of the nation of Israel, but it is also the place where God dwells and holds council.
receive their punishment.734 Melchizedek, then, was viewed as a divine eschatological judge whose victory

would usher in the rule of God (El) over the earth.

          Further, since it is Melchizedek who proclaims the rwrd in lines 6 of the scroll, it is logical to conclude

that he is also the herald of lines 18-19.735 Note those lines below, along with the interplay and differentiation of

the word Myhwl) to both God and Melchizedek, and my own italicized notations:

          6 . . . He (Melchizedek) will proclaim liberty for them, to free them from [the debt] of all
          their iniquities. And this will [happen] . . .

          9 it is the time of the "year of favor" for Melchizedek . . . holy ones of El through the rule of
          judgment, as is written 10 about him (Melchizedek) in the songs of David, who said: "a
          divine being (Myhwl)) stands in the assem[bly of El,] in the midst of the gods (Myhwl)) he
          judges.”
          17 Its interpretation: The mountains are the prophet[s ...] 18 And the herald (Melchizedek) is [the ano]inted of the
          spirit about whom Dan[iel] spoke [. . .] and the herald of] 19 good news who announ[ces salvation] is the one about
          whom it is written, [“to proclaim the year of the Lord’s favor, the day of the vengeance of our God;] to comfo[rt all
          who mourn” 20 Its interpretation: "he (Melchizedek) is to inst[r]uct them in all the ages of the worl[d...] 21 in truth.
          [...] 22 [...] it has been turned away from Belial and it [...] 23 [...] in the judgments of El, as is written about him:
          ["who says to Zi]on: (i.e., Melchizedek, the herald, says to Zion) 'your God (Myhwl)) reigns’. [Zi]on is 24 [the
          congregation of all the sons of justice, who] establish the covenant, those who avoid walking [on the pa]th of the
          people. Your divine being (Myhwl)) is 25 [Melchizedek, who will fr]ee [them] from the hand of Belial . . .


          The divine identity of the herald of lines 18-19 is drawn from the context of line 6 and its juxtaposition

to line 9’s application of Ps 82:1 to Melchizedek and the allusion back to Isaiah 61. As the herald of lines 18-

19, Melchizedek is seen as the previously unidentified being who announces to Zion that “your God (Myhwl))

reigns.” As noted in Chapter Four, this quotation comes from Isa 52:7, which is paralleled by Isa 40:9, which in

turn is a chapter that involves the activity of the divine council. The identification of the herald Melchizedek as

Myhwl) is also reinforced by lines 24-25, where the one who frees the people from the hand of Belial (viz.,

Melchizedek from lines 12-13) is referred to as “your Myhwl).” Hence 11QMelchizedek reveals the belief at

Qumran that there is an Myhwl) besides the God of Israel (El) who, as a member of the divine council, is


734
    Line 14's Mymwrm has been reconstructed on the basis of Mwrml in line 11, as well as the quotation of Ps 7:7-8 [Heb. 8,9] in line 11.
735
    John J. Collins and others dispute this, arguing that the herald is either a “prophetic precursor of Melchizedek” or perhaps the Teacher
of Righteousness from the Qumran sect (John J. Collins, “A Herald of Good Tidings,” 230-231). Collins and others, however, have
failed to interact with the work of scholars who articulate the divine council context of Deutero-Isaiah and its importance for any
discussion of the herald. There is also the identification of the prophets with the mountains—not the herald—in 11QMelchizedek itself.
Collins’ main argument is the “anointing” language elsewhere in Qumran material applied to prophets and the Teacher. By Collins’ own
admission, however, “anointing” in 11QMelchizedek may speak of a priestly role, and may only denote an appointment without any
reference to the prophetic office (John J. Collins, “A Herald of Good Tidings,” 227). Moreover, observing the references to anointing
does not address either of the two issues above.
chosen to pronounce and dispense judgment on the corrupt sons of God (cf. the use of Ps 82:2 in line 11) on that

eschatological day.

         Second, Melchizedek at Qumran was more than an eschatological judge; he was also the herald who

announced the coming judgment. Scholars have taken note that the description of the herald of good news of

Isaiah 61 bears “clear echoes” of the servant of the Lord in Isaiah 42 and 49.736 For example, the herald of

Isaiah 61, and hence of 11QMelchizedek, is anointed by the spirit (61:1a) to “proclaim liberty to the captives

and release to the prisoners” (61:1b) and “to proclaim the year of the Lord’s favor” (61:2a). God says of the

servant of Isaiah 42, “I have put my spirit upon him” (42:1) and the servant is appointed “to open the eyes that

are blind, to release prisoners from the dungeon, and from prison those who sit in darkness” (42:7). Isa 49:7-8

references a “time of favor” and a “day of salvation” in connection with the release of prisoners as well. Indeed,

the connections are so tight that some scholars have argued Isaiah 61 is a sort of commentary or actualization of

the servant of Deutero-Isaiah.737

         In regard to the herald role of the divine Melchizedek, I proposed in Chapter Three of this study that the

proceedings in Psalm 82 should not be viewed as evincing an antiquated polytheism, where El and Yahweh

were separate. Rather, either Yahweh-El was both judge and prosecutor, or the psalm described Yahweh-El as

judge and an unidentified divine being from the council as the prosecutor, the one who accuses the gods of

corruption and announces their sentence. 11QMelchizedek reflects the latter option. The scroll demonstrates a

belief at Qumran that a second divine being would both announce judgment and dispense that justice in the

eschatological day. On the basis of hints of the divine council in Second Isaiah, Chapter Four also put forth the

idea that the herald (r#obm) of Second Isaiah was very likely an unidentified divine council member. The

conflation of the herald in Isaiah 61 with the identification of the herald as divine being (lines 18-19) and the

fact that this divine being speaks the words of Isa 52:7 (cf. 40:9) demonstrates that the author of

11QMelchizedek understood the herald of Second Isaiah as a divine council member.




736
   John J. Collins, “Isaiah 61:1-3,” 226.
737
   W. A. M. Beuken, “Servant and Herald of Good Tidings: Isaiah 61 as an Interpretation of Isaiah 40-55,” in The Book of Isaiah: Le
Livre d’Isaie (ed. J. Vermeylen; BETL 81; Leuven: Peeters and Leuven University Press, 1989), 411-442.
         Third, the herald of 11QMelchizedek is “anointed.” While “anointing” can refer to appointment as a

herald or prophet (see below) in the Hebrew Bible, it also refers to rulership / kingship and the high priestly

office. Melchizedek naturally fills both roles as king-priest (Gen 14; Ps 110).

         Since the anointed one of Isaiah 61 is told to announce (r#ob) good news to the oppressed and proclaim

liberty to the captives, he is often identified by modern scholars as the prophet. J. Collins defends this view on

the basis that, though rare, the idea of prophets being anointed can be found in the Hebrew Bible738 and other

Dead Sea Scrolls refer to prophets as “anointed ones.”739 Surprisingly, this perspective overlooks the clear

reading of 11QMelchizedek itself. Lines 17-18 read: “Its interpretation: The mountains are the prophet[s ...] 18

And the herald is [the ano]inted of the spirit (xwrh xw#$m).” These lines distinguish the anointed one from the

prophets, and so the notion that the anointed one is the Isaianic prophet cannot be sustained.

         The imagery certainly seems obscure to modern thinking: an anointed herald “stands” upon the

prophets (mountains) to proclaim the good tidings to Zion. This “standing” atop the prophets (mountains)

should elicit joy, for the feet of the herald are “beautiful.” The midrashic point could be that the good news of

the return at the mouth of the herald simultaneously liberates Mount Zion and validates her prophets. Lines 23-

24 of 11QMelchizedek might connect the prophets in such a way (“. . . ‘Zion’ is [the congregation of all the sons

of justice, who] establish the covenant”). Whatever the correct understanding of the imagery, the text itself

distinguishes the prophets from the anointed one.

         Fourth, several scholars have discerned a priestly connection between the anointing of the herald and the

fact that the liberation proclaimed in Isaiah 61 and 11QMelchizedek is also proclaimed in Leviticus 25. While it

is true that Leviticus 25 is not the main point of reference for the midrash of the scroll, it is the starting point.740

As M. Miller has pointed out, it is because of the common theme of rwrd between Leviticus 25 and Isaiah 61

that the latter is brought into the discussion.741 Moreover, as Collins has noted, “the liberation is not economic

but relief from the burden of sin, an idea that may be suggested by the reference to the Day of Atonement in


738
    See 1 Kgs 19:16; Ps 105:15.
739
    See CD 2:12; 6:1; 1QM 11:7.
740
    C. Stuhlmueller, Creative Redemption in Second Isaiah (Rome: Pontifical Biblical Institute, 1970), 66-94.
741
    M. Miller, “The Function of Isaiah 61:1-2,” 467-469.
Leviticus 25:9” in line 25, which marks the tenth jubilee.742 This observation highlights the priestly role of the

anointed herald, which in turn makes the Qumranic interpretation that the herald is Melchizedek quite

understandable. In fact, one of the fragmentary occurrences of the name of Melchizedek in the Shabbat Shirot

specifically references “Melchizedek, priest in the assembly of God” (. . . t]d(b Nhwk qdc[yklm . . .).743

         Fifth, lines 11-14 of 11QMelchizedek considers the corrupt gods of Psalm 82 to be those divine beings

who serve Belial and who, according to the War Scroll, will fight with Belial at the end of days:

         As for what he sa[id, "How long will yo[u judge unjustly and show partiality to the wicked?
         Selah” (Ps 82:2). 12 Its interpretation concerns Belial and the spirits of his lot, who were
         rebels [all of them] turning aside from the commandments of El [to commit evil]. 13 But,
         Melchizedek will carry out the vengeance of El's judgments [on this day, and they shall be
         freed from the hands] of Belial and from the hands of all the sp[irits of his lot]. 14 Allied
         with him (shall be) all "the gods (Myhwl)) of [righteousness" (Isa 61:3).

According to the scroll, Melchizedek is the one chosen by God to defeat Belial and his hordes. Line 14 notes

that Melchizedek’s army will consist of other divine beings, the “gods of [righteousness].” As such, the divine

Melchizedek functions as God’s military commander and is placed in arch-opposition to Belial in this scroll.

         Another significant fragmentary Qumran scroll that details the eschatological herald is 4Q521,

specifically fragment 2, column II. The translation and key Hebrew terminology are as follows:744

         1 . . . heaven and earth will obey his anointed one
         2 [and all th]at is in them will not turn away from the commandments of holy ones.
         3 You who seek the Lord (ynd)), strengthen yourselves in his service.
         4 Is it not in this that you will find the Lord (ynd)), all who hope in their hearts?
         5 For the Lord (ynd)) will seek out the faithful ones (Mydysx) and call the righteous by
         name,
         6 and his spirit will hover over the poor and he will renew the faithful (Mynwm)) by might.
         7 For he will glorify the faithful ones (Mydysx) on the throne of an eternal kingdom
         (d( twklm )sk),
         8 releasing captives, giving sight to the blind, and raising up those who are bo[wed
         down].
         9 Forever I will cleave to [those who] hope, and in his kindness . . .
         10 The fru[it of a] good [wor]k will not be delayed for anyone . . .
         11 and the glorious things that have not taken place the Lord (ynd)) will do as he s[aid]
         12 for he will heal the wounded, give life to the dead, and preach (r#oby) good news to the
         poor
         13 and he will [sat]isfy the [weak] ones and lead those who have been cast out and enrich
         the hungry.



742
    John J. Collins, “A Herald of Good Tidings,” 229-230.
743
    The text cited is 4Q401, frg.11:3. Newsom notes that this line is “strongly reminiscent of 11QMelch, ii:10” (Newsom, The Songs of
the Sabbath Sacrifice, 134). See also Davila, “Melchizedek: King, Priest, and God,” 223.
744
    The translation is based on that of John J. Collins (“A Herald of Good Tidings,” 233) with a few of my own more literal renderings to
         The connections between 4Q521 and Isaiah 61 and 11QMelchizedek are obvious. Several observations

have crucial significance. First, a reader would assume from the outset that the God of Israel is the one called

“Lord” in the text despite the absence of the divine name. With this supposition I would agree. Yet in both

Isaiah 61:1-3 and 11QMelchizedek it is the herald who performs what “the Lord” does in 4Q521. On the other

hand, in Ps 146:5b-8, we read

                                                        `wyh'l{a/ hw"hy>-l[; Arb.fi Arz>[,B. bqo[]y: laev, yrev.a; 5
                                    `~l'A[l. tm,a/ rmeVoh; ~B'-rv,a]-lK'-ta,w> ~Y"h;-ta, #r,a'w" ~yIm;v' hf,[o 6
                                       `~yriWsa] ryTim; hw"hy> ~ybi[er.l' ~x,l, !tenO ~yqiWv[]l' jP'v.mi hf,[o 7
                                             `~yqiyDic; bheao hw"hy> ~ypiWpK. @qezO hw"hy> ~yriw>[i x;qePo hw"hy> 8
                   5 How blessed is he whose help is the God of Jacob, whose hope is in Yahweh his God, 6 who
                   made heaven and earth, the sea and all that is in them; who keeps faith forever; 7 who executes
                   justice for the oppressed; who gives food to the hungry. Yahweh sets the prisoners free. 8
                   Yahweh opens the eyes of the blind; Yahweh raises up those who are bowed down; Yahweh
                   loves the righteous.


In Psalm 146 it is unmistakable that Yahweh is the one who performs the deliverance ascribed to the anointed

one in Isaiah 61. While commentators would naturally argue that Israel’s theology must have Yahweh as the

ultimate power and deliverer, it is important to highlight the notion—discerned by those who wrote the Qumran

texts under consideration—that the anointed one acts in the stead of Yahweh. That is, the anointed one is the

special agent of God and, according to 11QMelchizedek, this one is an Myhwl). J. Collins is troubled by the

interplay of 4Q521 and 11QMelchizedek, noting that:

         Grammatically, God is the subject of v. 12 [of 4Q521], but nowhere else is God the subject of
         the verb r#ob in the Hebrew Bible. The verb refers to the activity of the herald or messenger,
         and so it would scarcely make sense to speak of God performing it directly. Consequently,
         the suspicion arises that God is supposed to act through an agent here . . . [but] no agent is
         made explicit at this point. Merely to insist on this point, however, is to fail to address the
         anomalous use of the verb r#oby. . . . If the presence of such an agent is not inferred, then
         neither the reference to the anointed one in v.1 nor the verb r#oby in v12 can be satisfactorily
         explained.745


         I would submit that the use of r#oby is not “anomalous” if one understands the herald of these passages

in Second Isaiah to be the divine vice-regent of God’s council. The Qumran writers, against the backdrop of


illustrate the vocabulary for the sake of the discussion.
745
    John J. Collins, “A Herald of Good Tidings,” 235-236.
their numerous references to the divine council and its second-tier Myhwl) / Myl), draw on the council

contexts of the passages in Second Isaiah discussed in Chapter Four and interpret them as describing a special

agent of Yahweh—one who is an Myhwl) and functions in Yahweh’s place. If the anointed one of these

passages and scrolls is the divine vice-regent acting as herald, judge, and deliverer as an extension of Yahweh,

there is no grammatical problem. The grammar is not troublesome when one recalls that in the pre-exilic

council El and the council were often considered one.746 In fact the parallelism of lines 1-2 of 4Q521 suggests

such an identification:

         1 . . . heaven and earth will obey his anointed one (wxy#$m)
         2 [and all th]at is in them will not turn away from the commandments of holy ones
         (My#$wdq).

         The relationship of “anointed one” (wxy#$m) in line 1 and “holy ones” in line 2 (My#$wdq) has prompted

some to propose that wxy#$m should be read as a plural and that the intended referent of both terms are priests.747

As Collins notes, however, there is not a single case in the Qumran literature “where either term is used

substantively as a noun with clear reference to priests in the plural, and neither [is there] any parallel for the idea

that heaven and earth should obey priests. . . . The parallelism suggests that the anointed one enjoys a status

comparable to the holy ones, or angels.”748 As noted earlier, Collins identifies the anointed herald as the prophet

himself, but this explanation fails to account for the divine council contexts of the herald references in Second

Isaiah and the relationship of 4Q521 and 11QMelchizedek, where the herald is an Myhwl).

         To summarize the contents of 11QMelchizedek and 4Q521 as they relate to the divine council and

divine vice regency, the Qumran sectarian scrolls noted thus far reflect the following beliefs: (1) Ps 82:1 spoke

of a divine being (Myhwl)) separate from Yahweh-El; (2) the interplay of these texts with the passages they

quote or allude to in the Hebrew Bible interchange Yahweh and this other Myhwl) figure; (3) this divine being

had some sort of priestly role; (4) this divine being also serves as the herald of good news, mediating divine

favor as God wishes; and (5) this divine being is a warrior who carries out the military decrees of God.


746
    Mullen, The Divine Council, 129.
747
    K.W. Niebuhr, “4Q521, 2 II – Ein Eschatologischer Psalm,” The Qumran Chronicle 5 (1995): 93-96.
748
    John J. Collins, “A Herald of Good Tidings,” 236.
            The parallels between this figure, the divine heavenly Melchizedek, and the pre-exilic divine vice-regent

of the council, the hwhy K)lm, the captain of Yahweh’s host, are apparent. Melchizedek is called Myhwl), as

is the case with the hwhy K)lm, by virtue of the Name being in him (Exod 23:20-23; see also Hos 12:3-4; Gen

48:15-16). Melchizedek performs the priestly role of atonement in relation to release of captives; the

hwhy K)lm has power to withhold forgiveness of sins and leads Israel to the Promised Land (Exod 23:20-23).

This parallel is bolstered by the fact that scholars have discerned a connection between the atoning release of the

captives in 11QMelchizedek and the deliverance of the slaves from Egypt.749 As J. Collins notes:

            The liberation envisaged [in 11QMelch] is the same as that envisaged in Isaiah 42: the
            liberation of captives. . . . The reference is to the return of the exiles from Babylon and the
            restoration of the community in Judah. This is quite clear in context; e.g., Isa 60:4 says that
            “your sons shall come from far away, and your daughters shall be carried on their nurses arms.”
            Isa 61:4 speaks of rebuilding ancient ruins. The release of the Jewish exiles from captivity is
            compared to the liberation of slaves. One of the recurring motifs in Deutero-Isaiah is that of the
            Lord as l)g, the kinsman who redeems his people. In the background, of course, is the
            paradigm of the release of the people of Israel from slavery in the Exodus. The release from
            Babylon is conceived as a re-enactment of the Exodus. The rwrd is ultimately granted by
            God.750

            Melchizedek as the herald of good news is paralleled by several instances where the hwhy K)lm

performs the same function, announcing blessing and deliverance (Gen 16; Exod 3; Judg 6, 13). Finally,

Melchizedek as military commander and dispenser of judgment calls to mind this familiar role of the

hwhy K)lm (Josh 5:14; 2 Kgs 19:35; 1 Chr 21:15ff.; Isa 37:36).

            It is precisely the military role of Melchizedek in 11QMelchizedek that has assured many scholars that

the divine Melchizedek should be equated with the angel Michael. Other scholars contend that additional

support for this equation has been found in line 12 of 4Q521, where the herald brings resurrection, an idea that is

associated with Michael in the last days in Dan 12:1-3, albeit the association cannot be determined. These

apparent congruencies notwithstanding, such an identification is overstated, and perhaps inaccurate. It is the

position of this study that the arguments used for identifying Melchizedek with the archangel Michael can be




749
      C. Stuhlmueller, Creative Redemption in Second Isaiah, 66-94.
750
      John J. Collins, “A Herald of Good Tidings,” 228-229.
used with equal force in defending the possibility that the Qumran scribes had another “angel” in mind—the

hwhy K)lm in his role as a deity level vice-regent under Yahweh.

         It should first be noted that Melchizedek may have been identified as an angel at Qumran. Several

decades ago, F. du Toit Laubscher proposed a coherent reconstruction of the missing lacuna in 11QMelchizedek

13b that proposed this possibility.751 Noting the eschatological nature of 11QMelchizedek, its commonalities

with 1QM (most notably the dualistic holy war and identical phrases describing such), and the syntax of both

scrolls, du Toit Laubscher reconstructed the lacuna of 13b using 4QCatena A, frags. 12-13, cols. 1,7. Both

fragments are nearly identical and speak of the deliverance of the children of Light from the power of Belial. If

du Toit Laubscher is correct in his case that the two texts are so close as to merit the reconstruction, where

11QMelchizedek has Melchizedek helping the children of Light against Belial, 4QCatena A has the phrase “his

[God’s] angel of truth,” which would seem a strong parallel to “the angel of truth” in 1QS 3:24-25. This would

mean that the resulting parallel has Melchizedek as God’s angel of truth.

         But is God’s angel of truth Michael? It must be pointed out that no text at Qumran ever specifically

equates the two figures.752 The primary means of equating Melchizedek and Michael via the Qumran material

has been based on several assumptions: (1) that the “Prince of Princes” and “Prince of the Host” of the book of

Daniel refer to Michael; (2) that these terms from Daniel speak of the same being the Dead Sea Scrolls describe

as the “Prince of Light” and the “Angel of Truth”; and (3) that these Qumran titles describe one being. I have

already detailed in Chapter Six that the first assumption lacks coherence, since Daniel’s “Prince of Princes” and

“Prince of the Host” is a being of superior status to Michael, who, though “great” is merely one of a larger

number of chief princes. That the Qumran community apparently had the same view emerges from an

examination of several passages in the scrolls.

         It is well known that the “Prince of Light(s)” of 1QM 13:10-11 and 1QS 3:20 is at the head of the

“dominion of light” to which all the “spirits of truth” and “sons of righteousness” belong. The chief adversary




751
    F. du Toit Laubscher, “God’s Angel of Truth and Melchizedek: A Note on 11QMelch 13b,” JSJ 3 (1972): 46-51. It should be noted
that his reconstruction takes great care to match the grammar and syntactical flow of 11QMelchizedek 13.
752
    Bampfylde, “The Prince of the Host,” 130-131.
to this Prince is Belial, who rules the “dominion of darkness.”753 Several interesting descriptions of this Prince

are provided in the sectarian scrolls that, in my opinion, provide a strong argument that this Prince is to be

identified with the “Prince of Princes” and “Prince of the Host” of Daniel, who in turn should be identified with

the hwhy K)lm, not Michael. First, 1QM 13:10-11 tells the reader that this Prince of Light was appointed

“from of old” to assist the sons of righteousness. Second, CD 5:17-19 identifies this Prince as the One who

helped Moses and Aaron lead Israel out of Egypt. This is a clear reference to the role of the hwhy K)lm in the

Hebrew Bible (cf. Exod 23:20-23; Judg 2:1ff.), and on no occasion is the hwhy K)lm identified as Michael.

There is no evidence in the Hebrew Bible that Michael is that being in whom the Name of Yahweh dwells.

Third, the Prince of Light has the task of supporting the sons of light in the final eschatological battle, where he

leads the angelic host against the forces of darkness (1QM 12:6ff.; 13:10-11). He is thus the heavenly leader (or

Prince) of God’s host. This fits quite well with the titles )bch-r#o and hwhy-)bc-r#o of Dan 8:11 and Josh

5:14, as well as the conflict with the divine princes who rule nations in Daniel 10-11.

          There is one passage in the War Scroll (1QM) to which scholars invariably appeal when arguing for a

Michael-Melchizedek equation. In his critical edition of this important scroll, Y. Yadin contended that 1QM

17:5-8 identified Michael as the Prince of Light:

          5 . . . Today is His [God’s] appointed time to subdue and to humble the prince of the
          dominion 6 of wickedness. He will send eternal assistance to the lot to be redeemed by Him
          through the might of an angel (K)lm trwbgb): He hath magnified (ryd)h) the authority
          of Michael (l)kym tr#ml) through eternal light 7 to light up in joy the house of Israel,
          peace and blessing for the lot of God, so as to raise amongst the angels (Myl)b) the authority
          of Michael (l)kym tr#m) and the dominion of 8 Israel (l)r#y tl#mmw) amongst all
          flesh.754

          Michael is specifically named in this passage, but the title “Prince of Light” does not appear. Yadin’s

argument for their equation, and that of the vast majority of scholars who have followed him, is based on the

translation of a few key phrases and the correlation of the passage’s contents with other passages in the War




753
   Ibid., 131.
754
   The translation is Yadin’s and is taken from Y. Yadin, The Scroll of the War of the Sons of Light Against the Sons of Darkness (trans.
Batya and Chaim Rabin; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1962), 340.
Scroll that describe the demise of the prince of darkness. Several observations are appropriate in regard to

Yadin’s translation and its implications.

         Some scholars prefer the rendering “Angel of Might”755 or “majestic angel”756 to “the might of an angel”

in line 6. These alternatives imply a distinction between this being and Michael, but have no grammatical

superiority over Yadin’s rendering. The primary point of contention is l)kym tr#ml of line 6. Yadin’s

translation of line 6 takes the l of l)kym tr#ml as signifying the object of the verb ryd)h, which has the

effect of reading K)lm trwbgb as belonging to the prior clause. If one considers K)lm trwbgb as

adverbially tied to ryd)h, the result is that the l of l)kym tr#ml describes Michael receiving help from the

angel of might or “Mighty Angel,” making them separate entities (“by the angel of might He magnified the

dominion of Michael”). The result is that “Michael receives eternal help, i.e., heavenly assistance, from the

Angel of Might.”757 This possibility, I would argue, is quite consistent with the book of Daniel, where a being

who outranks Michael (by implication, the Prince of the Host) receives help from Michael.

         One could argue (and most scholars have) that both Daniel and 1QM 17:5-8 merely describe Michael’s

princeship as being exalted above the other gods (Myl)b; cf. 1QM 17:7), the geographical princes of the

council—an idea that is clearly related to the pre-exilic council worldview—and so Michael is indeed the Prince

of the Host and Prince of Princes in Daniel, as well as the Prince of Light and Melchizedek at Qumran. A case

could be made for this approach in the Qumran material, but it is incoherent in Daniel, for the Prince of the host

/ Prince of princes is apparently distinct from Michael.758 It cannot be argued that Michael is made the lead

prince among the beings of his own class in Daniel, for Michael assists the divine being who earlier had the

authority to command Gabriel, another member of the princely class to which Michael belongs. I propose that

projecting Yadin’s view back into Daniel creates problems between the Qumran sectarian view and that

canonical book, which was held in such esteem by the sect. Rather, we should see 1QM 17:5-7 in light of the

divine hierarchy of Daniel.

755
    Bampfylde, “The Prince of the Host,” 132.
756
    Florentino Garcia Martinez and Eibert J.C. Tigchelaar, eds. The Dead Sea Scrolls Study Edition, vol. 1: 1Q1-4Q273 (Leiden: E. J.
Brill, 1997), 141.
757
    Ibid., 132-133.
         This suggestion has two benefits. First, it helps bring the references to resurrection in Dan 12:1-3 and

4Q521 closer together in a way that does not create contradiction with 1QM 17:5-7 or 11QMelchizedek. Seeing

the “Angel of Might” as a being higher than Michael who takes action to elevate him and Israel over the other

geographical god-princes and their respective nations completes the concatenated chain of mutually identified

vice-regent figures in the Qumran texts: the divine Melchizedek, the Prince of Lights, and the hwhy K)lm.

Yahweh’s vice-regent is the one who exalts Michael at the time of the end, and it is he, according to 4Q521,

who brings resurrection. Dan 12:1-3 merely says that individuals are resurrected in connection with Michael’s

rise; it does not suggest Michael is responsible. In like manner, Michael and the vice-regent are dissociated in

that Michael is never called an Myhwl), he is not a herald, and is not said to be anointed. Positing a higher

being over Michael yet under Yahweh resolves these longstanding angelological problems in Second Temple

religion.

         Second, arguing that these texts describe a divine being of greater rank than Michael and that this figure

is the vice-regent of Yahweh’s council makes the Qumran sect’s identification of Melchizedek as

Myhwl) understandable. The use of Psalm 82 in 11QMelchizedek demonstrates that the Qumran sect’s

religious worldview was in concert with that of Deut 32:8-9 and the pre-exilic council. Melchizedek assumes

the Myhwl) role of Ps 82:1 and is victorious over the corrupt gods of Belial (lines 10-12). He is assisted by the

“gods (yl)) of righteousness" in this feat (line 14).759 Moreover, the elevation of Michael, Israel’s prince, “over

the gods” (Myl)b) in 1QM 17:7 again indicates the pre-exilic perspective of cosmic geography. The Qumran

sect’s expectations for the vice-regent of council would have aligned with Baal’s roles of warrior and dynastic

intercessor or guarantor.760 Interpreting Psalm 82 eschatologically, however, required that the vice-regent fulfill

the priestly atoning function of the anointed herald of Isaiah 61 (cf. the midrashic use of Lev 25). The warrior-

758
    See the earlier discussion in Chapter Six.
759
    Scholars of 11QMelchizedek agree that the phrase in line 14 is to be reconstructed [qdch] yl) from Isa 61:3. The MT reads
qdch yly), and this was interpreted by the sect as the full spelling of yl). Newsom points out that several sectarian texts utilize the
full spelling when divine beings are obviously in view, and so the full spelling of Isa 61:3 would not have dissuaded the Qumran author
from seeing divine beings in Isa 61:3. She also speculates that the exegesis here may be the product of popular etymology, and points out
that several manuscripts of MT have the Myly) ynb in Pss 29:1 and 89:7 (see Newsom, The Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice, 23).
760
    Mullen, The Divine Council, 249-252. Recall that this role of Baal was referenced with respect to the “cloud witness / guarantor” in
Psalm 89.
priest, acting on behalf of Yahweh, was also the herald of the divine council implied in Isaiah 40 and 52. The

choice of Melchizedek is quite understandable in view of his description as a king-priest (Gen 14, Psalm 110),

particularly since Michael could not meet all the criteria of the Qumran perspective.

          The above vice regency expectations only partially answer the question of why the Qumran sect inserted

Melchizedek into the divine council scene of Psalm 82. One speculation as to the exegesis or midrashic

rationale for this belief is that Melchizedek was considered the divine earthly vice-regent of the Jebusite cult of

Elyon inherited by David’s conquest of Shalem, old Jerusalem,761 and thus a prototype for the necessary god-

priest-warrior king of Qumran apocalyptic.762 Another scholarly perspective is that the Canaanite context for the

Melchizedek account of Genesis 14 requires that scholars look to West Semitic religion for an answer. J. Davila

argues that Melchizedek was likely viewed as an ancestral king, and thus, in Canaanite belief, he was “a

divinized royal ancestor who . . . would have been an underworld deity . . . absorbed into the Davidic royal cult

[in] the Jerusalem temple.”763 Hence there would have been a longstanding tradition that Melchizedek was

divine, and as the progenitor of the original Jerusalem priesthood, he would be the primary Davidide servant

anointed to fulfill the eschatological prophecies of Second Isaiah. Still another approach suggests that the divine

Melchizedek is patterned after Ugaritic king Keret, called a “son of El” and thus divine.764 Keret also functioned

as a priest, making the connection to Melchizedek complete.765 An Ugaritic provenance for Psalm 110 would be

a necessity in this explanation, and its words would rightly be directed to Melchizedek and his descendants,

positions that scholars have attempted to validate.766

          All of these views make important points, but the most workable answer may be that Melchizedek’s

exalted position is somehow connected with hints of the personification of the Canaanite god S[edeq in the

sectarian literature of Qumran. 1QM 17:5-8 illustrates such a personification, and in the context of the divine

council no less:

761
    See Ps 76:3; J. A. Emerton, “The Site of Salem,” in Studies in the Pentateuch (ed. J.A. Emerton; VTSup 41; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1990),
45-71.
762
    John Day, “The Canaanite Inheritance of the Israelite Monarchy,” 72-90.
763
    James R. Davila, “Melchizedek: King, Priest, and God,” 224-229.
764
    KTU 1.16.I:10-25. See M. Delcor, “Melchizedek from Genesis to the Qumran Texts and the Epistle to the Hebrews,” JSJ 2:2 (1971):
122.
765
    Delcor, “Melchizedek from Genesis to the Qumran Texts,” 121-122.
766
    H. G. Jefferson, “Is Psalm 110 Canaanite?” JBL 73 (1954): 152-156; D. Flusser, The Crucible of Christianity: Judaism, Hellenism,
and the Historic Background of the Christian Faith (New York, 1969), 229-230.
        5 . . . Today is His [God’s] appointed time to subdue and to humble the prince of the
        dominion 6 of wickedness. He will send eternal assistance to the lot to be redeemed by Him
        through the Angel of Might: He has magnified the authority of Michael through eternal light
        7 to light up in joy the house of Israel, peace and blessing for the lot of God, so as to raise
        amongst the gods the authority of Michael and the dominion of 8 Israel among all flesh.
        Righteousness (qdc) will rejoice in the heights (Mymwrmb) and all the sons of his truth will
        have enjoyment in everlasting knowledge . . .


        In the Hebrew Bible qdc is sometimes personified, at times as a member of Yahweh’s divine council, a

phenomenon judged to reflect pre-Israelite (Jebusite) religion.767 In West Semitic religion, the Phoenicians

numbered Misor and Sydyk among their gods, which correspond to m|,s\o,r (“justice”) and

s[edeq (“righteousness”) in the Hebrew Bible, and Kittu in the Babylonian pantheon, who is often invoked with

Misharu. 768 Both of these Babylonian deities are described as being seated before Shamash or the minister of

Shamash’s right hand.769 Melchizedek, whose name means either “my king is righteous” or, more likely, “my

king is S[edeq,” is said to be the king of Salem/Shalem and priest of Nwyl( l). This is usually understood to

mean that Melchizedek was a priest of Canaanite El, but others have argued that Melchizedek was priest of the

god S[edeq.770 There is in fact evidence to suggest that S[edeq may perhaps be identified with the gods Shalem

and El. For example, there are two alphabetic names from Ugarit, )ils[dq and s[dq)il, which may mean “El / my

god is S[edeq,” though “El / my god is righteous” is also possible.771 There is also the Ugaritic personal name,

s[dqs\lm, which likely means “S[edeq is Shalem,” but may also be rendered, “Shalem is righteous.”

        The ambiguity of these names notwithstanding, Shalem certainly has connections to a solar cult, and

aspects of the god S[edeq were certainly absorbed into Yahwism.772 A pre-Israelite Jebusite solar cult makes

sense of a number of verses in the Hebrew Bible, such as descriptions of Jerusalem as “the city of

Righteousness” (Isa 1:21, 26) and “the pasture of Righteousness” (Jer 31:23). Followers of Yahweh are called

“the oaks of Righteousness, the planting of Yahweh,” where the parallelism transparently equates Yahweh and

S[edeq. In Ps 17:1 S[edeq is part of a compound name of Yahweh (“Yahweh-S[edeq”). The solar flavor of S[edeq

767
    B. Batto, “Zedeq,” DDD, 930.
768
    Ibid.
769
    Ibid.
770
    H.H. Rowley, “Zadok and Nehushtan,” JBL 58 (1939): 130.
771
    Ibid., 931. See also M. Pope, El in the Ugaritic Texts, 22.
772
    Roy A. Rosenberg, "The God S[edeq," HUCA 36 (1965): 161-177. The references that follow were drawn from Batto and
worship is hinted at in Mal 3:19-20, where “the intense sun will consume the wicked like stubble, while for

those who revere God, the ‘sun of Righteousness’ [S[edeqah] shall rise with healing in its wings.”773

         Of special significance for this chapter are eschatological references that appear to point to a personified

S[edeq in the Hebrew Bible. In Jer 33:16 Jerusalem will be known in the eschaton as “Yahweh is our

Righteousness.” The anointed king is expected to “judge the world with Righteousness and [to] judge the

peoples with Justice” (Ps 9:9; 98:9). He will “judge the weak with Righteousness [and] defend the poor of the

earth with Justice” (Ps 45:7-8). These passages and these dual qualities of Yahweh recall the gods

m|,s\o,r (“justice”) and s[edeq (“righteousness”), as well as the anointed one of 11Qmelchizedek, who dispenses

judgment upon the gods of Psalm 82 accompanied by the qdch yl).

         J. Baumgarten has taken note of such references and investigated the personification of S[edeq in Jewish

apocalyptic literature, especially at Qumran.774 Aside from the immediate connections to 11QMelchizedek and

Melchizedek’s exalted stature among the gods of the council, Baumgarten notes that in the Shabbat Shirot

         . . . several categories of angels are associated with S[edeq: mal)ake, s[edeq, ruh[ot s[edeq, and
          no(ade, s[edeq. Like the )ele, s[edeq these presumably comprise the heavenly counterpart of
         the )ans\e, goral malki s[edeq, the men of Melchizedek’s lot, mentioned in 11QMelch. The
         latter may in turn be identified with the adherents of the sect called Sons of S[edeq.775

         After noting the relationship of S[edeq to solar and astral religion, particularly references in Isa 61:10 (cf.

11QMelchizedek’s use of Isaiah 61) and Isa 62:1, where S[edeq is, respectively, the garment of the divine

warrior and a personified divine being of Jerusalem who goes forth like the morning star, Baumgarten concludes

that the deification of Melchizedek reflects the Qumran belief that he was not only a celestial priest but the

embodiment of S[edeq himself. He also suggests that the anointed one of 11QMelchizedek was connected with

the Son of Man of Daniel 7 who receives eternal dominion at the apocalypse, since the seventy weeks of Dan

9:24 determined to atone for iniquity and bring in eternal Righteousness (S[edeq (olam|,m) “is quite similar to the

chronology of 11QMelch where the atoning judgment of Melchizedek is to take place in the tenth jubilee.”776 If



Rosenberg.
773
    Batto, “Zedeq,” 932.
774
    J. M. Baumgarten, “The Heavenly Tribunal and the Personification of S[edeq in Jewish Apocalyptic,” in ANRW II, Principat 19.1 (ed.
Wolfgang Haase; New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1979), 219-239.
775
    Ibid., 223.
776
    Ibid.
Baumgraten’s suggestions are correct, this would bring all the descriptions and elements of the council vice-

regent in Qumran texts and the Hebrew Bible together.


7.5 Summation

        This overview of the sectarian material from Qumran has produced evidence that the sect’s religious

worldview contained a number of elements consistent with pre-exilic Israelite religion’s divine council. The

sectarian material is rife with references to plural Myhwl) / Myl), explicit divine council and motifs, and

descriptions of an exalted member of the divine council who acts as the specific agent of Yahweh in the manner

of the pre-exilic council’s vice-regent. Such a worldview provides a Jewish backdrop—tied to the Hebrew

Bible—for the notion of “two powers in heaven” that would emerge during the Second Temple period. As the

final chapter of this study demonstrates, the Qumran sect’s perspective was just one of many offered to explain

the language of divine plurality and deified heavenly mediators.
                                                     Chapter Eight


                      The Divine Council in Non-Sectarian Literature
                         from Qumran and Other Non-Canonical
                            Second Temple Period Literature

         This chapter concentrates on the body of non-canonical pre-Christian Jewish literature that can be dated

with reasonable certainty to the close of Judaism’s Second Temple Period, or 70 C.E.777 It therefore focuses on

the non-sectarian material from Qumran, the LXX,778 the Apocrypha, and the Pseudepigrapha that can be dated

prior to the late first century C.E. The goal is to discern whether this literature evinces the presence of a divine

council in a manner consistent with the pre-exilic terms, motifs, and paradigm detailed in the preceding

chapters.

         To that end, this chapter does not critique previous general treatments of Second Temple Period

angelology,779 merkabah mysticism,780 or heavenly ascensions,781 nor will it delve into issues of tradition

history, redaction, and midrashic technique of the literature at hand.782 These topics have been dealt with at


777
    See Chapter One for an explanation of these parameters and the exclusion of the New Testament.
778
    Space prevents a full treatment of the LXX, and so comments on that material will be limited. LXX readings are those found in the
respective volumes of the Göttingen LXX (Alfred Rahlfs, ed., Septuaginta: Vetus Testamentum Graecum, Auctoritate Academiae
Scientiarum Göttingensis editum [Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Rupprecht, 1979]).
779
    See Harold B. Kuhn, “The Angelology of the Non-Canonical Jewish Apocalypses,” JBL 67:3 (1948): 217-232; Philip S. Alexander,
“The Demonology of the Dead Sea Scrolls,” in The Dead Sea Scrolls After Fifty Years: A Comprehensive Assessment (ed. Peter Flint and
James C. Vanderkam; vol. 2; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999), 331-353; Robert Haywood, “Heaven and Earth in Parallel: The Key Role of
Angels in Ancient Judaism,” in Christ (London: SPCK, 1996), 57-74; Maxwell J. Davidson, Angels at Qumran.
780
    Philip S. Alexander, “Comparing Merkavah Mysticism and Gnosticism: An Essay in Method,” JJS 35 (Spr 1984): 1-18;
James R. Davila, “The Dead Sea scrolls and Merkavah Mysticism,” in The Dead Sea Scrolls in Their Historical Context
(Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 2000), 249-264; Ithamar Gruenwald, “Reflections on the Nature and Origins of Jewish Mysticism,” in
Gershom Scholem's Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism 50 Years After (Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 1993), 25-57.
781
    Adela Yarbro Collins, “The Seven Heavens in Jewish and Christian Apocalypses,” in Death, Ecstasy, and Other Worldly Journeys
(ed. John J. Collins and Michael Fishbane; Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1995), 59-92; Arie Zwiep, “Assumptus est in Caelum: Rapture
and Heavenly Exaltation in Early Judaism and Luke-Acts,” in Auferstehung (Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 2001), 323-349; David
Halperin, “Ascension or Invasion: Implications of the Heavenly Journey in Ancient Judaism,” Religion 18 (1988): 47-67; Alan
F. Segal, “Heavenly Ascent in Hellenistic Judaism, Early Christianity and Their Environment,” Vorkonstantinisches
Christentum (Principat 23:2; New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1980), 1333-1394; James H. Charlesworth, “The Portrayal of the
Righteous as an Angel,” in Ideal Figures in Ancient Judaism: Profiles and Paradigms (ed. John J. Collins and George W.E.
Nickelsburg; SBLSCS 12; Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1980), 135-151.
782
    See for example, Michael E. Stone, ed., Jewish Writings of the Second Temple Period: Apocrypha, Pseudepigrapha, Qumran,
Sectarian Writings, Philo, Josephus (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1984); James H. Charlesworth, ed., The Old Testament
Pseudepigrapha (2 vols.; New York: Doubleday, 1983, 1985); George Nickelsburg, “The Books of Enoch at Qumran: What We Know
and What We Need to Think About,” in Antikes Judentum und Fruhes Christentum: Festschrift fur Hartmut Stegemann zum 65.
Geburstag (BZNW 97; New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1999), 99-113; Peter Flint, “‘Apocrypha,’ Other Previously-Known Writings, and
‘Pseudepigrapha’ in the Dead Sea Scrolls,” in The Dead Sea Scrolls After Fifty Years: A Comprehensive Assessment (ed. Peter Flint and
James C. Vanderkam; vol. 2; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999), 24-66; James C. Vanderkam, “The Angel Story in the Book of Jubilees,” in
Pseudepigraphic Perspectives: The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha in Light of the Dead Sea Scrolls: Proceedings of the International
length by many scholars, and all such studies have presupposed the loss of the pre-exilic divine council second

tier or the equation of divine second tier beings with the lower angels.


8.1 Overview of the Primary Issues

         In general terms, Second Temple Jewish literature reveals several interesting phenomena related to the

discussion at hand. First, there is divergence with respect to how references in the Hebrew Bible to Myl),

Myhl), and Myl) / Myhl)(h) ynb are handled by Second Temple authors and translators. Some are quite

literal (e.g., ui`oi. tou/ qeou/, qeoi, sunagwgh/| qew/n); others tend to blur the council tiers by referring to every

inhabitant of heaven as a;ggeloj. Other texts, such as 1 Enoch and Jubilees in their re-telling of Gen 6:1-4,

frequently substitute “Watchers” (Nyry( or e'grhgoroi) for Myhl)(h) ynb. Second, there are several texts that

base the existence and activity of the heavenly hierarchy on Deuteronomy 32 and Daniel 10, where the nations

of the earth were distributed among the sons of God, the ruling princes. Third, and perhaps most interesting, as

the number of explicit references to the Myl) / Myhl)(h) ynb decrease (relative to the sectarian Qumran texts,

at least), the fascination with divine vice-regency increases. As J. Baumgarten observed, “When one compares

the earlier biblical allusions to the presidency of the heavenly court with those found in apocalyptic literature,

one is immediately struck by the emergence of surrogate figures.”783 Speculation on the identity of Yahweh’s

divine vice regent is the most prominent feature of the pre-exilic divine council in Second Temple texts, which

is significant with respect to this study’s attempt to bridge the gap between Israelite religion and the two powers

heresy of late antiquity.

         Second Temple literature conveys an inconsistent angelology, which is why scholars have found it

difficult to systematize. On the one hand, there are passages that seem to indicate that practically every

designation of a member of the heavenly host overlaps with all the others. That is, terms like “angel,”

“archangel,” “Watcher,” “archon,” and “power” are used interchangeably. On the other hand, there are texts

where members of these categories are spoken of in exalted terms or placed above other classes (e.g., “sons of


Symposium of the Orion Center for the Study of the Dead Sea Scrolls and Associated Literature, 12-14 January 1997 (ed. Esther G.
Chazon and Michael Stone, with the collaboration of Avital Pinnick; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999), 151-170; Gabriele Boccaccini, “Qumran
and the Enoch Groups,” in The Hebrew Bible and Qumran (ed. J.H. Charlesworth; N. Richland Hills, Texas: BIBAL Press, 2000), 63-92.
God”), evincing the kind of divine plurality one would expect in much earlier texts and the pre-exilic stage of

Israelite religion. In other words, certain members of the heavenly host are said to be above angels or

archangels yet below the God of Israel, or this status is implied by virtue of terms and status attributed to these

beings in contemporary Gentile literature and mythology. To further complicate the issue, there are also clear

statements of monotheism—or at least the “species uniqueness” of the God of Israel—in Second Temple Period

texts.784

            This final chapter puts forth three proposals that, if embraced, appear to resolve the muddle of Second

Temple angelology. If one interprets the angelic terminology through the grid of a divine council worldview,

the overlaps and contradictions largely disappear. The qualification “largely” is necessary because it cannot be

said that Second Temple Judaism is monolithic. I would certainly argue that the views put forth here would be

embraced by Jewish writers and thinkers of the period, but it would be an overstatement of the argument to

contend that all Jews of the day would agree with my understanding of their terms and my proposed resolutions.

            The first proposal is that the term “angel” in Second Temple texts (regardless of the language) became a

generic designation for any member of the heavenly host during that period and was not restricted to members

of the bottom tier of the pre-exilic council. That is, “angel” becomes a purely functional term designating the

service of the high God, not a term that denotes council status or “ontological” classification.

            M. Barker and others have argued that one of the reasons for the proliferation of angelic titles during

this period is the expression of God’s attributes.785 We have seen in earlier chapters that the personification of

God’s attributes in pre-exilic literature (and even the Qumran sectarian material) was an indication of divine

plurality. Some would suggest that the multiplication of angelic titles was an effort to disown such

personification as if to undermine divine plurality. However, this only works as an explanation if one takes the

word “angel” as subsuming the second tier deity-class language. I suggest that the persistence of such language

783
   Baumgarten, “The Heavenly Tribunal,” 220.
784
   This chapter will focus on evidence of divine plurality, not monotheistic assertions. The claim of this study is not that Second Temple
Judaism was monolatrous as a whole, only that for some Jews of the period exclusivistic monotheism would not reflect their beliefs.
Nevertheless, even the clearest assertions of monotheism in this period could conceivably be construed as monolatry. For example,
Sibylline Oracle Fragments One through Three confess that “God is alone, unique, and supreme” (3:4) since he is “self-generated [and]
unbegotten” (1:16). Yet in the same text one reads that “if gods beget and yet remain immortal, there would have been more gods born
than men” (2:1). 2 (Slavonic) Enoch (J) 2:2 affirms that while other gods are feckless, they exist but are temporary: “And do not turn
away from the Lord, and worship vain gods, gods who did not create the heaven and the earth or any created thing; for they will perish,
and so will those who worship them.”
alongside the use of a;ggeloj and clear divine council motifs in Second Temple literature suggests that this

was not the goal, and that this view does not account for such language.

            My second proposal is that Second Temple references to a divine “heavenly man” distinct from Michael

only make sense if the divine council vice regent paradigm is the conceptual backdrop. It is common in

scholarly studies of Second Temple angelology to suppose that references to an exalted heavenly commander or

intermediary speak of Michael. In some texts, this is clearly the case, but in others, a being higher than Michael

is in view, a being who is not Yahweh but at times is difficult to distinguish from Yahweh. The situation thus

mirrors the hwhy K)lm difficulty in the Hebrew Bible. Not surprisingly, on occasion the divine man is referred

to using motifs associated with the hwhy K)lm.

            Third, I propose that the category of archangel is synonymous with the categories “Watcher,” “blessed

ones” (Greek, maka/rej), “archon,” “principality,” and “dominion.” All the beings designated in these ways

exercise earthly geographical sovereignty, a function that coincides with the sons of God in Deut 32:8-9 and the

gods / sons of the Most High in Psalm 82. In fact, in Second Temple theology, this sovereignty is extended to

parts of the heavens, including stars and planets, an idea much in concert with pre-exilic Canaanite religion.

“Watchers” is the term used throughout Second Temple literature for the sons of God in pre-exilic Hebrew

literature. Scholarly discussion of the term creates a coherent case for the term being an Aramaic designation

for a territorial deity, which makes the choice of the term to describe the beings set over the nations in pre-exilic

Israelite religion quite sensible.

            This third proposal amounts to the recognition that Second Temple Hellenistic and Aramaic vocabulary

was utilized to describe the heavenly host at large and specific council members, not to obscure the divine

council’s second tier. All members of the heavenly host were Yahweh’s servants, and so a;ggeloj was

appropriate, yet insufficient to describe the old council bureaucracy. The point was not to create the impression

that the pre-exilic bottom tier had replaced the second tier in the name of exclusivistic monotheism, but to

further define the status and roles of those beings who were a;ggeloi.



785
      Barker, The Great Angel, 70-95.
          This chapter seeks to garner evidence for the endurance of the pre-exilic divine council and the

coherence of these proposals. This evidence is presented in three areas: (1) The presence of multiple deity-class

second tier beings, either in the form of a group or a deified figure above the other members of the heavenly host

yet below God; (2) a religious worldview articulated along the lines of Deuteronomy 32 and Daniel 10, where

the nations of the earth are ruled by divine heavenly princes; and (3) speculations in the literature about the

identity of an exalted, deified vice-regent.786


                            8.2 The Divine Council and Second Tier Council Members
          As noted above, the evidence for attitudes concerning plural divine beings within Second Temple

Judaism is mixed. This section documents the evidence for the approval of the idea by surveying first the

evidence for second tier beings as a group and with respect to a worldview reflective of Deut 4:19-20 and 32:8-

9, then moving to references to individual deity-level beings in God’s heavenly host.787

          It is perhaps best to begin by commenting on a misperception about LXX angelology. It is common for

LXX scholars to contend that the Hellenistic Jewish translators “demythologize” the references to plural gods

and the sons of God in the Hebrew Bible, allegedly “in a process parallel to what happened in Hellenism with

the mythology of Homer and Hesiod [where Hellenistic] critical philosophy puts the ancient Hellenistic

pantheon to the test and the LXX shares this critical philosophy.”788 N. Fernandez Marcos’ assertion is typical

of this view:

          The simplification of the names of God is evident when we compare the range of expressions in
          Hebrew to denote the deity and the normal translation in the LXX using the common nouns
          ku/rioj and qeo/j. It is also evident in a tendency to remove any remnant of polytheism from
          the translation of God’s names. The translators use circumlocutions to avoid the name of God,
          a tendency that would develop in late Judaism and in the rabbinic period. They translate
          )elohim as a;ggeloi when it refers to the gods of the Canaanite pantheon and could cause
          difficulties if translated by qeoi.789



786
    English translations of pseudepigraphic texts are taken from the respective translations in Charlesworth, ed., OTP, vols. 1-2, but
occasionally made more literal to bring out the council vocabulary.
787
    There are actually few instances where divine plurality is transparently rejected by virtue of the actions of an editor or writer. For
example, in the book of Jubilees, the plural verb and possessive pronouns in the phrase “let us make humankind in our image and in our
likeness” are completely omitted in the retelling of the creation of Adam and Eve. The same hint of plurality in Gen 11:5 is glossed by
the author so the reader knows only angels are referred to by such language, not other gods. See Jacques T. A. G. M. van Ruiten,
Primeaval History Interpreted: The Rewriting of Genesis 1-11 in the Book of Jubilees (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2000), 44, 352-353.
788
    Natalio Fernandez Marcos, The Septuagint in Context: An Introduction to the Greek Versions of the Bible (trans. Wilfred G. Watson;
Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2000), 311.
789
    Ibid.
         It is beyond the scope of this study to evaluate the claims above with respect to God’s names. However,

the claim that the LXX translators make a concerted effort to avoid any hint of polytheism by translating

Myhl)h-ynb as a;ggeloi lest theological difficulties be raised by referring to other gods in the text is

demonstrably untrue.790 While it would certainly be the case that some LXX translators and some LXX

manuscripts provide evidence of demythologization, there are a number of examples where the exact opposite is

the case. The idea that the LXX reflects a concerted agenda to rid the text of divine plurality cannot be

sustained.

         Modern LXX scholarship has recorded a number of manuscripts with very literal renderings for all the

main mythologically-charged references to the divine council in the Hebrew Bible. The Göttingen LXX

establishes the following readings:

         Gen 6:2 oi9 ui9oi\ tou= qeou=791
         Ps 29:1-2 (LXX, 28:1-2) ui9oi\ qeou=792
         Ps 82:1 (LXX, 81:1) sunagwgh|= qew=n, e0n me/sw| de\ qeou\j793
         Ps 82:6 (LXX, 81:6) evgw. ei=pa qeoi, evste kai. ui`oi. u`yi,stou pa,ntej
         Ps 89:7 (LXX, 88:7) ui9oi=j qeou=

         How the position articulated by Marcos can be defended in light of this manuscript evidence is difficult

to discern. In addition to the above readings, it is the LXX that preserves the very clear reference to the sons of

God in Deut 32:43 (pa,ntej ui`oi. tou/ qeou/; cf. Myhl) lk in 4QDeutq).794 The LXX departure from MT in

Deut 32:8 is another well known example. Although most LXX witnesses read a1ggelw=n qeou= here in place of

the MT’s l)r#oy ynb, several also read ui9w=n qeou=, a literal translation of Myhl)h ynb found in 4QDeutj.795

With respect to the divine council, in place of the four names of Isa 9:6, two of which are widely regard as

790
    Noting the propensity of the LXX translator of Job to use a2ggeloi when translating Myhl)h-ynb, J. Gammie comments, “I do not
see how these renderings, in and of themselves, can very convincingly be held to constitute evidence of a monotheizing tendency in the
Septuagint . . .” (John G. Gammie, “The Angelology and Demonology in the Septuagint of the Book of Job,” HUCA 56 [1985]: 7). The
Göttingen LXX lists no literal readings for Myhl)h-ynb. 11QTgJob reads, “angels.”
791
    The critical apparatus lists a2ggeloi tou qeou as a variant (Göttingen Septuagint, vol. I:108). Van Ruiten comments that “the oldest
reading of LXX is probably ‘sons of God’ (oi9 ui9oi\ tou= qeou=)” (Jacques T. A. G. M. van Ruiten, “The Interpretation of Genesis 6:1-12
in Jubilees 5:1-19,” in Studies in the Book of Jubilees [ed. Mathias Albani, Jorg Frey, and Armin Lange; Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 1997],
66).
792
    Theodotion has ui9ouj i9sxurw=n (Göttingen Septuagint, vol. X: 120-121). Tate notes that other Greek witnesses read u3iouj kriw=n,
which either reflects a Vorlage of Myly) or a decision to read Myl) in that way (P. Craigie, Psalms 1-50 [WBC 19; Waco, TX: Word
Publishing, 1983], 242). Göttingen lists no other Greek variants.
793
    Aquila has e0n sunagwgh|= i0sxurw=n (Göttingen Septuagint, vol. X: 223). Göttingen lists no other variants.
794
    Arie van Der Kooij, “The Ending of the Song of Moses: On the Pre-Masoretic Version of Deut 32:43,” in Studies in Deuteronomy in
evincing divine status (   d[;ybia] rABGI lae; “mighty God, eternal father”) the LXX translator’s
mega,lhj boulh/j a;ggeloj (“angel of [the] great council”) is startling. Although many scholars would render
the phrase “angel of great counsel,” I would suggest the alternative is to be preferred. The reference to the

divine council (  ~yvidoq.-dAsB.) in Ps 89:8 (Hebrew; LXX = 88:8) is rendered evn boulh/| a`gi,wn (“in the
council of the holy ones”). As J. Trigg noted in his study of the LXX of Isa 9:6, “boulh can mean ‘council’ as

well as ‘counsel’, so that, for readers of the LXX, mega,lhj boulh/j a;ggeloj would suggest the angelic

council of I Kings 22.”796

         To press the point concerning the LXX further, the translation and manuscript evidence of Ps 82:1

deserves additional attention. There is no manuscript inconsistency for the LXX reading e0n sunagwgh|= qew=n,

and R.B. Salters, in his study of the Ps 82:1 and the LXX, notes that this rendering may be in fact reflect

Myl) td(b rather than l) td(b of MT.797 He also points out that, even though Aquila’s

e0n sunagwgh|= i0sxurw=n neutralizes the reference to other gods, his rendering does point to a plural, since he

would likely have used qeou= had he been reading l).798 Aquila’s translation of this phrase also points to the fact

that he resists taking the phrase of 82:1a as being parallel to Myhl) brqb in 82:1b. Aquila apparently

realized that observing the parallelism meant lending credence to the idea that there were other gods besides

Yahweh. In Aquila’s thinking, “God may have been presiding over the great assembly of Israel, or an assembly

within Israel, possibly judges.”799 Aquila’s predilection against a council of gods is made even more evident by

the way he renders 82:1b: e0n e0gkatw| ku/rioj krinei=. He thus “differs from LXX by taking Myhl) as the subject

rather than the object of +p#$y; that is to say he forces a parallelism on the verse which is not natural.”800

Significantly, LXX takes the opposite route. As Salters notes:



Honor of C. J. Labuschagne on the Occasion of His 65th Birthday (ed. F. Garcia Martinez; VTSup 53; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1994), 95.
795
    Göttingen Septuagint, vol. III, 2: 347.
796
    Joseph W. Trigg, “The Angel of Great Counsel: Christ and the Angelic Hierarchy in Origen’s Theology,” JTS 42:1 (April 1991): 35-
51.
797
    R. B. Salters, “Psalm 82,1 and the Septuagint,” ZAW 103 (1991): 226.
798
    Ibid.,
799
    Ibid., 227.
800
    Ibid. Emphasis is the author’s.
              At first sight the LXX appears to have faithfully followed the Hebrew text, though in the second
              half of the verse the translator seems to have had trouble with the clause +p#$y Myhl) brqb.
              Instead of taking brqb as a phrase in the construct state with Myhl), the latter is taken as an
              accusative: “in the midst, he judges gods”—not what one was expecting. Why? This is a
              deliberate “mistranslation” if you like. The LXX translators usually render brqb either with a
              preposition, or with a prepositional phrase e0n mesw| followed by a word in the genitive—there is
              an understandable exception in Psalms 36,2—but this translator is twisting the grammar to an
              unfamiliar degree. The form breqeba2 does not exist in the Old Testament in the absolute. . . .
              The intention, however ungrammatical, would seem to have been to make clear who is being
              judged. It is the Myhl) that are being judged. This is a divine assembly, not a human one; and
              it must be noted that God is judging the Myhl), not human beings. The LXX translator, then,
              is eager to identify the Myhl) of verse 1 with the Myhl) of vv. 6ff.; and this may be because
              there existed at the time of translation a body of opinion which pressed for an interpretation of
              verse 1 as referring to a council of human beings.801


              To summarize, the point being made with respect to LXX is that it cannot be said that all of the

Hellenistic Jewish scribes who translated and transmitted the LXX found divine plurality and the divine council

offensive. It seems that all that can be argued successfully from the data is that some Jewish translators were

uneasy about the readings in the Hebrew text.

              Moving on, there are a number of other references to divine plurality in Second Temple texts. In Joseph

and Aseneth a “heavenly man” speaks to Aseneth,802 gives her a honeycomb made in heaven, and informs her

that “all the angels of God eat of it and all the chosen of God, and all the sons of the Most High.” The latter

phrase matches the LXX reading ui`oi. u`yi,stou pa,ntej in Ps 82:6 for Nwyl(-ynb. The word order and the

phrase’s juxtaposition with the other two phrases—one of which likely refers to human beings in paradise—

appears to require the understanding that the “sons of the Most High” area a separate class of heavenly being

and not angels.803

              The early first century C.E. Prayer of Joseph also explicitly mentions the sons of God. Fragment A is

the primary source for the belief that God’s exalted divine vice regent was the patriarch Jacob, a subject

discussed later in this chapter. For our purposes, Jacob has the authority to inform Uriel precisely what rank he

[Uriel] held “among the sons of God (ui`oi.j qeou/)” (lines 6-7). Jacob goes on to explain to Uriel that now he,

Jacob, was “the archangel of the power of the Lord” and “the chief captain among the sons of God

801
      Ibid.
(ui`oi.j qeou/).” The reference designates the archangels as the sons of God, which is important with respect to

the earlier book of 1 Enoch.

         In Pseudo-Phocylides, mention is made on two occasions (75, 163) of “the blessed ones” (maka,rej).

This term generally refers to the heavenly bodies designated as gods. The idea that the stars were animate

beings is frequently found in Second Temple Jewish literature, and is a direct carryover from pre-exilic Israelite

religion and the surrounding Babylonian and Canaanite polytheistic religions.804 1 En. 21:6-10 describes the

imprisoned Watchers as “stars.” 1 En. 72:1-3; 80:1 refers to angels as “leaders of the stars” and “leaders of the

stars of heaven,” while 2 En. 4:1-2 uses the descriptive phrase “the elders, rulers of the stars” to speak of angels.

The Testament of Solomon, dated by some scholars to the first century C.E., has demonic entities identifying

themselves as “heavenly bodies, rulers (kosmokra/torej) of this world of darkness” (8:1, 4).805 Elsewhere in

Pseudo-Phocylides (104), the dead are referred to as gods, prompting van der Horst’s comment that, “this looks

rather pagan and has no exact Jewish parallels, though often the deceased were regarded as angels, and angels

were often called gods.”806 The comment apparently reflects an unfamiliarity with the ascension / divinization

motifs and deity-class language of the Qumran sectarian material. It is precisely because of these references that

some have doubted the Jewish authorship of Pseudo-Phocylides.807

         In her study of the language of astral religion and multiple heavens in Second Temple Jewish literature,

A. Y. Collins argues that the archangels in this stage of Jewish theology, numbered either as four or seven,

correspond to the seven heavens mentioned in Jewish apocalypses, which in turn derived from Babylonian

beliefs about the seven planets.808 The understanding that each planet was controlled or occupied by a god was

quite familiar at the time.809 The correspondence of certain classes of angels with the mutli-layered heavens was




802
    More will be said about the “heavenly man” momentarily.
803
    “Joseph and Aseneth,” translated by C. Burchard (OTP 2:229).
804
    Lelli, “Stars,” DDD, 813-814.
805
    See R. Feldmeier, “World Rulers,” DDD, 908-909.
806
    “Pseudo-Phocylides,” translated by P. W. van der Horst (OTP 2:570).
807
    Ibid.
808
    Adela Yarbro Collins, “The Seven Heavens in Jewish and Christian Apocalypses,” 83ff.
809
    Lelli, “Stars,” DDD, 814.
troubling to the monotheism of certain Jews since these angelic beings were worshipped alongside the God of

heaven.810

         The issue of the divine status of archangels and the highest place in the heavens is related to the link

between the archangels and throne chariot vision of Ezekiel 1, 10. Nickelsburg notes that the number of four

archangels in 1 Enoch 9-10 was “doubtless inferred from the four living creatures (twyx) in the throne vision of

Ezekiel 1-2. . . . The later literature makes an association with Ezekiel 1-2 explicit.”811 The number is expanded

to seven in 1 Enoch 20-36, 81 “to provide a complement of angels who are associated with the places of

Enoch’s cosmic tour.”812 Although, as noted above, the seven archangels are associated with the cosmos, an

association of the seven with God’s throne—as in the case of the four—occurs in 1 En. 87:2-40 and the book of

Tobit (3:16-17; 12:11-15). The seven archangels became identified with the seven eyes of Yahweh, which in

turn were linked to the seven lamps of the menorah (cf. 4:10).813

         This association is significant with respect to divine plurality in Second Temple Judaism in that Philo, in

a complex philosophical speculation, connects the menorah to the Logos and the archangels in a way that

implies the plurality of either Yahweh or the Logos, or both. Philo says of the Logos, “I sustained the universe

to rest firm and sure upon the mighty Logos who is my viceroy.”814 The Logos is “that power of his [God] by

which he made and ordered all things.”815 Philo goes on to pluralize the Logos by referencing the Logos as the

central stem of the menorah (which formerly represented Yahweh), dividing three lamps from three lamps.816

Along with the Logos, God’s “power,” Philo says there are many powers, which are angels, which are in turn

the Glory of God: “By Glory I understand the Powers that keep guard around Thee.” Moses was told by God

that seeing the face of God was disallowed, and that only God’s back parts could be seen (Exod 33:23). Philo

understands God’s back parts as the angelic powers,817 an interpretation attested in Targum Neofiti to Exod

810
    Loren T. Stuckenbruck, “Worship and Monotheism in The Ascension of Isaiah,” in The Jewish Roots of Christological Monotheism:
Papers from the St. Andrews Conference on the Historical Origins of the Worship of Jesus (ed. Carey Newman, James R. Davila, and
Gladys S. Lewis; JSJSup 63; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999), 70-89.
811
    Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1: A Commentary on the Book of 1 Enoch Chapters 1-36, 81-108 (Hermeneia; Minneapolis: Fortress Press,
2003), 207.
812
    Ibid.
813
    M. Barker, The Great Angel, 83.
814
    Dreams 1: 241; cf. Agriculture, 51.
815
    Confusion, 137.
816
    Spec. Laws 1: 45; Heir, 215.
817
    Flight, 165; Names, 9.
33:23: “I will make a troop of angels pass by who stand and minister before me and you will see the Word of

the Glory of my Shekinah.”818 Two of the chief Powers—two archangels in Philo’s thinking—were called

“God” and “Lord,” but he was careful to clarify that these were but two aspects of the One:

         The two primary Powers of the Existing One, namely that through which He wrought the world,
         the beneficent, which is called God, and that by which he rules and commands that which he
         made, that is the punitive, which bears the name of the Lord, are, as Moses tells us, separated by
         God himself standing above and in the midst of them. ‘I will speak to thee’, it says, ‘above the
         mercy seat in the midst of the two Cherubim’. He means to show that the primal and highest
         powers of the Existent, the beneficent and the punitive, are equal, having him to divide them.819

Not only is God between the two primary Powers, but so is the Logos:

         While God is indeed One, his highest and chief Powers are two, even Goodness and
         Sovereignty . . . and in the midst between the two, there is a third which unites them, the Logos,
         for it is through the Logos that God is both ruler and good. Of these two powers, Sovereignty
         and Goodness, the cherubim are the symbols, as fiery sword is the symbol of the Logos.820


         Philo therefore created the impression that there was plurality in God and that this plurality was made

manifest in the archangels as extensions of deity. It is also noteworthy that the “fiery sword,” a symbol which

may recall the biblical hwhy-)bc-r#o, symbolizes the Logos.

          The deity-level status of archangels is also implied by their designation as Watchers (Nyry( or

e'grhgoroi), who very clearly in Second Temple literature correspond to the sons of God of the Hebrew Bible,
particularly with respect to the Gen 6:1-4 episode. Note the following examples, all of which reference the

perpetrators of that event:821

         1 En. 6:1-2

         In those days, when the children of man had multiplied, it happened that there were born unto them
         handsome and beautiful daughters. And the angels, the sons of heaven (ui`oi. ouvranou/), saw them and
         desired them . . .

         1 En. 14:1, 3

         This is the book of the words of righteousness and the chastisement of the eternal Watchers
         (e0grh/goroi), in accordance with how the Holy and Great One has commanded in this vision. . . .
         Accordingly he has created me and given me the word of understanding so that I may reprimand the
         angels, the sons of heaven (a;ggeloi ui`oi. ouvranou/).
818
    Barker, The Great Angel, 127.
819
    Heir, 166; cf. QG 1: 57; Unchangeable, 109.
820
    Cherubim, 27-28.
821
    The translations are from “1 (Ethiopic Apocalypse of) Enoch,” translated by E. Isaac (OTP 1:15, 20, 23-24, 30, 49, 86).
         1 En. 20:1; 21:1-6, 10
         1 And these are the names of the holy angels who watch (e'grhgoroi) . .

         1 And I came to an empty place. 2 And I saw (there) neither a heaven above nor an earth below, but a
         chaotic and terrible place. 3 And there I saw seven stars of the heaven bound together in it, like great
         mountains and burning with fire. 4 At that moment I said, “For what sin are they bound, and for what
         reason are they cast in here?” 5 Then one of the holy angels, Uriel, who was with me, leading them,
         spoke to me and said to me, “Enoch, for what reason are you asking and for what reason do you
         question and exhibit eagerness? 6 These are among the stars of heaven (avste,rej ouvranou/), which
         have transgressed the commandment of the Lord, and are bound in this place until the completion of ten
         million years.” 10 . . . And he said unto me: “This place is the prison house of the angels (a;ggeloi);
         they are detained here for ever.”
         1 En. 39:1

         1 And it shall come to pass in those days that the children of the elect and the holy ones [will descend]
         from the heights of heaven (e0k tw=n u9yistw=n tou= ou0ranou=)822 and their seed will become one with the
         children of the people.

         1 En. 71:1-3

         1 Thus it happened after this that my spirit passed out of sight and ascended into the heavens. And I saw
         the sons of the holy angels (ui`oi. a;ggelw/n) walking upon the flame of fire; their garments were
         white—and their overcoats—and the light of their faces was like snow. 2 Also I saw two rivers of fire,
         the light of which fire was shining like hyacinth. Then I fell on my face before the Lord of Spirits. 3
         And the angel Michael, one of the archangels, seizing me by my right hand and lifting me up, led me
         out into all the secrets of mercy . . .

         1 En. 106:4-6

         4 And his father, Lamech, was afraid of him and fled, and went to Methuselah his father; 5 and he said
         to him, “I have begotten a strange son: he is not like an ordinary human being, but he looks like the sons
         of heaven (ui`oi. ouvranou/) to me; his form is different, and he is not like us. His eyes are like the rays
         of the sun, and his face glorious. 6 It does not seem to me that he is of me, but of angels (a;ggeloi) . . .

         It is clear from these passages that terms like “angels,” “archangels,” “Watchers,” “holy ones,” “highest

ones,” and “sons of heaven” overlap.823 The majority of scholars contend that these phrases appear to be a

substitutes for “sons of God” because “the Judaism of the Greek period found the latter objectionable.”824 This

opinion lacks force, however, being weakened by the fact that Jewish writers and translators of the Hellenistic

period, as witnessed in the Qumran sectarian texts and the LXX, were not averse to textual references to divine



822
    This reading is a partial restoration by Black (Matthew Black, The Book of Enoch, or 1 Enoch: A New English Edition With
Commentary and Textual Notes [Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1985], 196).
823
    See also Tob 12:15; 1 En. 69:1-7 (the archangels are also referred to as angels).
824
    Joseph A. Fitzmyer, The Genesis Apocryphon of Qumran Cave 1: A Commentary (Rome: Pontifical Institute Press, 1971), 84; Black,
The Book of Enoch, 116.
plurality. In reality, there were varieties of Hellenistic Judaism, and statements that portray Second Temple

Judaism enforcing an agenda against divine plurality do not account for the evidence to the contrary.825

         With respect to the possibility that the plural sons of God survive in references to the watchers,

Nickelsburg has observed that such references are often qualified with phrases such as “holy ones” and “the

sons of heaven.”826 He has further detected a pattern in Second Temple Period usage. According to

Nickelsburg:

         Nowhere do the Qumran fragments of 1 Enoch attest the Aram. )k)lm, even where the LXX
         and Ethiopic have a1ggeloj and mal)ak . . . [W]ith the exception of 12:3, the LXX and Ethiopic
         reserve “watcher” as a designation for the rebel angels, with the qualifier “holy” being used
         only at 15:9. . . . With a few isolated exceptions (19:1,2; the doublet at 21:10; and 106:5-6, 12,
         where the counterparts in 1QapGen 2:1, 16 read “watchers, holy ones, watchers, sons of
         heaven”) the LXX and Ethiopic never use ‘angel’ to designate the rebel heavenly beings. This
         pattern suggests that the Greek translator(s) adopted “watchers” as the designation for the rebels
         and thus distinguished them from the others, who were almost uniformly known as “angels”. . .
         . It is possible, and perhaps likely, that the original Aramaic uniformly designated the heavenly
         ones as Nyry( (“watchers”), reserved Ny#$ydqw Nyry( (“watchers and holy ones”) for the
         unfallen heavenly beings, and used )ym#$ yd Nyry( (“watchers of heaven”) as a neutral term
         that designated both the good and evil beings as entities of heavenly provenance or as those who
         belonged to God, who is referred to by the circumlocution, “heaven.”827

         If Nickelsburg’s observations have merit, these distinctions imply that Watchers are to be distinguished

from angels. The fact that the phrase “sons of God” and “holy ones” appear in parallelism in 1QH 11(3):22 and

Wis. 5:5 may also suggest a distinction, at least in the minds of some. J. Collins agrees that they were indeed

“conceived of as a distinct class.”828 There are several lines of evidence that lends plausibility to this idea,

especially if, as proposed earlier, one considers the term “angel” to have become a catch-all term.

         Scholars are generally agreed that “Watcher” (ry(, e0grhgo/roj) was understood by ancient translators

as “unsleeping.”829 For example, this understanding is evident in 1 En. 39:12, 13; 40:2; 61:12; and 71:7 where

the term is defined as “those who sleep not.” The idea seems to have been that these beings “are on twenty-four


825
    On the variations of Second Temple Judaism, see Philip R. Davies, “Judaisms in the Dead Sea Scrolls: The Case of the
Messiah,” in The Dead Sea Scrolls in Their Historical Context (Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 2000), 219-232; Gabriele Boccaccini,
“Multiple Judaisms: A New Understanding of the Context of Earliest Christianity,” BRev 11 (Fall 1995), 38-41, 46; idem,
Beyond the Essene Hypothesis; John J. Collins, “Varieties of Judaism in the Hellenistic and Roman Periods,” JR 77:4 (Oct
1997): 605-611.
826
    Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch, 140. For “holy ones” see Dan 4:10, 14, 20 (Hebrew, 13, 17, 23); 1 En. 22:6. For the latter “sons of heaven”
and the related “Watchers of heaven,” see 1 En. 6:2; 12:4; 13:10; 14:3; 15:2. See also 1QapGen 2:1, 16.
827
    Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch, 140.
828
    John J. Collins, “Watcher,” DDD, 894.
829
    Ibid. See also R. Murray, “Origin of Aramaic ( |,r,” 304; John J. Collins, “Watcher,” DDD, 893.
hour duty attending God—whether to praise God or to function as a kind of bodyguard in the throne room.830 A

second connotation of the term is evident in 1 En. 20:1. This text identifies the Watchers as the archangels since

20:1 states, “These are the names of the holy angels who watch” and then proceeds to name the seven

archangels who “supervise aspects of the universe.”831 Watcher and archangels are also equated in 1 En. 40:1-2,

where the four who guard the throne of God are referred to as “those who do not slumber.”

         The Watcher-archangel connection is secure in view of the texts above. That “Watchers” was the

designation of choice for the fallen sons of God is also demonstrable from 1 Enoch, Jubilees, the Testament of

the Twelve Patriarchs, and a variety of non-sectarian texts from Qumran.832 Another possible point of evidence

for a correlation between this Second Temple classification and the second tier divine beings of the Hebrew

Bible concerns the philology of ry(.

         Charles considered the idea of the guardianship of the Watchers to extend to the nations, pointing to

Deut 32:8-9, Psalm 82, and Isa 62:6 as precedent.833 In an attempt to add philological weight to Watchers as

territorial spirits, Dahood proposed that ry( derived from Ugaritic g8yr (“to protect”) and is reflected in the

Hebrew verb rw( (“to awaken, rouse up”).834 In this case, the conception would apparently be that the

unsleeping Watcher is awake while others sleep, or the watchman’s duty to awaken the sleeping city in times of

danger, hence guardianship. Other derivations are possible. Ugaritic g8yr can also mean “pit, depth,”835 creating

the possibility that the plural might be metaphorical for “those from the pit.” Another possibility is Ugaritic

g8r (“mountain”),836 in which case there may be an association to the divine beings from the divine mountain of

the council.




830
    Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch, 140.
831
    Ibid. See also 1 En. 82:10.
832
    See Prescott Williams, “The Watchers in the Twelve and at Qumran,” in Texts and Testaments: Critical Essays on the Bible and Early
Church Fathers (Trinity University Press, 1980), 71-92; James C. VanderKam, “The Angel Story in the Book of Jubilees,” 151-170; van
Ruiten, “The Interpretation of Genesis 6:1-12 in Jubilees 5:1-19,” 59-75; J. P. Lewis, A Study of the Interpretation of Noah and the Flood
in Jewish and Christian Literature (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1968).
833
    R. H. Charles, A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Book of Daniel (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1929), 91. As noted
in Chapter Five of this study, it cannot be conclusively established that the Myrm#$ of Isa 62:6 are non-human.
834
    M. Dahood, Psalms I (AB 16; New York: Doubleday, 1966), 55; cf. J. Collins, “Watcher,” DDD, 892.
835
    DULAT 1:328. See HALOT 2:802.
836
    Ibid., 1:324. See HALOT 2:802.
         The above options are speculative, and scholars are skeptical that there are any secure instances where

either Hebrew ry( or Ugaritic g8yr are used to refer to territorial entities or guardians.837 In agreement with

Stamm, Murray contends that the strongest instances for the verb are the imperfect                  ry[iy" of the eagle in Deut
32:11 and of God in Job 8:6 (“If you were pure and upright, surely he [God] would awaken for you. . .”).

         As examples of noun usage, Murray postulated that there may have been “a noun (or participle) related

to the verb *(yr, denoting a kind of guardian divinity which was honoured under Canaanite influence.”838 Most

of Murray’s suggestions for Hebrew Myr( as a cryptic reference to the Watchers are quite forced,839 but his

notion may lend clarity for the puzzling verses of Isa 33:7-8:


                                                           `!WyK'b.yI rm; ~Alv' ykea]l.m; hc'xu Wq[]c' ~L'a,r.a, !he 7
                                                        ~yri[' sa;m' tyriB. rpehe xr;ao rbe[o tb;v' tALsim. WMv;n" 8
                                                                                                  `vAna/ bv;x' al{
         The JPS Tanakh translates these two verses, “Hark, the Arielites cry aloud; Shalom’s messengers weep

bitterly. Highways are desolate, wayfarers have ceased. A covenant has been renounced, cities rejected, mortal

man despised.” There are several interesting items in this text. In another article Murray argues that Isaiah 33

“echoes a ritual for the control of hostile forces, both human and supernatural.”840 Citing the phrase

~Alv' ykea]l.m; and the enigmatic ~L'a,r.a, (“Arielites”), both of which Jewish tradition understood as angels,
Murray contends the Myr( of 33:8b is an obscured reference to the Watchers. It is interesting that the

Testament of Dan mentions “a unique mediator, standing between God and mankind” who is called “the angel

of peace,” but there is no evidence that this is related to Isaiah 33.841 The references to Lebanon, Bashan, and

Carmel in 33:9 further contextualize the passage in favor of some sort of lament in the wake of, or in

anticipation of, a supernatural conflict. These geographical names are associated with Mt. Hermon, where the


837
    John J. Collins, “Watcher,” DDD, 894.
838
    Murray, “Origin of Aramaic ( |,r,” 307-308.
839
    For example, Murray suggested Myr( (with or without suffix) could be translated “Watchers” in Isa 14:21; Mic 5:13; Jer 2:28; 11:13.
840
    R. Murray, “Prophecy and Cult,” in Israel’s Prophetic Tradition: Essays in Honour of Peter Ackroyd (ed. R. Coggins, A. Phillips, and
M. Knibb; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982), 200-216.
841
    R. Feldmeier, “Mediator II,” DDD, 559.
Watchers descended from heaven, and mark the place where the Watchers wept after being sentenced to eternal

imprisonment.842 The verse seems more coherent if refers to judgment: “Behold, the Arielites [angels] cry

aloud, the angels of peace weep bitterly. Highways are desolate, Wayfarers have ceased, a covenant has been

renounced, the Watchers rejected.”

         Whereas Murray argues that these examples involve only a misunderstanding of a forgotten root source

behind ry(, he adduces several examples where he believes an original Hebrew Myry( or Myr( (“Watcher”)

has been deliberately changed by scribes to Myrw( (“blind”) as a “mocking substitute” to satirize these old

guardian deities. For example, in 2 Sam 5: 6, 8 the Myrw( that the Jebusites thought would defend them and

keep David out of the city, and which the text says David hated, were actually Myry( / Myr(, Watchers. As

proof that this deliberate manipulation of the text was known to the ancients, Murray offers the LXX of Lam.

4:14, where the phrase    tAcWxB; ~yriw>[i W[n" (“they have wandered as blind men in the streets”) is
inexplicably rendered evsaleu,qhsan evgrh,goroi auvth/j evn tai/j evxo,doij

(“her watchers / watchmen staggered in the streets”).

         While some of these passages may suggest a correlation between an alternative Hebrew ry( and

Aramaic ry( where both derive from Ugaritic g8yr , the evidence is inconclusive. There are inherent obstacles

to such a correspondence. Ugaritic has its own (ayin and the word for (yr (“city”), hence there is no a priori

reason to look for a root beginning with Ugaritic g8. While Ugaritic g8 is usually phonetically congruent with

Hebrew and Aramaic (, Ugaritic g8 may also atypically correspond to Proto-Semitic z[, Akkadian s[, and Aramaic

t[.843




842
  G. del Olmo Lete, “Bashan,” DDD, 161-163; W. Rollig, “Lebanon,” DDD, 506-507.
843
  Daniel Sivan, A Grammar of the Ugaritic Language (HO 28; Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1997), 23-24; Josef Tropper, Ugaritische Grammatik
(AOAT 273; Münster: Ugarit-Verlag, 2000), 125-126; Stanislav Segert, A Basic Grammar of the Ugaritic Language (Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 1984), 35.
               8.3 References to the Divine Council and the Worldview of Deuteronomy 4 and 32
         The language of the divine council is also evident by virtue of specific descriptions of divine council

scenes and references to multiple throne chariots reminiscent of the Shabbat Shirot. 2 En. [J] 22:1-6 records

Enoch’s vision of the God of Israel in his throne room:844

         1 And on the tenth heaven, Aravoth, I saw the view of the face of the Lord, like iron made
         burning hot in a fire and brought out, and it emits sparks and is incandescent. Thus even I saw
         the face of the Lord. But the face of the Lord is not to be talked about, it is so very marvelous
         and supremely awesome and supremely frightening. 2 And who am I to give an account of the
         incomprehensible being of the Lord, and of his face, so extremely strange and indescribable?
         And how many are his commands, and his multiple voice, and the Lord's throne, supremely
         great and not made with hands, and the choir stalls all around him, the cherubim and seraphim
         armies, and their never-silent singing. 3 Who can give an account of his beautiful appearance,
         never changing and indescribable, and his great glory? 4 And I fell down flat and did obeisance
         to the Lord. 5 And the Lord, with his own mouth, said to me, “Be brave, Enoch! Don’t be
         frightened! Stand up, and stand in front of my face forever.” 6 And Michael, the Lord’s
         archistratig, lifted me up and brought me in front of the face of the Lord.

         Noting the divine court context of this vision, F. I. Andersen comments that:

         This act of the Lord in consulting the heavenly assembly is very significant. . . . The discussion
         in the divine assembly provides the starting point of many Old Testament oracles, and prophets
         participate in some way, if only in a vision. The scene in 2 En 22 retains quite a lot of this
         mythology. There is no real debate. The Lord makes a proposal and the angels concur.845

         The Apocalypse of Zephaniah (Text A) records a divine council vision of the prophet in the fifth heaven.

The prophet states, “I saw angels who were called lords (kuri/ouj), and the diadem was set upon them in the

Holy Spirit, and the throne of each of them was sevenfold more brilliant that the light of the sun.”846 1 En. 47:3

has Enoch relating that “I saw the Chief of Days when he seated himself upon the throne of his glory, and the

books of the living were opened before him; And all his host which is in heaven above and his council stood

before him.” 2 En. 20:1 describes an array of “many-eyed thrones” in the seventh heaven, along with numerous

archangels, dominions, and authorities. Since God himself is in the tenth heaven in 2 Enoch, these thrones are

unmistakably for ruling council members. While the terms in this selection do not denote divine plurality, the

wordings recall Dan 7:9 and Ezekiel 1.




844
    “J” is the longer Old Slavonic rescension (cf. “2 [Slavonic Apocalypse of] Enoch,” translated by F. I. Andersen [OTP 1:98]).
845
    “2 (Slavonic Apocalypse of) Enoch,” translated by F. I. Andersen (OTP 1:138, note j).
846
    “Apocalypse of Zephaniah,” translated by O. S. Wintermute (OTP 1:508).
         The heavenly bureaucracy of the Second Temple period is very complex and well known to scholars.

Second Temple Jewish texts speak of “angels of the Presence” (Hel. Syn. Pr. 4:11), “angels of sanctification”

(Jub. 15:27), “archangels” (e.g., 1 En. 20-22, 40:8-10); L.A.E. 25:3-4), “archons” (T. Job 49:2; 1 En. 6:7-8; 2

En. 20:1); “rulers of the stars” (2 En. 4:1-2), “satans” (1 En. 40:1-8), “powers” (1 En. 40:8-10; 65:6-7; 82:8-9),

“principalities” (1 En. 61:10-11), and “dominions” (1 En. 61:10; 2 En. 20:1).

         While these terms are not precise as to a specific second tier of gods within the council, the pre-exilic

council worldview behind the dense bureaucracy comes through clearly. The passage cited above from the

Apocalypse of Zephaniah refers to ruling council members in the tradition of the pre-exilic council of Israelite

religion. These members exercise geographical authority and are elsewhere referred to by Greek a!rxw=n,

a!rxontej,847 a term that the LXX uses to translate references to pagan deities (cf. Ezek 31:11). The term

a!rxontej is specifically used in the LXX as a designation for the princes (Myr#o) of Dan 10:13, and seven times

in Theodotian Daniel (10:12, 20-21; 12:1), where LXX has strathgo/j (“commander, magistrate”).848 In 1 En.

6:7-8 a!rxh\ and a!rxw=n are used interchangeably as titles for supernatural forces, specifically twenty named

watchers.849 2 Enoch (Text A) uses the term “dominions (kurio/thj)” of angelic beings who exercise territorial

rule.850 2 Enoch also employs the language of divine royalty for the same beings, describing the council rulers

as “princes” (18:3).

         Mention should also be made of seventy angelic shepherds of 1 Enoch 89-90, the Animal Apocalypse.

While it is tempting to see these shepherds as a direct parallel to the sons of God of Deut 32:8-9 (cf. the seventy

nations of the Table of Nations), Nickelsburg correctly notes that the source of the seventy shepherds in Enoch

is more likely Ezekiel 34 and Zechariah 11. The seventy shepherds of 1 Enoch 89-90 are human, not angelic.851

They are not over the Gentile nations, but over Israel, and the number seventy is associated with seventy time

periods, not the number of the nations created by the division of the nations in Genesis 11 referenced in Deut

32:8-9.852

847
    D. E. Aune, “Archon,” DDD, 82-85.
848
    Ibid., 84.
849
    D. E. Aune, “Archai,” DDD, 77.
850
    P. W. van der Horst, “Dominion,” DDD, 262.
851
    Patrick Tiller, A Commentary on the Animal Apocalypse of 1 Enoch (SBLEJL 4; Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1993), 51-54.
852
    Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch, 391.
         Jub. 15:30b-32 provides the fullest description of the worldview of Deut 4:19-20; 32:8-9, and Daniel

10:

         30 . . . But he chose Israel that they might be a people for himself. 31 And he sanctified them
         and gathered them from all of the sons of man because (there are) many nations and many
         people, and they all belong to him, but over all of them he caused spirits to rule so that they
         might lead them astray from following him. 32 But over Israel he did not cause any angel or
         spirit to rule because he alone is their ruler and he will protect them and he will seek for them at
         the hand of his angels and at the hand of his spirits and at the hand of all of his authorities so
         that he might guard them and bless them and they might be his and he might be theirs
         henceforth and forever.853

         The passage is interesting on a number of levels. While the “sons of God” language of Deut 32:8-9 is

absent, being replaced by the neutral “spirits,” “angels,” and “authorities,” the point of Deut 4:19-20, that

Yahweh has ordained that the other nations worship foreign gods, has been well preserved. The declaration that

no angel or spirit rules over Israel appears to be a direct contradiction of Dan 10:21 and 12:1 and other

pseudepigraphic material (1 En. 89-90) that follows Daniel. However, the author may be obliquely stating that

God is greater than the angels he assigned to other nations, and ultimately superior to the angel of Israel.854


8.4 Evidence for an Exalted Divine Vice Regent

         In Joseph and Aseneth, Aseneth’s visitor, the “heavenly man” (14:4, et.al.) who is distinguished from

the God of heaven by his titles “chief of the house of the Lord and commander of the whole host of the Most

High” (14:7-8) is himself referred to as a god (qeoj) two times (17:9; 22:3). Several manuscripts of this text

inform us that certain Jewish scribes were offended at this notion. In some manuscripts the scribe has added the

definite article, apparently in an attempt to cast the figure as God himself and remove the reference to a second

divine being, while other witnesses substitute “angel.”855 Interestingly, this being and others described in divine

terms frequently have white hair and are of “old age yet like the youth of a handsome young man” (22:7), terms

that may have been drawn from the deity figure the Ancient of Days in Dan 7:9-10.

         This observation may also be significant for another reason. While a number of scholars propose that

this heavenly man is Michael by virtue of the fact that Michael is called “commander in chief” (a0rxistra/thgoj)


853
    “Jubilees,” translated by O. S. Wintermute (OTP 2:87).
854
    Hannah, Michael and Christ, 31.
855
    “Joseph and Aseneth,” (OTP 2:231, 239).
in other pseudepigraphic texts,856 this text never identifies the heavenly man as Michael. Scholars assume that

this title links Michael to the hwhy K)lm since the LXX translates               hw"hy>-ab'c.-rf; in Josh 5:14 with
avrcistra,thgoj duna,mewj kuri,ou, but the same title is also used of Raphael (Gk.Apoc.Ezra 1:4)857 and

Michael’s military functions are not unique to him, being shared by other archangels.858 It is certainly

conceivable that the author of Joseph and Aseneth is drawing from descriptions of Michael in other texts of the

day, but it is equally possible that the author’s own theology saw an exalted figure above Michael. This is in fact

a familiar problem with Second Temple literature and Michael. M. Mach notes that:

         It is generally difficult to point out the traditions connected with Michael, since this specific
         angel became much more prominent than any other angel. Consequently, he was likely to be
         identified with almost any unnamed biblical angel. . . . Modern scholarship should therefore try
         to differentiate between unnamed traditions that become part of the characteristics of Michael
         and more original Michael-traditions and not vice versa.859


         In concert with this opinion, it should be recalled from earlier discussions in this study (Sections 6.3,

7.4) that Second Temple literature may simultaneously have Michael as the guardian of Israel, complete with

military metaphors, and yet have a supreme commander of all the host of heaven above Michael. It may be

noteworthy in the present example that this unnamed figure is twice called a god, which is never said of Michael

in any Second Temple text when he is named.860

         The closest any text comes to deifying Michael is perhaps either 1 En. 40:1-9 or 69:13-25. The former

texts refer to the four “angels of the Presence” (40:2) and goes on to list Michael as the “first” (40:9). There is

an unnamed “angel of the Presence” described in Jub. 1:27-2:2 that is very clearly identified as “the angel who

went before the camp of Israel” (1:29), the hwhy K)lm. The orientation with the hwhy K)lm is further

secured by virtue of the title’s origin in Isa 63:9, whose context is the exodus from Egypt. According to the

Qere the verse reads: “In all their affliction he was afflicted; the angel of his Presence (           wyn"P' %a;l.m;) saved

856
    Cf. 3 Bar. 11:4, 6, 7, 8; 2 En. 22:6 (LR); 33:10 (LR); T. Ab. (Rec. A numerous times; Rec. B at 14:6).
857
    The Greek Apocalypse of Ezra dates from the 2nd to the 9th century C.E. (cf. “Greek Apocalypse of Ezra,” translated by M. E. Stone
[OTP 1:562]).
858
    M. Mach, “Michael,” DDD, 570.
859
    Ibid., 569.
860
    This conclusion is based on this author’s study of the major works on Michael, particular D. Hannah’s, which seeks to survey the
connections between Michael traditions and high Christology. Hannah does not produce any text where Michael is referred to as qeo\j.
them.” Even though Michael is not named in Jub. 1:27-2:2, it is possible that Michael was viewed as Yahweh’s

vice-regent by the author of 1 En. 40:1-9, but this cannot be considered certain, since “the presence” would also

be in three other archangels. As noted briefly above, this situation led some Jewish writers, notably Philo, to

write in terms of divine plurality with respect to both Yahweh and the Logos. The second example, 1 En. 69:13-

25, has a sat[an asking Michael “to show him the hidden Name, that he might pronounce the oath . . . and he

[God] has placed this oath )AKA( in the hand of Michael.”861 It is generally accepted that the hidden Name is

the divine Name and that the cryptic )AKA( is, by gematria, ynd) hwhy. The conclusion that this author

considered Michael the angel of the Name and Yahweh’s vice regent is possible. However, the text does not say

the name was in Michael, only that he knew it and had been given charge of it. Due to these uncertainties and

the fact that Michael in the book of Daniel is merely one of the chief princes, D. Hannah recommends that the

safest interpretation of the evidence is that Michael very likely became the pre-eminent angel only in the first

century C.E.862

         The presence of a deified figure distinct from Michael does occur in Second Temple literature. The

clearest example is found in the Apoc. Ab.10:1-7, 15-17:863

         1 And it came to pass when I heard the voice pronouncing such words to me that I looked this
         way and that. 2 And behold there was no breath in me, and my spirit was amazed, and my soul
         fled from me. And I became like a stone, and fell down upon the earth, for there was no longer
         strength in me to stand up on the earth. 3 And while I was still face down on the ground, I heard
         the voice of the Holy One speaking, “Go, Ya’el of the same name, through the mediation of my
         ineffable Name, consecrate this man and strengthen him against his trembling.” 4 The angel he
         sent to me in the likeness of a man came, and he took me by my right hand and stood me on my
         feet. 5 And he said to me, "Stand up Abraham, friend of God who has loved you, let human
         trembling not enfold you! 6 For lo! I am sent to you to strengthen you and to bless you in the
         name of God, creator of heavenly and earthly things, who has loved you. 7 Be bold and hasten
         to him. I am Ya’el . . . 15 Stand up, Abraham! Go boldly, be very joyful and rejoice. And I (am)
         with you, for a venerable honor has been prepared for you by the Eternal One. 16 Go, complete
         the sacrifice of the command. Behold, I am assigned (to be) with you and with the generation
         which is predestined (to be born) from you, 17 And with me Michael blesses you for ever. Be
         bold, go!"




861
    The translation is Black’s (Matthew Black, The Book of Enoch). The marks on either side of AKA are transliterated ) and (.
862
    Darrell Hannah, Michael and Christ, 51-52.
863
    The Apocalypse of Abraham was composed at the time of the destruction of the second temple or shortly thereafter (cf. ch. 27;
“Apocalypse of Abraham,” translated by R. Rubinkiewicz [OTP 1:683]). Unless otherwise noted, passages cited are from this
translation.
         The passage is significant on several accounts. The angel bears the name of God, Ya’el (“Yah is El”),864

he is in the likeness of a man, and he is explicitly distinguished from Michael (10:17). But not only does this

angel bear the name of Yahweh, but later in the same text (Apoc. Ab.17:13) we read that Ya’el is the God of

Israel. In 17:4 Abraham is commanded to worship God “on the place of highness” by reciting a song listing

God’s names. Abraham obeys and proclaims (Apoc. Ab.17:8-13):

         8 Eternal One, Mighty One, Holy El, God autocrat 9 self-originated, incorruptible, immaculate,
         unbegotten, spotless, immortal, 10 self-perfected, self-devised, without father, without mother,
         ungenerated, 11 exalted, fiery, 12 just, lover of men, benevolent, compassionate, bountiful,
         jealous over me, patient one, most merciful. 13 Eli, eternal, mighty one, holy, Sabaoth, most
         glorious El, El, El, El, Ya’el! 14


         The same deified figure appears in the Life of Adam and Eve 29:1-6, but in this case it is God himself

who is called Ya’el.865 The passage is quite reminiscent of occasions in the pre-exilic texts of the Hebrew Bible

where Yahweh and his vice regent were virtually indistinguishable:

         1 When the Lord had said these things, he ordered us cast out of paradise. 2 And your father
         (Adam) wept before the angels opposite Paradise, and the angels said to him, “What do you
         want us to do for you, Adam?” 3 Your father answered and said to the angels, “See you are
         casting me out; I beg you, let me take fragrances from Paradise, so that after I have gone out, I
         might bring an offering to God so that God will hear me.” 4 And they (the angels) came to God
         and said, “Ya'el, eternal king, command that fragrant incenses from Paradise be given to
         Adam.” 5 And God ordered Adam go come that he might take aromatic fragrances out of
         Paradise for his sustenance. 6 When the angels allowed him, he gathered four kinds: crocus,
         nard, reed, cinnamon; and other seeds for his food. And he took these and went out of Paradise.
         And so we came to be on the earth.
         Other apparent references to a single deity level in the role of the pre-exilic hwhy K)lm deserve brief

mention. In 2 Macc. 3:24ff.; 5:1-4, an unnamed angel warrior, “the Lord of spirits,” appears with a host of

heavenly horsemen to defend Jerusalem. In a parallel to this passage from 2 Maccabees, T. Mos.10:1-3 reads:

         1 Then His kingdom will appear throughout his whole creation. Then the devil will have an end.
         Yea, sorrow shall be led away with him. 2 Then will be filled the hands of the angel who is in
         the highest place appointed. Yea, he will at once avenge them of their enemies. 3 For the
         Heavenly One will arise from His kingly throne. Yea, he will go forth from his holy habitation
         with indignation and wrath on behalf of his sons.866




864
    “Apocalypse of Abraham,” (OTP 1:692, note. 10b).
865
    “Life of Adam and Eve,” translated by M. D. Johnson (OTP 2:285, note 29b).
866
    “Testament of Moses,” translated by J. Priest (OTP 1:931-932).
         The angel here is a warrior (“avenge”) and a priest (“his hands shall be filled”).867 He has been

appointed “chief”, presumably over the other angels, has a throne, and has sons. Either this is the vice regent of

Yahweh, “the ruler of the gods,” the one who has delegated authority over the sons of the high King, or the high

God himself is called an angel. From either perspective, the divine plurality is undisguised. Scholars have

noticed that the passage mirrors Yahweh’s own departure from his place at the eschaton in Isa 26:21 (“For,

behold, Yahweh comes out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity”) and Micah 1:3

(“For, behold, Yahweh comes forth out of his place, and will come down, and tread upon the high places of the

earth”). Scholars have also noted that T. Mos.10:2 is also similar to Deut 32:43, noted for the absence of

references to divine beings in MT, contra LXX and 4QDeutq. The comparison is noteworthy in that in Deut

32:43, part of an important divine council chapter, the one “avenging his sons” is Yahweh, whereas in the

Testament of Moses the warrior is an angel.868



8.5 Jewish Speculations That the Divine Vice-Regent was an Angel

         There are five criteria that scholars agree merit special consideration when seeking to understand

exalted vice regency: (1) divine position (Is the figure with or near God and his throne?); (2) divine appearance

(Is the figure described in the same ways as God’s physical form in the Hebrew Bible?); (3) divine functions

(Does the figure perform actions typically ascribed to God?); (4) divine Name (Does the figure bear the name of

Yahweh, or is he described as a hypostasis869 of the Name?); and (5) divine veneration (Is the figure

worshipped, or is prayer offered to the figure?).870 With respect to the last criterion, the exaltation of a figure

most often has its roots in Exod 23:20-23; Exod 24:9ff.; Dan 7:9ff.; and Ezekiel 1, 10. It is not a coincidence

that these texts are precisely those at the root of the two powers controversy since they evince a second divine

personage.871



867
    Ibid., 932, n. 10a.
868
    M. Barker, The Great Angel, 75.
869
    It is recognized that “hypostasis nomenclature” has been criticized by scholars in the past. However, the criticisms have been
carefully addressed in recent work on Jewish angelology and divine mediation. For a survey of the issues, evaluation of criticisms, and
judicious responses, see Gieschen, Angelomorphic Christology, 36-48.
870
    C. Gieschen, Angelomorphic Christology, 31-33.
871
    Segal, Two Powers in Heaven, 148-149. Christopher Rowland, The Open Heaven: A Study of Apocalyptic in Judaism and Early
Christianity (Eugene, OR: Wipf & Stock Publishers, 1982), 78-112.
          Second Temple Jewish writers devoted a good deal of time to speculating and debating about the

identity of the second power in heaven. Comments will be brief with respect to angels already introduced in this

chapter, so as to place emphasis on the other figures.872

          The most widely attested exalted angel figure is Michael. Earlier in this chapter it was pointed out that

1 En. 69:15ff. could be construed as evidence that Michael was thought to be the bearer of the divine (“hidden”)

Name. Michael also receives titles of exaltation, such as “archangel” and “commander in chief” of the angels,

which naturally elevate him to the highest position in heaven under God. Michael was also associated with the

mediation of the law to Moses (L.A.E. [Apoc.] Preface; Jub. 1:27-2:1). If Michael is in fact the angel described

in Joseph and Aseneth, “his physical description appears to be built upon a combination of traditions, primarily

the figure of the enthroned Glory in Ezek 1:26 (‘a man from heaven’, ‘sparks shot forth from his hands and

feet’) . . . Dan 10:5-6 (‘his face was like lightning’), and the fw=j from Gen 1:3 (LXX).”873 The unnamed

angel’s description as a “man of light” (a2nqrwpoj fwto\j) recalls the description of the Glory in Ezekiel the

                                                       874
Tragedian 70-71 as an enthroned man (fw=j                    ) wearing a crown and holding a scepter.

          Michael was also considered by some Jewish writers to be Yahweh’s co-regent in heaven and on earth

due to his status as the chief intercessor for Israel (Dan 12:1-3), a position that placed him nearest to God in

Jewish belief. For example, in T. Levi 5:5b-6 we read:

          . . . And I said to him, “I beg you, Lord, teach me your name, so that I may call on you in the
          day of tribulation.” 6 And he said, “I am the angel who makes intercession for the nation of
          Israel, that they might not be beaten.” 875

T. Dan 6:1-2 adds:

          1 And now fear the Lord, my children, be on guard against Satan and his spirits. 2 Draw near to
          God and to the angel who intercedes for you, because he is the mediator between God and men
          for the peace of Israel. He shall stand in opposition to the kingdom of the enemy.876

872
    The list given here is not meant to be exhaustive. Only those candidates are included that most clearly meet several of Gieschen’s
criteria, whose literary descriptions date to the first century C.E., and that relate to the major Two Powers passages. The requirement set
for this study to only include first century material thus eliminates Metatron, one of the most exalted figures in Jewish angelology. In
many ways Metatron is the capstone of vice-regent traditions since he bears the name N+qh hwhy, the “lesser Yahweh.” Much of the
material for Metatron is found in 3 Enoch, which scholars date from the 2nd to the 5th centuries C.E. This book also has some of the
most explicit divine council scenes in all of Jewish literature.
873
    J. Fossum, The Image of the Invisible God: Essays on the Influence of Jewish mysticism on Early Christology (Göttingen:
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1995), 22-23.
874
    fw=j is “a poetic form of a0ner in Homeric literature” (“Ezekiel the Tragedian,” translated by R. G. Robertson (OTP 2:812, n. b2).
875
    “Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs,” translated by H. C. Kee (OTP 1:790).
876
    Ibid., 810.
         In the 2nd century C.E., Michael’s status as intercessor and lead angel came to be expanded as a

mediatorial role for all nations, thereby positioning him as the Son of Man figure of Dan 7:9ff., and therefore the

divine vice-regent.877

         Gabriel was also divinized by some Jewish exegetes, a choice that most modern scholars attribute to his

splendid description in Dan 10:4-6:

         6 His body was like the beryl, and his face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps
         of fire, and his arms and his feet like polished brass, and the voice of his words like the voice of
         a multitude.

         Scholars have observed that there are secure links between this portrayal and Ezek 1:26-28 and 8:2. The

latter reads, “Then I looked, and behold, a likeness as the appearance of fire: from the appearance of his loins

even downward, fire; and from his loins upward, as the appearance of brightness, as the color of amber.” As

noted in Chapter Six, some scholars seek to identify the Son of Man in Dan 7:9ff. with Gabriel in light of his

appearance.878 His description also correlates with that of the unnamed angel in Jos.Asen.14:1-17:10 and Ya’el

in Apoc. Ab. 10:1-17:21.

         Perhaps surprisingly, another of the archangels, Raphael, was also considered to be the second power in

heaven of exalted status. Despite the fact that he is “one of the seven archangels who stand before the Glory of

the Lord” (Tobit 12:12, 15), Raphael is specifically called the “angel of the Lord” in Tob 12:22. Tob 11:14-15

also reveals that Raphael may have been considered by the writer as possessing the divine Name (reading with

Codex Sinaiticus):879

         14 Then he saw his son and embraced him, and he wept and said, "Blessed art thou, O God, and
         blessed is His Name for ever, and blessed are all your holy angels; May his Name be upon us.
         And blessed be all the angels unto all ages.15 For thou hast afflicted me, but thou hast had
         mercy upon me; here I see my son Tobias!"

The point offered by some scholars concerning this passage is that not only are God, His Name, and all the

angels blessed, but it is possible that “His Name” is being directly addressed in context. This would mean

Raphael, the angel who intervenes for Tobit, would bear the Name.

877
    Mach, “Michael,” DDD, 571. Nathaniel Schmidt, “The Son of Man in the Book of Daniel,” JBL 19 (1900): 22-28. Cf. Apoc. Mos.
2:1; 3:2; 49:2; 1 En. 25; 60:4-5. See also the discussion in Chapter Six concerning Michael.
878
    J. Fossum, Name of God, 279, n. 61.
879
    Stuckenbruck has argued that the recension in Codex Sinaiticus is older than the text most often used (Stuckenbruck, Angel
          Earlier several references to plural sons of God were noted in Fragment A of the Prayer of Joseph. That

text is also significant for its deification of Jacob in the form of the angel Israel: “I, Jacob, who is speaking to

you, am also Israel, an angel of God and a ruling spirit . . . I am he whom God called Israel, which means ‘a

man seeing God,’ because I am the firstborn of every living thing to whom God gives life” (lines 1, 3). Jacob is

confronted by a jealous archangel Uriel, whom Jacob puts in his place as “the eighth after me” (7). Jacob then

declares, “I, Israel, the archangel (a!rxa/ggeloj) of the Power of the Lord and the chief captain (a0rxixilia/rxoj)

among the sons of God. Am I not Israel, the first minister before the presence (lit., face) of God.”

          Elsewhere in Second Temple literature these designations are linked to Michael.880 The “Power of the

Lord” is a designation used in later Jewish mysticism for the Glory of the Lord, and so some scholars have

concluded that this phrase is evidence for the deification of Jacob/Israel as the Glory.881 Commentators on this

text have also long recognized that every title in this exalted description is used by Philo for the Logos.882 The

relationship of the passage to merkabah traditions is likewise well established, and scholars naturally see the

reason for the titles and linkage to the chariot throne as the second deity figure who wrestled with Jacob.883

          The angel Ya’el, described so transparently in the passages mentioned above as the Angel of the Lord,

deserves several additional comments. By virtue of his explicit identification with the pre-exilic hwhy K)lm,

scholars regard Ya’el as one of the clearest examples of a divine hypostasis in Second Temple texts.884 In

addition to bearing “the ineffable Name,” Ya’el has the authority “to restrain Leviathan . . . [and] to loosen

Hades” (Apoc. Ab. 10:10-11). The language of restraining Leviathan recalls Yahweh’s speech in Job 41. In

addition, Ya’el’s description (11:2-3) marks his divine status:

          2 The appearance of his body was like sapphire, and the aspect of his face was like chrysolite,
          and the hair of his head like snow, 3 and the turban (was) on his head, its look like that of a
          rainbow, and the clothing of his garments (was) purple; and a golden staff (was) in his right
          hand.885

Veneration and Christology, 164-167).
880
    2 En. 22:6[A]; 33:10[A]; 3 Bar. 11:6; T. Ab. 1:4[A].
881
    Gieschen, Angelomorphic Christology, 141 (cf. J. Fossum, Image of the Invisible God, 135-151).
882
    “Israel” (Conf. 146); “angel/archangel” (Leg. 3.177; Deus, 182; Her. 205; Mut. 87; Conf. 146; Somn. 1.240); “ruling spirit” (Abr. 124;
QE 2.64, 66, 68); “one seeing God” (many times; e.g., Leg. 2.34; 3.186, 212; Sacr. 134; Conf. 56, 72, 146, 148); “firstborn” (Conf. 63;
Agr. 51); “eldest son of God” (Leg. 3.175; Det. 118; Migr. 6; Conf. 146); “chief captain” (Conf. 174; Somn. 1.241; cf. Pseudo-Justin,
Oratio ad Graecus, 5); “first minister” (Leg. 3.82-88; Gig. 52; Migr. 102).
883
    See the earlier discussions of Gen 28-32; 35:1-7 (noting the plural verb with Myhl)h) and Hos 12:3-4.
884
    Gieschen, Angelomorphic Christology, 143.
885
    “Apocalypse of Abraham,” (OTP 1:694).
            There are several obvious points of correspondence with Ezek 1:26-28 (radiant body, rainbow) and

Ezek 28:13 (sapphire, chysolite). The white hair is identical to that of the Ancient of Days in Dan 7:9, and the

turban recalls Exod 28:4, 36, where the high priest’s turban bore the name of Yahweh. A second power in

heaven who brandishes a sceptre also appears in the description of the “man of light” in Ezek Trag. 74. Yet

despite the amazingly exalted status of Ya’el, he worships the Most High God along with Abraham in Apoc.

Abr. 17:1-21.



8.6 Jewish Speculations that the Divine Vice-Regent was a Deified Human

            The category of exalted humans as God’s chief angel has received much less scholarly attention than

exalted angels.886 The designation “exalted human” refers to the belief that certain human beings were exalted

to a position of rulership with God without physical death.

            For example, 2 En. 30:11-12 explicitly identifies Adam as one of God’s chief angels over creation:

            11 And on the earth I assigned him to be a second angel, honored and great and glorious. 12
            And I assigned him to be a king, to reign on the earth, and to have my wisdom. And there was
            nothing comparable to him on the earth, even among my creatures that exist.887

            Adam is also elevated higher than a principal angel in the Life of Adam and Eve (14:2) where Michael

commands Satan to worship Adam, “the image of God.” In the T. Ab.11:4, Abraham is shown a man “seated on

a golden throne” who has a “terrifying” appearance “like the Master’s.” Abraham’s guide, Michael, reveals the

figure’s identity in verse 9: “This is the first-formed Adam who is in such glory, and he looks at the world,

since everyone has come from him.”

            Of all the human vice regent figures, Enoch has perhaps received the most scholarly attention. Enoch is

identified as the Son of Man in the throne room scene of 1 Enoch 71:

            1 Thus it happened after this that my spirit passed out of sight and ascended into the heavens. And I saw
            the sons of the holy angels (ui`oi. a;ggelw/n) walking upon the flame of fire; their garments were
            white—and their overcoats—and the light of their faces was like snow. 2 Also I saw two rivers of fire,
            the light of which fire was shining like hyacinth. Then I fell on my face before the Lord of Spirits. 3
            And the angel Michael, one of the archangels, seizing me by my right hand and lifting me up, led me

886
      Melchizedek is excluded from the discussion here in light of the extended treatment in Chapter Seven.
887
      “2 (Slavonic Apocalypse of) Enoch,” (OTP 1:152).
         out into all the secrets of mercy; and he showed me all the secrets of righteousness. 4 And he showed
         me all the secrets of the extreme ends of the heaven and all the reservoirs of the stars and the
         luminaries—from where they come out (to shine) before the faces of the holy ones . . . 8 And I saw
         countless angels—a hundred thousand times a hundred thousand, ten million times ten million—
         encircling that house. 9 Michael, Raphael, Gabriel, Phanuel, and numerous (other) holy angels that are
         countless. 10 With them the Ancient of Days: His head is white and pure like wool and his garment is
         indescribable. 11 I fell on my face, my whole body mollified and my spirit transformed . . . 14 Then an
         angel came to me and greeted me and said to me “You, son of man, who art born in righteousness and
         upon whom righteousness has dwelt, the righteousness of the Ancient of Days will not forsake you.”888

2 Enoch 22 [Rec. A] also describes this transformation of Enoch into a divine being:

         4 And I fell down flat and did obeisance to the Lord. 5 And the Lord, with his own mouth, said
         to me, “Be brave, Enoch! Don’t be frightened! Stand up, and stand in front of my face forever.”
         6 And Michael, the Lord’s archistratig, lifted me up and brought me in front of the face of the
         Lord. And the Lord said to his servants, sounding them out, “Let Enoch join in and stand in
         front of my face forever!” 7 And the Lord’s glorious ones did obeisance and said, “Let Enoch
         yield in accordance with your word, O Lord!” 8 And the Lord said to Michael, “Go, and extract
         Enoch from his earthly clothing. And anoint him with my delightful oil, and put him into
         clothes of my glory. 9 And so Michael did just as the Lord had said to him. He anointed me and
         clothed me. And the appearance of that oil is greater than the greatest light, and its ointment like
         sweet dew, and its fragrance myrrh; and it is like the rays of the glittering sun. 10 And I looked
         at myself, and I had become like one of his glorious ones.889

         The allusions to the divine council scene of Dan 7:9ff. are unmistakable. Some scholars have also

argued that Enoch’s ascent on the clouds in 1 Enoch 14:8 is the model upon which the Son of Man description

in Daniel 7 is based.890 In 1 En. 14:8, however, Enoch is carried upwards by the winds, not the clouds, which is

not the case in Daniel 7: “Behold, clouds called me in the vision, and the mist called me . . . and in the vision

winds caused me to fly.” As Collins notes, while there are interesting parallels between 1 Enoch 14 and Daniel

7, “direct dependence between Daniel and this Enoch literature cannot be demonstrated.”891 Of note for this

study is the fact that this early Jewish tradition separates Michael from the Son of Man figure.

         Moses was also considered a god by Philo, who used Exod 4:16 and 7:1, texts that refer to Moses as

Myhl), as his starting point.892 However, Philo was careful to make it clear that Moses was not like the highest

God, the God of Israel.893 Moses receives a far more dramatic exaltation in the 2nd century B.C.E. text of

Ezekiel the Tragedian. It is Moses who is the “man of light” noted earlier (lines 68-80), the exalted figure

888
    “1 (Ethiopic Apocalypse of) Enoch,” OTP 1:49-50
889
    “2 (Slavonic Apocalypse of) Enoch,” OTP 1:137-138.
890
    T. F. Glasson, “The Son of Man Imagery: Enoch xiv and Daniel vii,” NTS 23 (1976-1977): 82-90.
891
    John J. Collins, Daniel, 59.
892
    Mos. 1:158; Somn. 1:189; Mut. 128-129. In QG 4:8 (cf. Mos. 1:155-159) Philo refers to Moses as o9 a0rxa/ggeloj.
893
    Det. 162; Leg. 1:40-41; Migr. 84.
enthroned and worshipped as king over creation. Incredibly, God himself abdicates the throne and hands his

crown to Moses:

         68 On Sinai’s peak I (Moses) saw what seemed a throne 69 so great in size it touched the clouds
         of heaven. 70 Upon it sat a man of noble mien, 71 becrowned, and with scepter in one hand 72
         while with the other he did beckon me. 73 I made approach and stood before the throne. 74 He
         handed over the scepter and he bade 75 me mount the throne, and gave me the crown; 76 then
         he himself withdrew from off the throne. 77 I gazed upon the whole earth round about; 78
         things under it, and high above the skies. 79 Then at my feet the multitude of stars 80 fell down,
         and I their number reckoned up.894

Scholars draw attention to the depiction of God as a man on the throne and His abdication of that throne to

Moses as nothing less than deification of a second being.895

         Finally, some Second Temple period texts identify the Son of Man, and hence the divine vice-regent,

with an unnamed human figure. 1 En. 46:1 describes a scene where the white-haired “Chief of days” is

accompanied by a being “whose face had the appearance of a man, and his face was full of grace, like one of the

holy angels.” This figure is called “messiah” (anointed one) in 1 En. 48:10; 52:4 and is further described as

existing prior to creation (48:3). 4 Ezra 4:13 another figure is described as coming with the clouds and pre-

existent; he is the one “whom the Most High has been keeping for many ages.”


Summation

         The aim of this chapter was to survey the evidence for divine plurality in Second Temple Jewish

literature in order to discern congruencies between that corpus and the divine council plurality evident in

canonical Hebrew texts. The terminology for divine beings in the Second Temple period lacks the precision of

earlier canonical material. Nevertheless, the exaltation and geographical sovereignty of certain groups of

heavenly beings echo the divine council of earlier Israelite religion. On the other hand, the concept of a second

deity figure in heaven, a divine vice regent, is actually more explicit in Second Temple writings. The evidence

suggests that divine plurality was a significant part of Second Temple Jewish belief, albeit consistently cast in

way that made even the most exalted divine beings subservient to Yahweh, the unique God of Israel. The idea




894
   R. G. Robertson, “Ezekiel the Tragedian,” OTP 2:811-812.
895
   Meeks, “Moses as God and King,” 354-371; Pieter van der Horst, “Moses’ Throne Vision in Ezekiel the Dramatist,” JJS 34 (1983):
19-29 (esp. 25).
that Judaism in the Second Temple period must be unequivocally described in terms of intolerant monotheism

cannot be sustained.
                                                 Conclusion

        The goal of this dissertation was to demonstrate that the pre-exilic Israelite belief in a divine council of

Myhl) / Myl) (ynb) under Yahweh was maintained in Israel’s faith after the exile and survived in at least

some strains of Judaism well into the Common Era. The strategy employed in meeting this goal was threefold.

        First, the dissertation offered evidence of divine plurality, including the pervasive presence of a divine

vice-regent, in late canonical Hebrew texts and Second Temple period Jewish literature. After surveying the

terminology and motifs that describe the divine council in both Ugaritic and pre-exilic Israelite religion, these

same data were mined from canonical material dating to the exilic and post-exilic periods and non-canonical

Second Temple texts. It was shown that the most dramatic evidence in both corpi for a divine council of

Myhl) / Myl) (ynb) derives from the Hellenistic period: the book of Daniel and the sectarian texts from

Qumran.

        Second, the currently accepted reconstruction of the development of monotheism in Israel was

challenged. This challenge focused on how the current reconstruction assumes what it seeks to prove and thus

lacks logical coherence. The consensus view assumes that the textual evidence for divine plurality in late

canonical and non-canonical texts cannot actually express a belief in the pre-exilic divine council, because that

would result in monolatry or polytheism, which assuredly gave way to monotheism after the exile. References to

other gods in the council must therefore speak of angels or be rhetorical devices used to prop up monotheism,

because that would not be monolatry or polytheism. Put another way, this study argued that it is incoherent to

appeal to the textual data examined in this study to prove the validity of a monotheistic breakthrough during and

after the exile, and then insist that the data must be “contextualized” by the very monotheism for which proof is

being sought.

        Third, this study also challenged the consensus view by pointing out how assumptions about the

evolution of monotheism influence the exegesis of various passages and phrases in Deuteronomy, Deutero-

Isaiah, and Psalm 82. More specifically, the dissertation demonstrated that Deuteronomy 4 and 32 evince a

monolatrous worldview, a conclusion shared by many scholars of Israelite religion. The God of Deuteronomy
created the other gods (which are not idols, lest Yahweh be a idol maker) and decreed they be worshipped by the

non-elect Gentile nations. This monolatrous context of Deuteronomy therefore requires that declarations that

“there are no gods beside Yahweh” be understood as statements of incomparability. The same or similar

phrases and syntactical constructions occur in Deutero-Isaiah and constitute the primary evidence utilized by

defenders of the consensus view of Israel’s monotheistic breakthrough. This dissertation contended that the

reason these constructions are understood as indicating monolatry in Deuteronomy but intolerant monotheism in

Deutero-Isaiah is that the presumption of the monotheistic breakthrough is brought to the text a priori.

Dismissing the divine plurality in Deuteronomy 32 and Psalm 82 as a mere rhetorical device designed to

articulate the denial of other gods was likewise considered insufficient in view of both flawed analysis and the

fact that other late canonical divine council scenes in Job and Daniel can hardly be so construed.

        These three lines of argumentation necessitated that the evidence for divine plurality in later canonical

and non-canonical Jewish texts be considered on its own merits without the imposition of an assumed

monotheistic progression. The study argued that the survival of Israel’s pre-exilic divine council worldview

provides greater explanatory power for the data than the consensus view of the development of monotheism. In

particular, the survival of the divine council with its feature of divine vice regency provides a coherent

explanation for the provenance of the belief that there were two powers in heaven, a belief common to Judaism

until the second century C.E., when it was declared a heresy.
                                        Bibliography
Aaron, David H. Biblical Ambiguities: Metaphor, Semantics, and Divine Imagery. Leiden: E. J.
Brill, 2001.

Ackerman, James S. "An Exegetical Study of Psalm 82." Th.D. diss. Harvard University, 1966.

Ackerman, Susan. Under Every Green Tree: Popular Religion in Sixth Century Judah. Harvard
Semitic Monographs 46. Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1992.

Afzal, Cameron. “Wheels of Time: Merkavah Exegesis in Revelation 4.” Pages 465-482 in SBL
Seminar Papers, 1998. 2 vols. Society of Biblical Literature Seminar Papers 33; Atlanta: Scholars
Press 37. Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1998.

Albright, W.F. Yahweh and the Gods of Canaan: An Historical Analysis of Two Conflicting Faiths.
Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1968.

Alexander, Philip S. “Comparing Merkavah Mysticism and Gnosticism: An Essay in Method.”
Journal of Jewish Studies 35 (Spr 1984): 1-18.

_______. “The Demonology of the Dead Sea Scrolls.” Pages 331-353 in The Dead Sea Scrolls
After Fifty Years: A Comprehensive Assessment. Vol. 2; eds. Peter Flint and James C. Vanderkam.
Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999.

Alomia, K.M. "Lesser Gods of the Ancient Near East and Some Comparisons with Heavenly Beings
of the Old Testament." Ph.D. diss., Andrews University, 1987.

Arnold, Clinton. Ephesians: Power and Magic. Society for New Testament Studies Monograph
Series 63. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.

_______. Powers of Darkness: Principalities and Powers in Paul’s Letters. Downer’s Grove, Ill.:
Intervarsity, 1992.

Aune, D. E. “Archai.” Pages 77-80 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible. Edited by
Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans
Publishing Co., 1999.

_______. “Archon.” Pages in 82-85 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible. Edited by
Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans
Publishing Co., 1999.

_______. “Orthodoxy in First Century Judaism. A Response to N. J. McEleney.” Journal for the
Study of Judaism 7 (1976): 1-10.

Bampfylde, Gillian. “The Prince of the Host in the Book of Daniel and the Dead Sea Scrolls.”
Journal for the Study of Judaism 14:2 (1983): 129-134.

Barker, Margaret. “Enthronement and Apotheosis: The Vision in Revelation 4-5.” Pages 217-227
in New Heaven and New Earth Prophecy and the Millennium: Studies in Honour of Anthony
Gelston. Edited by P. J. Harland and C. T. R. Hayward. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999.

_______. The Great Angel: A Study of Israel’s Second God. Louisville, KY: Westminster / John
Knox Publishers, 1992.
_______. The Older Testament: The Survival of Themes from the Ancient Royal Cult in Sectarian
Judaism and Early Christianity. London: SPCK, 1987.

Barr, James. “Hypostatization of Linguistic Phenomena in Modern Theological Interpretation.”
Journal of Semitic Studies 7 (1962): 85-92.

_______. The Problem of Israelite Monotheism. Transactions of the Glasgow University Oriental
Society 17. Glasgow: Glasgow University, 1957-1958.

Barton, Tamsyn. Ancient Astrology. New York: Routledge, 1994

Batto, B. "The Sleeping God: An Ancient Near Eastern Motif of Divine Sovereignty." Biblica 68:2
(1987): 153-177.

_______. “Zedeq.” Pages 929-934 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible. Edited by
Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans
Publishing Co., 1999.

Bauckham, Richard. “The Throne of God and the Worship of Jesus.” Pages 43-69 in The Jewish
Roots of Christological Monotheism: Papers from the St. Andrews Conference on the Historical
Origins of the Worship of Jesus. Edited by Carey C. Newman, James R. Davila, and Gladys S.
Lewis. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999.

Baumgarten, J. M. “The Heavenly Tribunal and the Personification of S[edeq in Jewish Apocalyptic.”
Pages 219-239 in Aufstieg und Niedergang der Romischen Welt II, Principat 19.1. Edited by
Wolfgang Haase. New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1979.

Becking, Bob. “Continuity and Discontinuity After the Exile.” Pages 1-8 in The Crisis of Israelite
Religion: Transformation of Religious Tradition in Exilic and Post-Exilic Times. Oudtestamentische
Studien XLII. Edited by Bob Becking and Marjo C.A. Korpel. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999.

Bentzen, A. Daniel. Handbuch zum Alten Testament 19. 2nd edition. Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck,
1952.

_______. King and Messiah. Oxford: Blackwell, 1952.

Berger, Peter L., and Thomas Luckmann. The Social Construction of Reality. New York: Penguin,
1966.

Beuken, W.A.M. “Servant and Herald of Good Tidings: Isaiah 61 as an Interpretation of Isaiah 40-
55.” Pages 411-442 in The Book of Isaiah: Le Livre d’Isaie. Edited by J. Vermeylen. Bibliotheca
ephemeridum Theologicarum Lovaniensium 81. Leuven: Peeters and Leuven University Press,
1989.

Bickerman, Elias J. The God of the Maccabees: Studies on the Meaning and Origin of the
Maccabean Revolt. Translated by H.R. Moehring. Studies in the Judaism of Late Antiquity 32.
Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1979.

Black, Matthew. The Book of Enoch, or 1 Enoch: A New English Edition With Commentary and
Textual Notes. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1985.

_______. "The Throne-Theophany Prophetic Commission and the 'Son of Man'." Pages 57-73 in
Jews, Greeks, and Christians: Essays in Honor of W.D. Davies. Edited by Robert Hamerton-Kelly
and Robin Scroggs. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1976.
Boccaccini, Gabriele. Beyond the Essene Hypothesis: The Parting of the Ways Between Qumran
and Enochic Judaism. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1998.

_______. “Multiple Judaisms: A New Understanding of the Context of Earliest Christianity.” Bible
Review 11 (Fall 1995), 38-41, 46.

_______. “Qumran and the Enoch Groups.” Pages 63-92 in The Hebrew Bible and Qumran. Edited
by J.H. Charlesworth. N. Richland Hills, Texas: BIBAL Press, 2000.

Boer, P.A.H. de. “The Counsellor” Pages 42-71 in Wisdom in Israel and in the Ancient Near East:
Presented to Professor Harold Henry Rowley. Edited by M. Noth and D. Winton Thomas. Journal
for the Study of the Old Testament Supplement Series 3. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1955.

Bousset, Wilhelm. Kyrious Christos: Geschichte des Christusglaubens bis Irenaeus. 5th ed.
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1965. Translated by John E. Steely. Repr., Nashville:
Abingdon, 1970.

Buttenwieser, M. The Psalms. New York: Ktav Publishing House, 1969.

Byrne, B. “Sons of God”—“Seed of Abraham”: A Study of the Idea of the Sonship of God of All
Christians in Paul Against the Jewish Background. Analecta biblica 83. Rome: Pontifical Institute
Press, 1979.

Capes, David. Old Testament Yahweh Texts in Paul’s Christology. Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 1992.

Carr, Wesley. Angels and Principalities: The Background, Meaning, and Development of the
Pauline Phrase hai archai kai hai exousiai. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981.

Carrell, Peter R. Jesus and the Angels: Angelology and the Christology of the Apocalypse of John.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Carroll, R.P. “Psalm 78: Vestiges of a Tribal Polemic.” Vetus Testamentum 21 (1971): 133-150.

Casey, P. M. "Monotheism, Worship, and Christological Development in the Pauline Churches."
Pages 214-233 in The Jewish Roots of Christological Monotheism: Papers from the St. Andrews
Conference on the Historical Origins of the Worship of Jesus. Journal for the Study of Judaism
Supplements 63. Edited by Carey C. Newman, James R. Davila, and Gladys S. Lewis. Leiden: E. J.
Brill, 1999.

Cassuto, U. “Baal and Mot in the Ugaritic Texts.” Israel Exploration Journal 12 (1962): 77-86.

Charlesworth, James H. “The Jewish Roots of Christology: The Discovery of the Hypostatic Voice.”
Southwestern Journal of Theology 39 (1986): 19-41.

_______. “The Portrayal of the Righteous as an Angel.” Pages 135-151 in Ideal Figures in Ancient
Judaism: Profiles and Paradigms. Edited by John J. Collins and George W.E. Nickelsburg. Society
of Biblical Literature Septuagint and Cognate Studies 12. Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1980.

Charlesworth, James H., ed. Old Testament Pseudepigrapha. 2 vols. New York: Doubleday, 1983,
1985.

Chester, Andrew. “Jewish Messianic Expectations and Mediatorial Figures and Pauline
Christology.” Pages 17-89 in Paulus und antike Judentum: Tübingen-Durham Symposium im
Gedenken an den 50. Todestag Adolf Schlatters. Edited by Martin Hengel and Ulrich Heckel.
Wissenschaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament 58. Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 1991.

Christensen, Duane L. Deuteronomy 21:10-34:12. Word Biblical Commentary 6B. Nashville:
Thomas Nelson Publishers, 2002.

Christofferson, Olle. The Earnest Expectation of the Creature: The Flood Tradition as the Matrix
of Romans 8:18-27. Coniectanea Biblica New Testament Series 32. Uppsala: Almqvist & Wiksell
International, 1990.

Clifford, Richard J. The Cosmic Mountain in Canaan and the Old Testament. Harvard Semitic
Monographs 4. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1972.

_______. "The Tent of El and the Israelite Tent of Meeting." Catholic Biblical Quarterly 33 (1971):
221-227.

Clines, D. J. A. "Job 5, 1-8: A New Exegesis." Biblica 62 (1981): 185-194.

_______. Job 1-20. Word Biblical Commentary 17. Dallas: Word Books, 1989.

Cohen, H. R. Biblical Hapax Legomena in the Light of Akkadian and Ugaritic. Society of Biblical
Literature Dissertation Series 37. Missoula, MT: Scholars Press, 1978.

Cohon, Samuel S. "The Unity of God: A Study in Hellenistic and Rabbinic Theology." Hebrew
Union College Annual 26 (1955): 425-479.

Collins, Adela Yarbro. “The Seven Heavens in Jewish and Christian Apocalypses.” Pages 59-92 in
Death, Ecstasy, and Other Worldly Journeys. Edited by John J. Collins and Michael Fishbane.
Albany, New York: SUNY Press, 1995.

_______. "The Worship of Jesus and the Imperial Cult.” Pages 234-257 in The Jewish Roots of
Christological Monotheism: Papers from the St. Andrews Conference on the Historical Origins of
the Worship of Jesus. Journal for the Study of Judaism Supplements 63. Edited by Carey C.
Newman, James R. Davila, and Gladys S. Lewis. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999.

Collins, John J. "Apocalyptic Genre and Mythic Allusions in Daniel." Journal for the Study of the
Old Testament 21 (1981): 83-100.

_______. Daniel: A Commentary on the Book of Daniel. Hermeneia. Minneapolis: Fortress Press,
1993.

_______. “The Herald of Good Tidings: Isaiah 61:1-3 and Its Actualization in the Dead Sea
Scrolls.” Pages 225-240 in The Quest for Context and Meaning: Studies in Biblical Intertextuality
in Honor of James A. Sanders. Edited by Craig Evans and Shemaryahu Talmon. Leiden: E. J. Brill,
1997.

_______. “The Mythology of Holy War in Daniel and the Qumran War Scroll: A Point of Transition
in Jewish Apocalyptic.” Vetus Testamentum 25 (1975): 596-612.

_______. “Powers in Heaven: God, Gods, and Angels in the Dead Sea Scrolls.” Pages 9-28 in
Religion in the Dead Sea Scrolls. Edited by John J. Collins and Robert Kugler. Grand Rapids: Wm.
B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 2000.
_______. “The Son of Man in First Century Judaism.” New Testament Studies 38 (1992): 448-
466.

_______. “Varieties of Judaism in the Hellenistic and Roman Periods.” Journal of Religion 77:4 (Oct
1997): 605-611.

_______. “Watcher.” Pages 893-895 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible. Edited by
Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans
Publishing Co., 1999.

Cooke, Gerald. "The Sons of (the) God(s)." Zeitschrift für die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft 76
(1964): 22-47.

Craigie, P. Psalms 1-50. Word Biblical Commentary 19. Waco, TX: Word Publishing, 1983.

Cross, Frank Moore. Canaanite Myth and Hebrew Epic. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1973.

_______. “The Council of Yahweh in Second Isaiah.” Journal of Near Eastern Studies 12 (1953):
274-277.

_______. “The Olden Gods in Ancient Near Eastern Creation Myths.” Pages 329-338 in Magnalia
Dei, The Mighty Acts of God: Essays on the Bible and Archaeology in Memory of G. Ernest Wright.
Edited by F.M. Cross, P.D. Miller, and W.E. Lemke. New York: Doubleday and Company, 1976.

_______. “The Song of the Sea and Canaanite Myth.” Journal of Theology and the Church 5
(1968): 1-25.

Cross, Frank Moore and David Noel Freedman. Studies in Ancient Yahwistic Poetry. Missoula, MT:
Scholars Press, 1975. Repr., Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1997.

Dahood, M. "Ancient Semitic Deities in Syria and Palestine." Pages 65-94 in Le Antiche Divinita
Semitiche. Studi Semitici 1. Edited by S. Moscati. Rome: Centro di Studi Semitici, 1958.

_______. Psalms I. Anchor Bible 16. New York: Doubleday, 1966.

_______. Ras Shamra Parallels. Vol. I of Analecta Orientalia 49. Edited by L. R. Fisher. Rome:
Pontifical Institute, 1972.

Davidson, Maxwell J. Angels at Qumran: A Comparative Study of 1 Enoch 1-36; 72-108 and
Sectarian Writings from Qumran. Journal for the Study of the Pseudepigrapha Supplement Series
11. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1992.

Davies, Philip R. “Judaisms in the Dead Sea Scrolls: The Case of the Messiah.” Pages 219-223 in
The Dead Sea Scrolls in Their Historical Context. Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 2000.

Davila, James R. “The Dead Sea Scrolls and Merkavah Mysticism.” Pages 249-264 in The Dead Sea
Scrolls in Their Historical Context. Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 2000.

_______. “Heavenly Ascents in the Dead Sea Scrolls.” Pages 461-485 in The Dead Sea Scrolls
After Fifty Years: A Comprehensive Assessment, vol. II. Edited by Peter W. Flint and James C.
Vanderkam. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999.
_______. “Melchizedek: King, Priest, and God.” Pages 217-234 in The Seductiveness of Jewish
Myth: Challenge or Response? Edited by S. Daniel Breslauer. Albany: State University of New
York Press, 1997.

_______. "Of Methodology, Monotheism, and Metatron: Introductory Reflections on Divine
Mediators and the Origins of the Worship of Jesus." Pages 3-18 in The Jewish Roots of
Christological Monotheism: Papers from the St. Andrews Conference on the Historical Origins of
the Worship of Jesus. Journal for the Study of Judaism Supplements 63. Edited by Carey C.
Newman, James R. Davila, and Gladys S. Lewis. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999.

Day, John. "Asherah in the Hebrew Bible and Northwest Semitic Literature.” Journal of Biblical
Literature 105 (1986): 385-408.

_______. "The Canaanite Inheritance of the Israelite Monarchy.” Pages 72-90 in King and
Messiah in Israel and the Ancient Near East: Proceedings of the Oxford Old Testament Seminar.
Edited by John Day. Journal for the Study of the Old Testament Supplement Series 270. Sheffield:
Sheffield University Press, 2000.

_______. “Echoes of Baal's Seven Thunders and Lightnings in Psalm 29 and Habakkuk 3:9 and
the Identity of the Seraphim in Isaiah 6.” Vetus Testamentum 29:2 (1979): 143-151.

_______. God's Conflict with the Dragon and the Sea. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1985.

_______. Psalms. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1990.
Delcor, M. “Melchizedek from Genesis to the Qumran Texts and the Epistle to the Hebrews.”
Journal for the Study of Judaism 2:2 (1971): 122.

Dequeker, L. "The Saints of the Most High." Oudtestamentische Studien 18 (1973): 108-187.

Deurloo, Karel A. "The One God and All Israel in Its Generations." Pages 31-46 in Studies in
Deuteronomy: In Honor of C. J. Labuschagne on the Occasion of his 65th Birthday. Journal for the
Study of the Old Testament Supplement Series 53. Edited by F. Garcia Martinez, A. Hilhorst,
J.T.A.G.M. van Ruiten, and A.S. van der Woude. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1994.

Deutsch, Nathaniel. Guardians of the Gate: Angelic Vice Regency in Late Antiquity. Leiden: E. J.
Brill, 1999.

Dever, William G. “The Contribution of Archaeology to the Study of Canaanite and Early Israelite
Literature.” Pages 209-248 in Ancient Israelite Religion: Essays in Honor of Frank Moore Cross.
Edited by Patrick D. Miller, et. al. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1987.

Dietrich, M. and O. Loretz. "Die Ba(al-Titel b(l )ars[ und )aliy qrdm.” Ugarit Forschungen 12 (1980):
391-393.

Dietrich, M., O. Loretz, and J. Sanmartín. The Cuneiform Alphabetic Texts from Ugarit, Ras Ibn
Hani and Other Places. Abhandlungen zur Literatur Alt-Syrien-Palästinas und Mesopotamiens 8.
KTU: 2nd ed. Münster: Ugarit-Verlag, 1995.

Dijkstra, M. “Yahweh-El or El-Yahweh?” Pages 42-52 in “Dort ziehen Schiffe dahin . . .” Collected
Communications to the XIVth Congress of the International Organization for the Study of the Old
Testament, Paris 1992. Beitrage zur Erforschun des Alten Testaments und des antiken Judentum
28; Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 1996.

Dimant, Devorah. “Men as Angels: The Self-Image of the Qumran Community.” Pages 93-103 in
Religion and Politics in the Ancient Near East. Edited by Adele Berlin. Bethesda, MD: University
Press of America, 1996.

Donner H. and W. Rollig. Kanaanaische und aramaische Inschriften, Mit einem Beitrage von O.
Rossler. 4th ed. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrasowitz, 1976-1979

du Toit Laubscher, F. “God’s Angel of Truth and Melchizedek: A Note on 11QMelch 13b.” Journal
for the Study of Judaism 3 (1972): 46-51.

Duncan, Julie. “A Critical Edition of Deuteronomy Manuscripts from Qumran, Cave IV. 4QDt b,
4QDt e, 4QDt h, 4QDt j, 4QDt b, 4QDt k, 4QDt l.” Ph.D. diss. Harvard University, 1989.

Dunn, James D. G. “Was Christianity a Monotheistic Faith From the Beginning?” Southwestern
Journal of Theology 35 (1982): 303-336.

Eissfeldt, O. "El and Yahweh." Journal of Semitic Studies 1 (1956): 25-37.

Elnes E.E. and P.D. Miller. "Elyon." Pages 293-299 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the
Bible. Edited by Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1999.

Emerton, J. A. "The Origin of the Son of Man Imagery." Journal of Theological Studies 9:2
(October, 1958): 227-242.
_______. “The Site of Salem.” Pages 45-71 in Studies in the Pentateuch. Edited by J.A. Emerton.
Vetus Testamentum Supplements 41. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1990

Eshel, Esther. “4Q471b: A Self-Glorification Hymn.” Revue de Qumran 17 (1996): 177-203.

Eshel, Esther. “The Identification of the ‘Speaker’ of the Self-Glorification Hymn.” Pages 619-635
in The Provo International Conference on the Dead Sea Scrolls. Edited by Donald W. Parry and
Eugene Ulrich. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999.

Feldmeier, R. “Mediator II.” Pages 558-560 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible.
Edited by Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1999.

_______. “World Rulers.” Pages 908-909 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible. Edited by
Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans
Publishing Co., 1999.

Ferch, Arthur J. "Daniel 7 and Ugarit: A Reconsideration." Journal of Biblical Literature 99
(1980): 75-86.

_______. The Son of Man in Daniel 7. Andrews University Seminary Doctoral Dissertation Series 6.
Berrien Springs, Michigan: Andrews University Press, 1979

Ferrera, A. J. and Simon B. Parker, "Seating Arrangements at Divine Banquets." Ugarit
Forschungen 4 (1972): 37-39.

Fishbane, Michael. “Some Forms of Divine Appearance in Ancient Jewish Thought.” Pages 261-270
in From Ancient Israel to Modern Judaism. Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1989.

Fisher, R.W. “The Herald of the Good News in Deutero-Isaiah (40:9; 41:27; 52:7).” Pittsburgh
Theological Monograph Series 1 (1974): 117-132.

Fitzmyer, Joseph A. The Genesis Apocryphon of Qumran Cave 1: A Commentary Rome: Pontifical
Institute Press, 1971.

_______. “The Semitic Background of the New Testament Kyrios-Title.” Pages 115-142 in A
Wandering Aramaean: Collected Aramaic Essays. Society of Biblical Literature Monograph Series
25. Missoula, MT: Scholars Press, 1979.

Fletcher-Louis, Crispin H. T. Luke-Acts: Angels, Christology, and Soteriology. Wissenschaftliche
Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament 94. Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 1997.

_______. “Wisdom Christology and the Parting of the Ways Between Judaism and Christianity.”
Pages 52-68 in Christian-Jewish Relations Through the Centuries. Edited by Stanley E. Porter and
Brook W. R. Pearson. Journal for the Study of the New Testament Supplement Series 192.
Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 2000.

Flint, Peter. “‘Apocrypha,’ Other Previously-Known Writings, and ‘Pseudepigrapha’ in the Dead
Sea Scrolls.” Pages 24-66 in The Dead Sea Scrolls After Fifty Years: A Comprehensive
Assessment. Vol. 2. Edited by Peter Flint and James C. Vanderkam. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999.

Flusser, D. The Crucible of Christianity: Judaism, Hellenism, and the Historic Background of the
Christian Faith. New York, 1969.
Fontenrose, J. “Dagon and El.” Oriens 10 (1957): 277-279.

Fossum, Jarl E. The Image of the Invisible God: Essays on the Influence of Jewish Mysticism on
Early Christology. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1995.

_______. The Name of God and the Angel of the Lord: Samaritan and Jewish Concepts of
Intermediation and the Origin of Gnosticism. Wissenschaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen
Testament 36; Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 1985.

Fowler, Mervyn D. “The Meaning of lip;ne, YHWH in the Old Testament.” Zeitschrift für die
alttestamentliche Wissenschaft 99 (1987): 384-390.

Freedman, David Noel. “Who is Like Thee Among the Gods? The Religion of Early Israel.” Pages
315-336 in Ancient Israelite Religion: Essays in Honor of Frank Moore Cross. Edited by Patrick D.
Miller, et.al. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1987.

Fulco, W. The Canaanite God Resheph. New Haven, CT: American Oriental Society, 1976.

Gager, John. The Origins of Anti-Semitism: Attitudes Toward Judaism in Paganism and Christian
Antiquity. New York: Oxford University Press, 1983.

Galling, K. "Der Ehrenname Elisas und die Entruckung Elias." Zeitschrift fürTheologie und Kirche
53 (1956): 129-148.

Gammie, John G. “The Angelology and Demonology in the Septuagint of the Book of Job.” Hebrew
Union College Annual 56 (1985): 1-19.

Gibson, Arthur. Biblical Semantic Logic: A Preliminary Analysis. Oxford: Blackwell, 1981.

Gibson, J.C.L. "The Theology of the Ugaritic Baal Cycle." Orientalia 53 (1984): 202-219.

Gieschen, Charles. Angelomorphic Christology: Antecedents and Early Evidence. Arbeiten zur
Geschichte des antiken Judentums und des Urchristentums 42. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1998.

Glasson, T. F. “The Son of Man Imagery: Enoch xiv and Daniel vii.” New Testament Studies 23
(1976-1977): 82-90.

Gnuse, Robert Karl. No Other Gods: Emergent Monotheism in Israel. Journal for the Study of the
Old Testament Supplement Series 241. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1997).

Goldingay, J. "'Holy Ones on High' in Daniel 7:18.” Journal of Biblical Literature 107 (1988): 497-
499.

Grabbe, L. L. "Hebrew pa4(al / Ugaritic b(l and the Supposed b / p Interchange." Ugarit Forschungen
11 (1979): 307-314.

_______. “Orthodoxy in First Century Judaism. What Are the Issues?” Journal for the Study of
Judaism 8 (1977): 149-153.

Grave, Cecelia. “The Etymology of Northwest Semitic s[apanu.” Ugarit Forschungen 12 (1980):
221-229.

Gray, J. The Legacy of Canaan. 2nd ed. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1965.
Greenspahn, F. Hapax Legomenon in Biblical Hebrew. Society of Biblical Literature Dissertation
Series 74. Chico, CA: Scholars Press, 1984.

Gruenwald, Ithamar. “Reflections on the Nature and Origins of Jewish Mysticism.” Pages 25-57 in
Gershom Scholem's Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism 50 Years After. Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck,
1993.

Hallo, William W., ed. Canonical Compositions from the Biblical World. Vol. 1 of The Context of
Scripture. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1997.

Halperin, David J. “Ascension or Invasion: Implications of the Heavenly Journey in Ancient Judaism.”
Religion 18 (1988): 47-67.

_______. The Faces of the Chariot: Early Jewish Responses to Ezekiel's Vision. Texte und Studien
zum Antiken Judentum 16. Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 1988.

_______. “Merkabah Midrash in the Septuagint.” Journal of Biblical Literature 101:3 (1982): 351-
363.

Handy, Lowell K. Among the Host of Heaven: The Syro-Palestinian Pantheon as Bureaucracy.
Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns, 1994.

_______. "The Appearance of Pantheon in Judah." Pages 27-43 in The Triumph of Elohim: From
Yahwisms to Judaisms. Edited by Diana Vikander Edelman. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans,
1995.

_______. “The Authorization of Divine Power and the Guilt of God in the Book of Job: Useful
Ugaritic Parallels.” Journal for the Study of the Old Testament 60 (1993): 107-118.

_______. “Dissenting Deities or Obedient Angels: Divine Hierarchies in Ugarit and the Bible.”
Biblical Research XXXV (1990): 18-35.

_______. "Hezekiah's Unlikely Reform." Zeitschrift für die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft 100
(1998): 111-115.

_______. “One Problem Involved in Translating to Meaning: An Example of Acknowledging Time
and Tradition.” Southwestern Journal of Theology 10:1 (1996): 1-19.

_______. “A Solution for the Problem of Many MLKM.” Ugarit Forschungen 20 (1988): 57-59.

Hannah, Darrell D. Michael and Christ: Michael Traditions and Angel Christology in Early
Christianity. Wissenschaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament 109. Tübingen: Mohr-
Siebeck, 1999.

Hartman, Louis F. and Alexander A. DiLella. The Book of Daniel. Anchor Bible 23. Garden City,
New York: Doubleday, 1978.

Hayman, Peter. "Monotheism - A Misused Word in Jewish Studies?" Journal of Jewish Studies
42:1 (Spring 1991): 1-15.

Haywood, Robert. “Heaven and Earth in Parallel: The Key Role of Angels in Ancient Judaism.”
Pages 57-74 in Christ. London: SPCK, 1996.
Heiser, Michael S. “The Mythological Provenance of Isa. 14:12-15: A Reconsideration of the
Ugaritic Material.” Vetus Testamentum 51:3 (2001): 354-369.

Herrmann, W. "Baal Zebub.” Pages 154-156 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible.
Edited by Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1999.

_______. "Rider Upon the Clouds." Pages 703-705 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the
Bible. Edited by Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1999.

Hoffman, Yair. “The Concept of ‘Other Gods’ in Deuteronomistic Literature.” Pages 66-84 in
Politics and Theopolitics in the Bible and Postbiblical Literature. Edited by Henning Graf
Reventlow, Yari Hoffman, and Benjamin Uffenheimer. Journal for the Study of the Old Testament
Supplement Series 171. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1994.

Hoffner, H. “Second Millennium Antecedents to the Hebrew bw),” Journal of Biblical Literature 86
(1967): 385-401.

Horbury, W. T. “The Messianic Associations of ‘The Son of Man.’” Journal of Theological Studies 36
(1985): 34-55.

Horst, P. W. van der. “Dominion.” Page 262 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible.
Edited by Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1999.

Hurtado, Larry. "The Binitarian Shape of Early Christian Worship.” Pages 187-213 in The Jewish
Roots of Christological Monotheism: Papers from the St. Andrews Conference on the Historical
Origins of the Worship of Jesus. Journal for the Study of Judaism Supplements 63. Edited by
Carey C. Newman, James R. Davila, and Gladys S. Lewis. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999.

_______. "First-Century Jewish Monotheism." Journal for the Study of the New Testament 71
(1998): 3-26.

Hurvitz, A. “The Date of the Prose Tale of Job Linguistically Reconsidered.” Harvard Theological
Review 67 (1974): 17-34.

Jefferson, H.G. “Is Psalm 110 Canaanite?” Journal of Biblical Literature 73 (1954): 152-156.

Johnson, Aubrey R. The One and the Many in the Israelite Conception of God. Cardiff: University
of Wales Press, 1961.

Johnson, Luke T. “The New Testament’s Anti-Jewish Slander and the Conventions of Ancient
Polemic.” Journal of Biblical Literature 108 (1989): 436-441.

Kapelrud, A.S. Baal in the Ras Shamra Texts. Copenhagen: G.E.C. Gad, 1952
Kingsbury, Edwin C. "The Prophets and the Council of Yahweh." Journal of Biblical Literature 83
(1964): 279-286.

Knoppers, Gary. "David’s relation to Moses: The Contexts, Contents, and Conditions of the
Davidic Promises.” Pages 91-118 in King and Messiah in Israel and the Ancient Near East:
Proceedings of the Oxford Old Testament Seminar. Edited by John Day. Journal for the Study of
the Old Testament Supplement Series 270. Sheffield: Sheffield University Press, 2000.
Kobelski, P. J. Melchizedek and Melchiresha(. Catholic Biblical Quarterly Monograph Series 10.
Washington, D.C.: Catholic Biblical Society, 1981.

Kockert, M. “Fear of Isaac.” Pages 329-331 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible.
Edited by Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1999.

Koehler, Ludwig, Walter Baumgartner, and Jakob Stamm. The Hebrew and Aramaic Lexicon of the
Old Testament. Translated by M. E. J. Richardson. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1995.

Kooij, Arie. van der. “The Ending of the Song of Moses: On the Pre-Masoretic Version of Deut.
32:43.” Pages 93-100 in Studies in Deuteronomy in Honor of C.J. Labuschagne on the Occasion of
His 65th Birthday. Edited by F. Garcia Martinez. Vetus Testamentum Supplement 53. Leiden: E. J.
Brill, 1994.

Korpel, M.C.A. "Creator of All.” Pages 208-211 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible.
Edited by Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1999.

_______. A Rift in the Clouds: Ugaritic and Hebrew Descriptions of the Divine. Münster: Ugarit
Verlag, 1990.

Kraus, Hans-Joachim. Psalms 60-150. Translated by Hilton C. Oswald. Minneapolis: Fortress
Press, 1993.

Kruger, P. A. “Rank Symbolism in the Baal Epic: Some Further Indicators.” Ugarit Forschungen 27
(1995): 170.

Kuhn, Harold B. “The Angelology of the Non-Canonical Jewish Apocalypses.” Journal of Biblical
Literature 67:3 (1948): 217-232.

Kvanvig, Helge S. Roots of Apocalyptic: The Mesopotamian Background of the Enoch Figure and
the Son of Man. Neukirchen-Vluyn: Neukirchener Verlag, 1988.

Labuschagne, C. L. The Incomparability of Yahweh in the Old Testament. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1966.

Lelli, F. “Stars.” Pages 809-815 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible. Edited by Karel
van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans Publishing
Co., 1999.

Lewis, J. P. A Study of the Interpretation of Noah and the Flood in Jewish and Christian Literature.
Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1968.

Lewis, Theodore J. Cults of the Dead in Ancient Israel and Ugarit. Harvard Semitic Monographs
39. Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press, 1989.

L'Heureux, Conrad. Rank among the Canaanite Gods: El, Ba(al, and the Repha)im.. Harvard Semitic
Monographs 21. Missoula, MT: Scholars Press, 1979.

Lim, T.H. “11QMelch, Luke 4, and the Dying Messiah.” Journal of Jewish Studies 43 (1992): 90-
92.

Lipinski, E. "El's Abode: Mythological Traditions Related to Mount Hermon and to the Mountains of
Armenia." Pages 13-69 in Orientalia lovaniensia periodica 2 (1971): 13-69.
_______. Le Poe'me Royal du Psaume 89: 1-5, 20-38. Paris: Bagalla, 1967.

Loewenstamm, S.E. "Grenzgebiete ugaritischer Sprach- und Stilvergleichung." Ugarit Forschungen
3 (1971): 93-100.

Lohfink, Norbert. “The Cult Reform of Josiah of Judah: 2 Kings 22-35 as a Source for the History
of Israelite Religion.” Pages 459-475 in Ancient Israelite Religion: Essays in Honor of Frank Moore
Cross. Edited by Patrick D. Miller, et.al. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1987.

Ludwig, Theodore M. “Monotheism.” Encyclopedia of Religion, vol. 10. Edited by Mircea Eliade.
New York: MacMillan, 1987.

Lust, J. “Daniel 7,13 and the Septuagint.” Ephemeridum Theologicarum Lovaniensium 54 [1978]:
62-69.

Luyten, J. “Primeval and Eschatological Overtones in the Song of Moses (Dt 32, 1-43).” Pages
341-347 in Das Deuteronomium: Entstehung, Gestalt, und Botschaft. Edited by Norbert Lohfink.
Leuven: Leuven University Press, 1985.

MacDonald, Nathan. Deuteronomy and the Meaning of ‘Monotheism’. Forschungen zum Alten
Testament Reihe 2 Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 2003.

Mach, M. “Michael.” Pages 569-572 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible. Edited by
Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans
Publishing Co., 1999.

Maier, S. A. “Angel of Yahweh.” Pages 53-59 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible.
Edited by Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1999.

Marcos, Natalio Fernandez. The Septuagint in Context: An Introduction to the Greek Versions of
the Bible. Translated by Wilfred G. Watson. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2000.

Marcus, Ralph. "Divine Names and Attributes in Hellenistic Jewish Literature." Pages 43-120 in
Proceedings of the American Academy for Jewish Research 1931-32. New York: American
Academy for Jewish Research, 1933.

Martinez, Florentino Garcia, and Eibert J.C. Tigchelaar, eds. The Dead Sea Scrolls Study Edition,
vol. 1: 1Q1-4Q273. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1997.

May, Herbert G. "The King in the Garden of Eden: A Study of Ezekiel 28:12-19." Pages 166-176 in
Israel's Prophetic Heritage: Essays in Honor of James Muilenburg. Edited by Bernhard W.
Anderson and Walter Harrelson. New York: Harper and Brothers, 1962.

McCarter, P. Kyle. “Aspects of the Religion of the Israelite Monarchy: Biblical and Epigraphic Data”
Pages 137-156 in Ancient Israelite Religion: Essays in Honor of Frank Moore Cross. Edited by
Patrick D. Miller, et.al. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1987.

McEleney, N. J. “Orthodoxy in Judaism in the First Christian Century.” Journal for the Study of
Judaism 9 (1978): 83-88.
McGrath, James, and Jerry Truex. “‘Two Powers’ and Early Jewish and Christian Monotheism.”
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Society of Biblical Literature. Denver, CO. Cited 1
January 2003. Online: http://www.iwu.edu/~religion/ejcm/McGrath_SBL_2001_TwoPowers.htm.

Meek, T. J. “Monotheism and the Religion of Israel.” Journal of Biblical Literature 61 (1942): 21-
43.

Meeks, Wayne. “Moses as God and King.” Pages 354-371 in Religions in Antiquity: Essays in
Memory of Erwin Ramsdell Goodenough. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1968.

Mettinger, T. N. D. “Cherubim.” Pages 189-192 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible.
Edited by Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1999.

_______. The Dethronement of Sabaoth: Studies in the Shem and Kabod Theologies.
Coniectanea biblica: Old Testament Series 18. Lund: CWK Gleerup, 1982.

_______. King and Messiah: The Civil and Sacral Legitimation of the Israelite Kings. Coniectanea
biblica: Old Testament Series 8. Lund: C.W.K. Gleerup, 1976

Meyers, Carol L. and Eric M. Meyers. Haggai, Zechariah 1-8. Anchor Bible 25B. New York:
Doubleday, 1987.

Milik, J.T. "Fragment d'une Source du Psautier (4Q Ps 89) et fragments des Jubilés, du document
de Damas." Revue Biblique 73 (1966): 94-106.

_______. “Milk|,-s[edeq et Milk|, -res\a( dans les anciens e8crit juifs et chre8tiens.” Journal of Jewish Studies
23 (1972): 95-144.

Miller, Cynthia L. “Pivotal Issues in Analyzing the Verbless Clause.” Pages 3-17 in The Verbless
Clause in Biblical Hebrew: Linguistic Approaches. Edited by Cynthia L. Miller. Linguistic Studies in
Ancient West Semitic 1. Edited by M. O’Connor and Cynthia L. Miller. Winona Lake, IN:
Eisenbrauns, 1999.

Miller, M. “The Function of Isaiah 61:1-2 in 11QMelchizedek.” Journal of Biblical Literature 88
(1969): 467-469.

Miller, Patrick D. “Cosmology and World Order in the Old Testament: The Divine Council as
Cosmic-Political Symbol.” Pages 422-444 in Israelite Religion and Biblical Theology: Collected
Essays. Journal for the Study of the Old Testament Supplement Series 267. Sheffield: Sheffield
Academic Press, 2000.

_______. The Divine Warrior in Early Israel. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1973.

_______. "The Divine Council and the Prophetic Call to War." Vetus Testamentum 18 (1968):
100-107.

_______. "Fire in the Mythology of Canaan and Israel." Catholic Biblical Quarterly 27 (1965):
257-258.

_______. “Israelite Religion.” Pages 142-181 in Israelite Religion and Biblical Theology: Collected
Essays. Edited by Patrick D. Miller. Journal for the Study of the Old Testament Supplement Series
267. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 2000.
Montgomery, James A. A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Book of Daniel. International
Critical Commentary. Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 1927.

Moor, Johannes C. de. The Rise of Yahwism: The Roots of Israelite Monotheism. Bibliotheca
ephemeridum theologicarum lovaniensium XCI. Leuven: University Press / Uitgeverij Peeters,
1990.

_______. The Seasonal Pattern in the Ugaritic Myth of Ba(alu According to the Version of Ilimilku.
Alter Orient und Altes Testament 16. Kevelaer: Kevelaer & Neukirchen-Vluyn, 1971.

_______. “The Semitic Pantheon of Ugarit.” Ugarit Forschungen 2 (1970): 187-228.

Morgenstern, J. "The Mythological Background of Psalm 82." Hebrew Union College Annual 14
(1939): 29-132.

Mosca, P. "Ugarit and Daniel 7: A Missing Link." Biblica 67 (1986): 496-517.

Moscati, S. An Introduction to the Comparative Grammar of the Semitic Languages. 2nd ed.;
Wiesbaden: Harrassowtiz, 1980.

Mowinckel, S. "Drive and / or Ride in the Old Testament.” Vetus Testamentum 12 (1962): 278-
299.
Muilenburg, J. “The Linguistic and Rhetorical Usages of the Particle yk in the Old Testament.”
Hebrew Union College Annual 32 (1961): 135-160.

Mullen, E. Theodore. The Divine Council in Canaanite and Early Hebrew Literature. Harvard
Semitic Monographs 24. Missoula, MT: Scholars Press, 1980.

_______. "The Divine Witness and the Davidic Royal Grant: Ps 89:37-38." Journal of Biblical
Literature 102:2 (1983): 207-218.

Murray, R. “The Origin of Aramaic (|<r, Angel.” Orientalia 53 (1984): 304-317.

_______. “Prophecy and Cult.” Pages 200-216 in Israel’s Prophetic Tradition: Essays in Honour of
Peter Ackroyd. Edited by R. Coggins, A. Phillips, and M. Knibb. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1982.

Newsom, Carol A. “He Has Established for Himself Priests: Human and Angelic Priesthood in the
Qumran Sabbath Shirot.” Pages 101-120 in Archaeology and History in the Dead Sea Scrolls: The
New York University Conference in Memory of Yigael Yadin. Edited by Lawrence H. Schiffman;
Journal for the Study of the Pseudepigrapha Supplement Series 8. Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1990.

_______. "'Sectually Explicit' Literature from Qumran." Pages 167-187 in The Hebrew Bible and
Its Modern Interpreters. Edited by W.H. Propp, B. Halpern, and D.N. Freedman. Winona Lake:
Eisenbrauns, 1990.

_______. Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice. A Critical Edition. Harvard Semitic Monographs 27.
Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1985.

Nickelsburg, George. 1 Enoch 1: A Commentary on the Book of 1 Enoch Chapters 1-36, 81-108.
Hermeneia. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2003.

_______. “The Books of Enoch at Qumran: What We Know and What We Need to Think About.”
Pages 99-113 in Antikes Judentum und Fruhes Christentum: Festschrift für Hartmut Stegemann
zum 65. Geburstag. Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft 97. New York:
Walter de Gruyter, 1999.

Niebuhr, K.W. “4Q521, 2 II – Ein Eschatologischer Psalm.” The Qumran Chronicle 5 (1995): 93-
96.

Niehr, Herbert. “Host of Heaven.” Pages 428-430 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible.
Edited by Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1999.

_______. “Religio-Historical Aspects of the ‘Early Post-Exilic’ Period.” Pages 228-244 in The Crisis
of Israelite Religion: Transformation of Religious Tradition in Exilic and Post-Exilic Times.
Oudtestamentische Studien XLII. Edited by Bob Becking and Marjo C.A. Korpel. Leiden: E. J. Brill,
1999.

Nielsen, Kirsten. Yahweh as Prosecutor and Judge: An Investigation of the Prophetic Lawsuit R|,b-
Pattern Translate by Frederick Cryer. Journal for the Study of the Old Testament Supplement
Series 9. Sheffield: University of Sheffield, 1978.

Nissen, Marti. “Prophets and the Divine Council.” Pages 4-19 in Kein Land für sich allein: Studien
zum Kulturkontakt in Kanaan, Israel/Palastina und Ebirnari für Manfred Weippert zum y65.
Geburstag. Edited by Ulrich Hubner und Ernst Axel Knauf. Orbis biblicus et orientalis 186.
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Rupprecht, 2002.

Nitzan, Bilha. “4QBerakhot (4Q286-290): A Preliminary Report.” Pages 53-71 in New Qumran
Texts and Studies: Proceedings of the First Meeting of the International Organization for Qumran
Studies, Paris 1992. Edited by George J. Brooke and Florentino Garcia Martinez. Studies on the
Texts of the Desert of Judah 15. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1994.

Noort, Ed. "Gan-Eden in the Context of the Mythology of the Hebrew Bible." Pages 21-36 in
Paradise Interpreted: Representations of Biblical Paradise in Judaism and Christianity. Edited by
Gerard P. Luttikhuizen. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999.

Noth, Martin. "The Holy Ones of the Most High." Pages 215-228 in The Laws of the Pentateuch
and Other Essays. Edited by Martin Noth. London: SCM, 1984.

Obermann, J. Ugaritic Mythology. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1948.

Oldenburg, Ulf. "Above the Stars of El: El in Ancient South Arabic Religion." Zeitschrift für die
alttestamentliche Wissenschaft 82 (1970): 187-208.

_______. The Conflict Between El and Baal in Canaanite Religion. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1969.

Olmo Lete, G. del. “Bashan.” Pages 161-163 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible.
Edited by Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1999.

Olmo Lete, G. del and Joaquín Sanmartín. A Dictionary of the Ugaritic Language in the Alphabetic
Tradition. Translated by Wilfred G. E. Watson. Handbuch der Orientalistik 67. Leiden: E. J. Brill,
2003.

_______. Canaanite Religion According to the Liturgical Texts of Ugarit. Translated by Wilfred G.
E. Watson. Bethesda, MD: CDL Press, 1999.
Olyan, Saul M. Asherah and the Cult of Yahweh. Society of Biblical Literature Monograph Series
34. Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press, 1988.

_______. A Thousand Thousands Served Him: Exegesis and the Naming of Angels in Ancient
Judaism. Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 1993.

Otzen, Benedikt. “Michael and Gabriel: Angelological Problems in the Book of Daniel.” Pages 114-
124 in The Scriptures and the Scrolls: Studies in Honor of A.S. van der Woude on the Occasion of
his 65th Birthday. Edited by F. Garcia Martinez, A. Hilhorst, and C.J. Labuschagne. Leiden: E. J.
Brill, 1992.

Paas, Stefan. Creation and Judgement: Creation Texts in Some Eighth Century Prophets.
Oudtestamentische Studien XLVII. E. J. Brill, 2003.

Page, H.R. The Myth of Cosmic Rebellion: A Study of its Reflexes in Ugaritic and Biblical
Literature. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1996.

Pakkala, Juha. Intolerant Monotheism in the Deuteronomistic History. Publications of the Finnish
Exegetical Society 76. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1999.

Parker, Simon B. "The Beginning of the Reign of God – Psalm 82 as Myth and Liturgy." Revue
Biblique 102 (1995): 532-559.

_______. "Sons of (the) God(s)" Pages 794-798 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible.
Edited by Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1999.

Pettinato, G. The Archives of Ebla. New York: Doubleday, 1981.

Pike, D. M. “The ‘Congregation of YHWH’ in the Bible and at Qumran.” Revue de Qumran 17
(1996): 233-240.

Pola, Thomas. “Form and Meaning in Zechariah 3.” Pages 156-167 in Yahwism After the Exile:
Perspectives on Israelite Religion in the Persian Era. Edited by Rainer Albertz and Bob Becking.
Studeis in Theology and Religion 5. Van Gorcum, 2003.

Polley, M.E. “Hebrew Prophecy Within the Council of Yahweh Examined in its Ancient Near Eastern
Setting.” Pages 141-156 in Scripture in Context: Essays in the Comparative Method. Edited by
C.D. Evans, W.W. Hallo, and J.B. White. Pittsburgh Theological Monograph Series 34. Pittsburgh,
1980.

Pope, Marvin. El in the Ugaritic Texts. Vetus Testamentum Supplements 2. Leiden: E. J. Brill,
1955.

______. Job. Anchor Bible 15. New York: Doubleday, 1965.

Puech, E. “Notes sur le manuscript del XIQMelchisedeq.” Revue de Qumran 12 (1987): 483-512.

Rahlfs, Alfred. ed. Septuaginta: Vetus Testamentum Graecum, Auctoritate Academiae Scientiarum
Göttingensis editum. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Rupprecht, 1979.

Rainbow, Paul A. "Jewish Monotheism as the Matrix for New Testament Christology.” Novum
Testamentum 33 (1991): 78-91.
_______. “Monotheism and Christology in 1 Corinthians 8:4-6.” D. Phil. diss., Oxford University,
1987.

Rechenmacher, H. “Außer mir gibt es keinen Gott!” Eine sprach- und literaturwissenschaftliche
Studie zur Ausschließlichkeitsformel. ATSAT 49. St. Ottilien, 1997.

Riesenfeld, Harold. “Sons of God and Ecclesia: An Intertestamental Analysis.” Pages 89-104 in
Renewing the Judeo-Christian Wellsprings. New York: Crossroad Publishing, 1987.

Ringgren, Helmer. Israelite Religion. Translated by D. Green. London: SPCK, 1966.

Roberts, J. J. M. The Earliest Semitic Pantheon. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1972.

_______. “Job and the Israelite Religious Tradition.” Pages 110-116 in The Bible and the Ancient
Near East: Collected Essays. Edited by J.J.M. Roberts. Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns, 2002.

Robinson, H. Wheeler. "The Council of Yahweh." Journal of Theological Studies 45 (1944): 151-
157.

Rofé, Alexander. "The Monotheistic Argumentation in Deuteronomy IV 32-40: Contents,
Composition, and Text." Vetus Testamentum 35:4 (1985): 434-445.

Rollig, W. “Lebanon.” Pages 506-507 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible. Edited by
Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans
Publishing Co., 1999.

Rosenberg, Roy A. "The God S[edeq." Hebrew Union College Annual 36 (1965): 161-177.

Röttger, Hermann. Mal’ak Jahwe—Bote von Gott: Die Vorstellung von Gottes Boten im
hebräischen Alten Testament. Regensburger Studien zur Theologie 13. Frankfurt: Peter Lang,
1978.

Rowland, Christopher. "The Visions of God in Apocalyptic Literature." Journal for the Study of
Judaism 10 (1979): 137-154.

Rowley, H. H. “Moses and Monotheism.” Pages 35-63 in From Moses to Qumran: Studies in the
Old Testament. New York: Association Press, 1963.

_______. “Zadok and Nehushtan.” Journal of Biblical Literature 58 (1939): 113-141.

Ruiten, Jacques T. A. G. M. van. Primeaval History Interpreted: The Rewriting of Genesis 1-11 in
the Book of Jubilees. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2000.

_______. “The Interpretation of Genesis 6:1-12 in Jubilees 5:1-19.” Pages 59-75 in Studies in the
Book of Jubilees. Edited by Mathias Albani, Jorg Frey, and Armin Lange. Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck,
1997.

_______. "The Use of Deuteronomy 32:39 in Monotheistic Controversies in Rabbinic Literature."
Pages 223-241 in Studies in Deuteronomy in Honor of C.J. Labuschagne on the Occasion of his
65th Birthday. Supplements to Vetus Testamentum 53. Edited by F. Garcia Martinez, A. Hilhorst,
J. T. A. G. M. van Ruiten, and A.S. van der Woude. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1994.

Salters, R. B. “Psalm 82,1 and the Septuagint.” Zeitschrift für die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft
103 (1991): 226.
Sanders, Paul. The Provenance of Deuteronomy 32. Oudtestamentische Studien 37. Edited by
Johannes de Moor. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1996.

Schaeffer, Claude F.A. Ugaritica V: Nouveaux texts accadiens, hourrites et ugaritiques. Paris: Paul
Guenther, 1968.

Schiffman, L. From Text to Tradition: A History of the Second Temple and Rabbinic Judaism.
Hoboken, NJ: Ktav Publishing House, 1991.

Schloen, J. David. The House of the Father as Fact and Symbol: Patrimonialism in Ugarit and the
Ancient Near East. Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns, 2001.

_______. “The Patrimonial Household in the Kingdom of Ugarit: A Weberian Analysis of Ancient
Near Eastern Society.” Ph.D. diss., Harvard University, 1995.

Schmidt, Nathaniel. “The Son of Man in the Book of Daniel.” Journal of Biblical Literature 19
(1900): 22-28.

Schoors, A. “The Particle yk.” Old Testament Studies 21 (1981): 240-253.

Schurer, Emil. The History of the Jewish People in the Age of Jesus Christ (175 B.C.-A.D. 135).
Vol. III.1. Edited by Geza Vermes, Fergus Millar, and Matthew Black. Revised English edition.
Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 1973-1986.

Scott, R. B. Y. "Behold He Cometh with Clouds." New Testament Studies 5 (1959): 127-132.

Segal, Alan F. “Heavenly Ascent in Hellenistic Judaism, Early Christianity and Their Environment.”
Pages 1333-1394 in Vorkonstantinisches Christentum. Principat 23:2. New York: Walter de
Gruyter, 1980.

_______. “Some Observations about Paul and Intermediaries.” Paper presented at the Philadelphia
Seminar on Christian Origins. Philadelphia, PA, February 4, 1988. Cited 1 January 2003. Online:
http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/psco/year25/8802.shtml.

_______. Two Powers in Heaven: Early Rabbinic Reports about Christianity and Gnosticism.
Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1977.

Segert, Stanislav. A Basic Grammar of the Ugaritic Language. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 1984.

Seitz, Christopher R. “The Divine Council: Temporal Transition and New Prophecy in the Book of
Isaiah.” Journal of Biblical Literature 109:2 (1990): 229-247.

Seow, C.L. “Face.” Pages 322-325 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible. Edited by
Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans
Publishing Co., 1999.

Sivan, Daniel. A Grammar of the Ugaritic Language. Handbuch der Orientalistik 28. Leiden: E. J.
Brill, 1997.

Skehan, Patrick W. “A Fragment of the ‘Song of Moses’ (Deut 32) from Qumran.” Bulletin of the
American Schools of Oriental Research 136 (1954) 12-15.
_______. “Qumran and the Present State of Old Testament Text Studies: The Masoretic Text,”
Journal of Biblical Literature 78 (1959): 21-25.

Smith, Mark S. “Divine Travel as a Token of Rank.” Ugarit Forschungen 16 (1984): 359.

_______. The Early History of God: Yahweh and Other Deities in Ancient Israel. 2nd ed. Grand
Rapids: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 2002.

_______. "Interpreting the Ba(al Cycle." Ugarit Forschungen 18 (1986): 313-339.

_______. The Origins of Biblical Monotheism: Israel’s Polytheistic Background and the Ugaritic
Texts. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001.

Smith, Morton. “Ascent to the Heavens and Deification in 4QMa.” Pages 181-188 in Archaeology
and History in the Dead Sea Scrolls: The New York University Conference in Memory of Yigael
Yadin. Edited by Lawrence H. Schiffman; Journal for the Study of the Pseudepigrapha Supplement
Series 8. Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1990.

Sommer, Benjamin. A Prophet Reads Scripture: Allusion in Isaiah 40-66. Stanford, Ca.: Stanford
University Press, 1998.

Speiser, E. A. “The Biblical Idiom pa4n|,m ho4lek|4m.” Pages 515-517 in The Seventy-Fifth Anniversary
Volume of the Jewish Quarterly Review. Philadelphia: Jewish Quarterly Review, 1967.

_______. Genesis. Anchor Bible 1. Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1964.

_______. "Studies in Semitic Formatives." Pages 416-432 in Oriental and Biblical Studies:
Collected Writings of E.A. Speiser. Edited by J.J. Finkelstein and Moshe Greenberg. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania, 1967.

Spronk, K. Beatific Afterlife in Ancient Israel and the Near East. Alter Orient und Altes Testament
219. Kevelaer: Butzon und Bercker: Neukirchener Verlag, 1986

Stadelmann, L.I.J. The Hebrew Conception of the World: A Philological and Literary Study.
Analecta biblica 39. Rome: Pontifical Institute, 1970.

_______. "Down with He=le4l! The Assumed Mythological Background of Isa. 14:12." Pages 717-
726 in "Und Mose schrieb dieses Lied auf": Studien zum Alten Testament und zum Alten Orient:
Festschrift für Oswald Loretz. Münster, 1998.

Stadelman, Luis I. J. The Hebrew Conception of the World: A Philological and Literary Study.
Analecta Biblica 39. Rome: Pontifical Institute Press, 1970.

Stone, Michael E., ed. Jewish Writings of the Second Temple Period: Apocrypha, Pseudepigrapha,
Qumran, Sectarian Writings, Philo, Josephus. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1984.

Strolz, Walter. “The Unique One: The Uniqueness of God According to Deutero-Isaiah.” Pages
257-266 in Standing Before God: Studies on Prayer in Scriptures and in Tradition with Essays in
Honor of John M. Oesterreicher. New York: Ktav Publishing House, 1981.

Stuckenbruck, Loren T. Angel Veneration and Christology. Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 1995.
_______. “An Angelic Refusal of Worship: The Tradition and Its Function in the Apocalypse of
John.” Pages 679-696 in SBL Seminar Papers, 1994. Edited by Eugene H. Lovering, Jr.; Society of
Biblical Literature Seminar Papers 33; Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1994.

_______. “The Book of Daniel and the Dead Sea Scrolls: The Making and Remaking of the Biblical
Tradition.” Pages 135-171 in The Hebrew Bible and Qumran. Edited by J.H. Charlesworth. N.
Richland Hills, TX: Bibal Press, 2000.

_______. “Worship and Monotheism in The Ascension of Isaiah.” Pages 70-89 in The Jewish Roots
of Christological Monotheism: Papers from the St. Andrews Conference on the Historical Origins of
the Worship of Jesus. Journal for the Study of Judaism Supplements 63. Edited by Carey C.
Newman, James R. Davila, and Gladys S. Lewis. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999.

Stuhlmueller, C. Creative Redemption in Second Isaiah. Rome: Pontifical Biblical Institute, 1970.

Sweeney, Marvin A. Isaiah 1-39. Forms of the Old Testament Literature XVI. Grand Rapids:
William B. Eerdmans, 1996.

Tabor, James. “Firstborn of Many Brothers: A Pauline Notion of Apotheosis.” Pages 295-303 in
SBL Seminar Papers, 1984 Edited by Kent Richards. Society of Biblical Literature Seminar Papers
21. Chico: Calif.: Scholars Press, 1984.

Talmon, S. "The Old Testament Text." Pages 159-199 in Cambridge History of the Bible. Vol. 1.
Edited by P.R. Ackroyd and C.F. Evans. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1963.

Tate, Marvin E. Psalms 51-100. Word Biblical Commentary 20. Dallas: Word Books, 1990.

Tigay, Jeffrey H. The JPS Torah Commentary: Deuteronomy. Philadelphia: Jewish Publication
Society, 1996.

Tigchelaar, Eibert J.C. Prophets of Old and the Day of the End: Zechariah, the Book of the
Watchers, and Apocalyptic. Oudtestamentische Studien 35. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1996.

Toorn, Karel van der. “Anat-Yahu, Some Other Deities, and the Jews of Elephantine.” Numen 39
(1992): 88-92.

_______. "Yahweh." Pages 910-913 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible. Edited by
Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans
Publishing Co., 1999.

Tov, E. Textual Criticism of the Hebrew Bible. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1992.

_______. “Textual Criticism (OT).” Pages 395-411 in vol. VI of the Anchor Bible Dictionary. Edited
by D. N. Freedman. 6 vols. New York: Doubleday, 1992.

Trigg, Joseph W. “The Angel of Great Counsel: Christ and the Angelic Hierarchy in Origen’s
Theology.” Journal of Theological Studies 42:1 (April 1991): 35-51.

Tromp, N. Primitive Conceptions of Death and the Netherworld in the Old Testament. Biblica et
orientalia 21. Rome: Pontifical Biblical Institute, 1969.

Tropper, Josef. Ugaritische Grammatik. Alter Orient und Altes Testament 273. Münster: Ugarit-
Verlag, 2000.
Tsevat, Matitiahu. "God and the Gods in Assembly." Hebrew Union College Annual XL-XLI (1969-
1970): 123-137.

Tsumura, D.T. “The Deluge (mabbu,l) in Psalm 29:10.” Ugarit Forschungen 20 (1988): 351-355.

Uehlinger, C. "Leviathan." Pages 511-515 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible. Edited
by Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans
Publishing Co., 1999.

Ullendorff, E. "Ugaritic Studies within their Semitic and Eastern Mediterranean Setting." Bulletin of
the John Rylands Library 46 (1963-64): 236-249.

Ulrich, Eugene. “Qumran and the Canon of the Old Testament.” Pages 57-80 in The Biblical
Canons, Proceedings of the 50th Colloquium Biblicum Lovianiense. Edited by J.M. de Jonge.
Bibliotheca ephemeridium theologicarum lovaniensium 163. Leuven: Peeters, 2003.

Ulrich, Eugene. “The Qumran Biblical Scrolls—The Scriptures of Late Second Temple Judaism.”
Pages 67-87 in The Dead Sea Scrolls in Their Historical Context. Edited by Timothy H. Lim, et.al.
Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 2000.

_______. “The Text of the Hebrew Scriptures at the Time of Hillel and Jesus.” Pages 85-108 in
Congress Volume, Basel 2001. Edited by A. Lemaire. Supplements to Vetus Testamentum 92.
Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2002.

Ulrich, Eugene, F. M. Cross, S. W. Crawford, J. A. Duncan, P. W. Skehan, E. Tov, and J. T.
Barrera. Qumran Cave 4.IX: Deuteronomy to Kings. Discoveries in the Judean Desert XIV.
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1995.

VanBeek, Lawrence. “1 Enoch Among Jews and Christians: A Fringe Connection?” Pages 93-115 in
Christian-Jewish Relations Through the Centuries. Edited by Stanley E. Porter and Brook W. R.
Pearson. Journal for the Study of the New Testament Supplement Series 192. Sheffield: Sheffield
Academic Press, 2000.

VanderKam, James C. “1 Enoch, Enochic Motifs, and Enoch in Early Christian Literature.” Pages
33-101 in The Jewish Apocalyptic Heritage in Early Christianity. Edited by James C. VanderKam
and William Adler. CRINT 3.4. Assen/Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1996.

_______. “The Angel Story in the Book of Jubilees.” Pages 151-170 in Pseudepigraphic
Perspectives: The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha in Light of the Dead Sea Scrolls: Proceedings of
the International Symposium of the Orion Center for the Study of the Dead Sea Scrolls and
Associated Literature, 12-14 January 1997. Edited by Esther G. Chazon and Michael Stone, with
the collaboration of Avital Pinnick. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1999.

_______. “Joshua the high Priest and the Interpretation of Zechariah 3.” Catholic Biblical
Quarterly 53 (1991): 553-573.

Veijola, Timo. "The Witness in the Clouds: Ps 89:38." Journal of Biblical Literature 107:3 (1988):
413-417.

Waltke, Bruce K. and M. O'Connor. Introduction to Biblical Hebrew Syntax. Winona Lake, Indiana:
Eisenbrauns, 1990.

Watson, W. E. G. “Ugaritic Lexical Studies in Perspective.” Studi epigrafici e linguistici 12 (1995):
221-222.
Wegner, Judith Romney. “Coming Before the LORD: hwhy ynpl and the Exclusion of Women from
the Divine Presence.” Pages 81-91in Hesed Ve-Emet: Studies in Honor of ErnestS. Frerichs.
Edited by Jodi Magness and Seymour Gitin. Brown Judaic Studies 320. Atlanta: Scholars Press,
1998.

Weinfeld, M. Deuteronomy and the Deuteronomic School. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972.

Whybray, R. N. The Heavenly Counsellor in Isaiah XL 13-14: A Study of the Sources of the
Theology of Second Isaiah. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971.

Wicks, Henry J. The Doctrine of God in the Jewish Apocryphal and Apocalyptic Literature. London:
Hunter & Longhurst, 1915.

Williams, C.H. I am He: The Interpretation of )Ani Hu4) in Jewish and Early Christian Literature.
Wissenschaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament 113. Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 2000.

Wilson, I. Out of the Midst of the Fire: Divine Presence in Deuteronomy. Society of Biblical
Literature Dissertation Series 151. Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1995.

Woude, A.S. van der. “Melchisedek als himmlische Erlosergestalt in den neugefundenen
eschatologischen Midraschim aus Qumran Hohle XI.” Oudtestamentische Studien 14 (1965): 354-
373.

Wright, G.E. "The Lawsuit of God: A Form-Critical Study of Deuteronomy 32." Pages 26-67 in
Israel's Prophetic Heritage: Essays in Honor of James Muilenburg. Edited by Bernhard W.
Anderson and Walter Harrelson. New York: Harper and Brothers, 1962.

Wyatt, Nicholas. “‘Jedidiah’ and Cognate Forms as a Title of Royal Legitimation.” Biblica 66
(1985): 112-125.

_______. Myths of Power: A Study of Royal Myth and Ideology in Ugaritic and Biblical Tradition.
Ugaritisch-biblische Literatur 13. Münster: Ugarit-Verlag, 1996.

_______. “Quaternities in the Mythology of Ba(al.” Ugarit Forschungen 21 (1989): 451-459.

_______. “The Relationship of the Deities Dagan and Hadad.” Ugarit Forschungen 12 (1980):
375-379.

_______. Religious Texts from Ugarit. 2nd ed. London: Sheffield Academic Press, 2002.

_______. “The Significance of S[PN in Western Thought.” Pages 213-237 in Ugarit: Ein
ostmediterranes Kulturzentrum im Alten Orient: Ergebnisse und Perspektiven der Forschung.
Edited by Manfried Dietrich and Oswlad Loretz. Ugarit und seine altorientalische Umwelt 1.
Münster: Ugarit-Verlag, 1995.

_______. “The Theogony Motif in Ugarit and the Hebrew Bible.” Pages 395-420 in Ugarit and the
Bible: Proceedings of the International Symposium on Ugarit and the Bible. Ugaritisch-Biblische
Literatur 11. Edited by George J. Brooke, Adrian H.W. Curtis, and John F. Healey. Münster:
Ugarit-Verlag, 1994.

_______. “The Titles of the Ugaritic Storm God.” Ugarit Forschungen 24 (1992): 403-424.
Xella, P. “Resheph.” Pages 700-703 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible. Edited by
Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans
Publishing Co., 1999.

Yadin, Y. The Scroll of the War of the Sons of Light Against the Sons of Darkness. Translated by
Batya and Chaim Rabin. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1962.

Young, Frances. “Christology and Creation: Towards a Hermeneutic of Patristic Christology.”
Pages 191-205 in The Myriad Christ: Plurality and the Quest for Unity in Contemporary
Christology. Bibliotheca ephemeridum theologicarum lovaniensium 152. Edited by T. Merrigan and
J. Haers. Leuven: Peeters, 2000.

Yusa, Michiko. “Henotheism.” Encyclopedia of Religion, vol. 6. Edited by Mircea Eliade. New York:
MacMillan, 1987.

Zatelli, I. “Astrology and the Worship of the Stars in the Bible.” Zeitschrift für die
alttestamentliche Wissenschaft 103 (1991): 86-99.

_______. “Constellations.” Pages 202-204 in Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible.
Edited by Karel van der Toorn and Bob Becking. 2nd extensively revised ed. Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1999.

Zevit, Z. "The Structure and Individual Elements of Daniel 7." Zeitschrift für die alttestamentliche
Wissenschaft 80 (1968): 394-396.

Zijl, P.J. van. Baal: A Study of the Texts in Connexion with Baal in the Ugaritic Epics. Alter Orient
und Altes Testament 10. Kevelaer: Butzon und Bercker; Neukirchen-Vluyn: Neukirchener Verlag
des Erziehungsvereins, 1972.

Zwiep, Arie. “Assumptus est in Caelum: Rapture and Heavenly Exaltation in Early Judaism and
Luke-Acts.” Pages 323-349 in Auferstehung. Tübingen: Mohr-Siebeck, 2001.
  The Divine Council at Ugarit and                                       The Divine Council in Pre-Exilic Israel                                    The Divine Council in Post-Exilic Israel
 in Canaanite / Phoenician sources                                                                                                                       / Second Temple Literature
                                                                                                 Yahweh
        El (also Elyon outside Ugarit)                                       (came        to be identified with both El and Baal)                                          Yahweh
                (ultimate high sovereign)
                                                                                          Divine Vice Regent                                                         Divine Vice Regent
                                                                    (a hypostasis of Yahweh; his essence brought forth as an independent,
                                                                                         but not autonomous, being)                                        (The hypostasis of Yahweh idea is preserved
                     Baal                                                                                                                                    and perpetuated through descriptions of a
           (The Divine Vice Regent)                            • The Name (Psa 20:1; 54:1; 44:5; Deu 12:5,11; 16:6, 11; 1Ki 8:1-19 [links                   second deity level being who is God’s chief
                                                                 the Glory Cloud and the Name]; 2Ch 20:9)                                                agent – see Daniel, Qumran, Philo, and the idea
              Vice-regent of El; the “ruler /                  • The Word (Jer 1; 1Sa 3)                                                                  of the Spirit as the Presence of Yahweh). For
           king of the gods”; the “Most High”                  • The Glory (Exo 16:9; 24:9ff.; 40:34 [linking the glory and the cloud – see                    example, Son of Man in Daniel 7:9ff.;
          ((ly); “deputy” or “regent” (<y>tgr).                  below])                                                                                     Melchizedek in 11QMelch; the Logos. At
           He is a son of El, brother to El and                • The “Presence” with whom certain people speak “face to face” (Gen 32:30                      Qumran the vice-regent takes on a more
           Athirat’s other 70 sons. The vice –                   [cf. the context of wrestling with the elohim / angel; cp. Hos 12:4-5 Heb];             apparent priestly / intercessory role (cf. Baal as
        regency was fought for among the sons                    Exo 33:11; Deu 5:4; Num 14:14; Jdg 6:22                                                intercessor and the Angel of Yahweh’s power to
        of El, and so the vice regent is a created             • ? Wisdom and the Spirit are independent grammatically (conceptually?)                    withhold forgiveness of sins). “Sons of God”
         son of El who acts as the special agent                 feminine figures. Wisdom is created or brought forth prior to the creation of            and “gods” are still used in descriptions of the
          of El – fights his battles and rules the               the stars [= sons of God]) in Prov 8:22ff., and the Spirit may be                      council (175 such plurals at Qumran). As Segal
          gods as appointed authority over the                   hypostasized in the Hebrew Bible in Isa 63:1-11. This is not Christian tri-                 points out, after the second century C.E., a
        other lower ranking divine rulers of the                 unity, but interchange with Yahweh as are the other hypostases (and the NT              number of the verses to the left were forbidden
              earth, the sons / princes of El.                   itself may suggest this as well – cf. Acts 8:26-29; 10:19-22)                             reading without the assistance of one’s rabbi
                                                                                                                                                         since they taught the idea of a second power in
                                                                The hypostasis of Yahweh at times took human form, and was difficult (if not               heaven. Prior to that time, the second power
                                                                              impossible) to clearly distinguish from Yahweh:                             was not considered a heresy. Second Temple
                                                                                                                                                           literature made a careful distinction between
 The 70 sons of El (and Athirat, his wife)                                                                                                                Yahweh and the second occupant of heaven’s
                                                               • The “Angel of Yahweh” in whom was the Name (Exo. 23:20-23; cf. Gen
                                                                                                                                                         throne (or between the cherubim) as Yahweh’s
       Referred to as “princes”; “judges” [“rulers”];            48:15-16; Exo 13:21; 14:19, 24; 32:34; 34:5; Jdg 2:1-3; cp. Gen 32:24, 30
                                                                                                                                                          hypostasized Presence. This person was not a
   “kings” (cf. Handy and Pardee re. the “many mlkm”             and Hos 12:4-5 [Heb]; both Yahweh and the Angel occupy the cloud and
                                                                                                                                                        competitor to Yahweh, since he was Yahweh in
   issue), “stars”; and “sons”. This group, with El and          are thus conceptually interchanged). See also Exo 3:1-3; Josh 5:13-15; cp.
                                                                                                                                                        anthropomorphic form. Yet he was not Yahweh
 Athirat, constitute the “council proper” - the royal house      Num 22:23; Exo 15:3). If, as virtually all scholars agree, the Cloud and the
                                                                 Name are hypostases, then so is the Angel of Yahweh.                                                 since he obeyed Yahweh.
                 of the heavens as it were.
                                                               • The “glorious man” on God’s throne (Ezek 1:26ff.; Exo 24:9ff., 33:18;
                                                                 34:5; Isa 6)
                                                                                                                                                                     The sons of God
    These many “kings” (mlkm) had geographical rule
                                                                                                                                                       The previous nomenclature is retained, especially at
                                                               • The “cloud witness” who guarantees Yahweh’s covenant with David (Psa
                                                                                                                                                         Qumran. It is also supplemented by terms like
                                                                 89:38-39 [Heb])
                                                                                                                                                                    “Watchers”; “archangel”

                                                                                          The sons of God
                                                                      Called “sons of the Most High” and “elohim” in Psa 82; “princes”;
                                                              “stars” (Job 38:7-8) and “stars of El” (Isa 14:12-15). They “judge” the 70 nations,                        The ml)km
                                                                    exercising geographical rule over them (Deut 4:19-20; 32:8-9; Dan 10)             “Angel” is used as an overlapping term in Second
                                                                                                                                                      Temple lit for Watchers and archangels, which may
                                                                                                                                                      mean a blurring of categories. More likely, in view
                                                                                                                                                      of the retention of the “Deut 4 / 32 worldview”—that
                                                                                                                                                      the nations have ruling deities assigned by Yahweh—
                                                                                                                                                      the word took on a purely functional meaning. That
                     The ml)km                                                                   The ml)km                                            is, any member of the heavenly host is a messenger
                                                                       The term is typically translated “angels.” They fulfill the same               (ml)k) of Yahweh. If the “angels of God” of Gen 28
                                                                       servant roles as Ugarit / Canaan and are not royal sons of                     / 35 are gods, this prompts a new (monolatrous)
These are part of the council at large, but not the council                                                                                           perspective of the “geographical ruling deity”
“proper” since they are not sons of El. They are referred              Yahweh-El. They may be gods, as at Ugarit, in which case my
                                                                       thesis gains strength (cf. Gen 28:12ff.; cp. Gen 32 (esp. vv. 24-              language (“e.g., “dominions”; “archai”; and
 to as gods, though. They take orders and serve El and                                                                                                “thrones”) in the NT and early Jewish material.
  the higher authorities. They are the “council staff.”                30; 35:1-9 [the God / gods appearing interchange]).
                                 Note to the Reader



The reader should be aware that this dissertation assumes certain critical
presuppositions about the books of Isaiah and Daniel of which the author is not
necessarily persuaded. Multiple authorship of Isaiah is assumed, but I am not
persuaded that redaction does not better explain the phenomena of the text of Isaiah
(as opposed to the combination of completely separate “books” of Isaiah). A late
date (2nd century B.C.) for Daniel is also assumed, but I do not necessarily think that
this view is completely coherent. The late date is helpful for the arguments herein,
but is not essential. An earlier date (6th century B.C.) works as well, since that, too,
is chronologically subsequent to the earliest secure dating of the received texts of
the Torah, the Deuteronomistic History, and most of the prophetic books.
