Ezekiel 
the tragic poet gives an account, taking up the narrative from 
the beginning when Jacob arid his family came into Egypt to 
Joseph. And he tells it as follows, bringing Moses forward as the 
speaker : 


‘When Jacob from the land of Canaan down 
To Egypt came, with threescore souls and ten, 
He there begat a multitudinous race, 
Who much endured and long, by wicked men 
And tyrant’s hand to this our day crushed down, 
For when he saw our people had waxed strong, 
The king with subtle craft our fathers ruled, 
And some in making bricks he sore oppressed, 
And some in raising heavy stones to build 
His lofty towers, for their despite contrived. 
Next he commands that all the Hebrew race 
Cast every man-child in the Nile’s deep flood. 
And I have often heard my mother tell, 
How at that time she hid me for three months: 
Fearing detection then, she wrapped me close 
In rough attire, and laid me secretly 
"Mid the thick rushes by the river’s bank. 
My sister Miriam close at hand kept watch, 
Till Pharaoh’s daughter with her maids came down 
To bathe her shining limbs in the cool stream. 
She saw the babe, and straightway took it up, 


437 a1 Ezekiel, The Exodus; cf. Clement of Alexandria, Strom. i. 414 P 
Hha 467 


(g) 


437 c THE PREPARATION FOR THE GOSPEL 


ALEX- And knew its Hebrew birth. My sister then 
ANDER G Ran up, and to the princess thus she spake: 
“Wilt thou I find as nurse for this fair child 
Seme Hebrew wife?’ The princess bade her speed, 
And to her mother quick she told the tale, 
Who came with speed, and took me in her arms, 
Then spake the Pharaoh's daughter, ‘Take this child 
To nurse, good dame, and I will pay thy wage,’ 
‘Moses’ the name she gave, to mark the fact 
That from the river’s brink she drew me forth.” 


p. 438 ‘To this farther on in the tragedy Ezekiel adds more on the 
following points, bringing Moses forward as speaking : 


“So when my time of infancy was past, 
My mother led me to the princess’ home, 
But first she told me all the tale, my birth 
And kindred, and God's gifts of old. 
The princess then through all my boyhood’s years, 
As I had been a son of her own womb, 
b In royal state and learning nurtured me. 
But when the circle of the days was full, 
I left the palace, urged to lofty deeds 
By my own soul, and by the king’s device. 
Then the first day I saw two men at strife, 
Egyptian one, and one of Hebrew race. 
And when I saw that we were quite alone, 
None else in sight, I to the rescue came, 
Avenged my kinsman, and the Egyptian slew, 
c And buried in the sand, that none might see 
What we had ventured, and lay bare the deed. 
But on the morrow’s dawn again I saw 
Two of our kin in deadly strife, and cried, 
‘Why smitest thou thy weaker brother thus?’ 
But he replied, ‘And who made thee a judge, 
Or ruler here? Me also wouldest thou slay, 
As that man yestermorn?’ Then to myself 
In fear I said, ‘How came that deed abroad ?’ 
All this was quickly carried to the king, 
d And Pharaoh sought to take away my life. 
His plot I learned, and from his hands escaped, 
And now to other lands am wandering forth.” 


‘Then concerning the daughters of Raguel he adds this: 
‘‘ But here, behold! some seven fair maids I see.” 


‘And on his asking them what maidens they were, Zipporah 
replies : 
468 


BOOK IX. CHAP, XXIX 


“The land, O stranger, bears the common name 

Of Libya, but by various tribes is held 

Of dark-skinned Aethiops: yet the land is ruled 

By one sole monarch, and sole ehief in war. 

This eity has for ruler and for judge 

A priest, the father of myself and these.” 

‘He then describes the giving drink to the cattle, and adds the 

account of his marriage with Zipporah, bringing forward Chum 
and Zipporah as speaking in alternate verses: 


“Ch. ‘Yet this thou need’st must tell me, Zipporah.’ 
Z. ‘My father gave me for this stranger’s wife.” 


CHAPTER XXIX 


t DEMETRIUS described the slaying of the Egyptian, and the 
quarrel with him who gave information about the deceased man, 
in the same way as the writer of the Sacred Book. He says, 
however, that Moses fled into Midian, and there married Zipporah 
the daughter of Jothor, who was, as far as one may conjecture 
from the names, one of the descendants of Keturah, of the stock 
of Abraham, from Jexan who was the son of Abraham by 
Keturah: and from Jexan was born Dadan, and from Dadan 
Raguel, and from Raguel, Jothor, and Hobab: and from Jothor 
Zipporah, whom Moses married. ; 

‘The generations also agree; for Moses was seventh from 
Abraham, and Zipporah sixth. For Isaac, from whom Moses 


descended, was already married when Abraham at the aged 


of a hundred and forty married Keturah, and begat by her a 
second son Isaar. Now he begat Isaac when he was a hundred 
years old; so that Isaar, from whom Zipporah derived her descent, 
was born forty-two years later than Isaac. 

‘There is therefore no inconsistency in Moses and Zipporah 
having lived at the same time. And they dwelt in the city 
Madiam, which was called from one of the sons of Abraham. 
For it says that Abraham sent his sons towards the East to find 
a dwelling-place: for this reason also Aaron and Miriam said at 
Hazeroth that Moses had married an Aethiopian woman. 

‘Ezekiel also speaks of this in the Fxodus, adding to the 


469 


438d 


b 


c 


ALEX- 
ANDER 


p. 439 


439d THE PREPARATION FOR THE GOSPEL 


Arex- tradition the dream that was seen by Moses and interpreted by 
ANDER his father-in-law. And Moses himself talks with his father-in-law 
p. 440 in alternate verses, as follows: 


‘¢Methought upon Mount Sinai’s brow I saw 
A mighty throne that reached to heaven’s high vault, 
Whereon there sat a man of noblest mien 
Wearing a royal crown; whose left hand held 
A mighty sceptre; and his right to me 
Made sign, and I stood forth before the throne. 
b He gave me then the sceptre and the crown, 
And bade me sit upon the royal throne, 
From which himself removed. Thence I looked forth 
Upon the earth’s wide circle, and beneath 
The earth itself, and high above the heaven. 
Then at my feet, behold! a thousand stars 
Began to fall, and I their number told, 
c As they passed by me like an armèd host: 
And I in terror started up from sleep.” 


‘Then his father-in-law thus interprets the dream : 


“This sign from God bodes good to thee, my friend. 

Would I might live to see thy lot fulfilled ! 
A mighty throne shalt thou sct up, and be 
Thyself the leader and the judge of men! 
And as o'er all the peopled earth thine eye 
Looked forth, and underneath the earth, and high 
Above God’s heaven; so shall thy mind survey 

d All things in time, past, present, and to come.” 


‘With regard to the burning bush, and the mission of Moses 
to Pharaoh, he again brings Moses forward as holding converse 
alternately with God. Moses speaks thus: 


“Ha! see! What sign is this from yonder bush ? 
A marvel such as no man might believe. 
A sudden mighty fire flames round the bush, 
And yet its growth remains all green and fresh. 
What then? I will go forward, and behold 
This wondrous sign, that passes man’s belief.” 


-Then God speaks to him : 


“Stay, Moses, faithful servant, draw not nigh, 
Ere thou hast loosed thy shoes from off thy feet: 
p- 44! The place thou standest on is holy ground ; 
And from this bush God’s word shines forth for thee. 
Fear not, My son, but hearken to My words. 
Of mortal birth, thou canst not sce My face ; 


440 a2 Ezekiel, The Exodus 


470 


BOOK IX. CHAP. XXIX 441 a 


Yet mayest thou hear the words I came to speak. ALEX- 
Thy fathers’ God, the God of Abraham, ANDER 
Of Isaac, and of Jacob, I am God, 

I do remember all My gifts to them, b 


And come to save My people Israel; 

For I have seen their sorrows and their toils. 
Go then, and signify thou in My name, 

First to the Hebrews gathered by themselves, 
Then to the king of Egypt, this My will, 

That thou lead forth My people from the land.” 


‘Then lower down Moses himself speaks some lines in answer : 


“I am not eloquent, O Lord, but slow c 
Of speech my tongue, and weak my stammering voice 
To utter words of mine before the king?” 


‘Then God in answer to this says to him: 


“Thy brother Aaron I will send with speed : 
First tell thou him al! I have told to thee ; 
And he before the king, and thou with Me 
Alone shalt speak, he what he hears from thee.” 


‘With regard to the rod, and the other wonders thus he speaks 
in alternate verse : 


“God. ‘Say, what is that thou holdest in thine hand?’ d 
M. ‘A rod, wherewith to smite or beasts or men. 
God. ‘Cast it upon the ground, and flee in haste; 
For a fierce serpent will affright thine eye.’ 
Bf. ‘Lo! there I cast it. Save me, gracious Lord! 
How huge, how fierce! In pity spare Thou me. 
I shudder at the sight in every limb.’ 
God. ‘Fear not: stretch forth thy hand, and seize the tail. 
Again “twill be a red. Now thrust thy hand 
Into thy bosom: take it out again. P- 442 
See, at My word, ’tis leprous, white as snow. 
Now thrust it in again, ’tis as before.’ ” 


To this, after some words that he has interposed, he 
adds the following : 
‘Now this is what Ezekiel says in Zhe Exodus, when he brings 
forward God speaking of the signs, as follows: 
“With this thy rod thou shalt work all these plagues. 
The river first shall flow all red with blood, 
And every spring, and stream, and stagnant pool, 


Then frogs and lice shall swarm o’er all the land. b 
Next ashes from the furnace sprinkled round 


M 471 


P.443 


THE PREPARATION FOR THE GOSPEL 


In ulcers sore shall burst on man and beast. 

And swarms of flies shall eeme, and sore afflict 
The bodies of the Egyptians. After that 

On those hard hearts the pestilence and death 
Shall fall. And heaven’s wrath let loose on high 
Shall pour down fire and hail and deadly storm 
On man, and beast, and all the fruits of earth. 
Then shall be darkness over all the land 

For three whole days, and locusts shall devour 

All food, all fruits, and every blade of grass. 
Moreover I will slay each first-born child, 

And crush this evil nation’s wanten pride. 

Yet none of these My plagues shall toueh the king, 
Until he see his first-born son lie dead: 

Then will he send yon forth in fear and haste. 
This also speak to all the Hebrew raee: 

‘This month shall be the first month of your year, 
Wherein I bring you to that other land, 

As to the fathers of your race I sware.’ 

Also command the people, in this month, 

At evening ere the meon’s full orb appear, 

To sacrifiee the Passover to God, 

And strike the side-posts of the door with blood : 
So shall My messenger of death pass by. 

But the flesh eat ye roast with fire at night. 

Then will the king drive forth your gathered hest 
In haste; but ere ye go, I will give grace 

To this My people in the Egyptians’ eyes, 

So that each woman from her neighbour’s store 
All needful vessels freely shall receive, 

Silver and gold, and raiment meet for man, 

To make requital fer their evil deeds. 

And when ye shall have reached your promised land, 
Take heed that, from the morn whereon ye fled 
From Egypt and marched onward seven whole days, 
From that same morn se many days eaeh year 

Ye eat unleavened bread, and serve your God, 
Offering the first-born of all living things, 

All males that open first the mother’s wemb.” 


‘And again concerning this same feast he says that the poet 
has spoken with more careful elaboration : 


“And when the tenth day of this month is come, 
Let every Hebrew for his household choose 
Unblemished lambs and calves, and keep them up 
Until the fourteenth day; and then at eve 
Oifer the solemn sacrifice, and eat 
The flesh and inward parts all roast with fire. 
Thus shall ye eat it, with your loins girt up, 


472 ® 


BOOK IX. CHAP. XXIX 443 d 


And shoes upon your feet, a staff withal ALEX- 
Held ready in your hand; for in great haste ANDER 
The king will bid them drive you from his land. 

Let each man’s eating for the lamb make count ; 

And when the victim has been duly slain, 

Take a full bunch of hyssop in your hand, 

Dipped in the sacred blood, and therewith strike 

The posts and upper lintel of the door; 

That death may pass o’er every Hebrew’s house. 

Keep ever thus this feast unto the Lord, 

Eating for seven days unleavened bread, P. 444 
And in your houses let no leaven be found. 

For ye shall be delivered, and the Lord 

Shall lead you forth from Egypt in this month, 

Henceforth to be the first month of your year.” 


Again, after some other passages he further says : 


‘Ezekiel also, in the drama which is entitled The Evodus, 
brings forward a Messenger describing both the condition of the 
Hebrews and the destruction of the Egyptians, as follows: 


‘ For when king Pharaoh from his house set forth b 
With all this crowd of countless men-at-arms, 
With horsemen, and with four-horsed chariots, 
In serried ranks in front and on each flank, 
The embattled host was dreadful to behold. 
The centre footmen held in phalanx deep 
With spaces for the chariots to drive through. 
And on the right wing and the left were set 
The best of all the Egyptian chivalry. ‘ 
The numbers of our army whieh I asked, c 
Were thousand thousands brave well-arméd men. 
The Hebrews, when o’ertaken by our host, 
Lay some in groups hard by the Red Sea shore 
Worn out with toil, and others with their wives 
To feed their tender infants were intent: 
Cumbered with flocks and herds and household goods. 
The men themselves with hands not armed for fight, d 
At sight of us, set up a doleful cry, 
And all, with hands uplift to heaven, invoked 
Their fathers’ God. Great was their multitude ; 
But on our side all jubilant our camp 
Behind them close we pitched, where by the sea 
There lies a city, Baal-zephon hight. 
And as the suu was near his western couch, 
We waited, longing for the fight at dawn, 
Trusting our mighty host and deadly arms. 
But now the signs of heaven’s own wrath began, 


473 


445a 
P. 445 


ALEX- 
ANDER 


p. 446 


THE PREPARATION FOR THE GOSPEL 


A dread and wondrous sight. For suddenly 

A pillar of cloud rose high above the earth 
Midway between the Hebrew camp and ours: 
And then their leader Moses took his rod 

Of power divine, which late on Egypt wrought 
So many baneful signs and prodigies. 

Therewith he struck the waves, and the deep sea 
Was cleft asunder; and with eager steps 

Their host rushed swiftly o'er that briny path. 
We then upon their track without delay 

Tred the same path, and marching forward met 
The darkness of the night; when suddenly, 

As if fast bound in chains, our chariot wheels 
Refused to turn; and from the sky a flame 

As of a mighty fire before us shone. 

Their God, methinks, was there to succour them: 
For they no sooner reached the farther shore, 
Than close at hand we heard the mighty roar 
Of surging waves; and one in terror cried: 

‘Flee from the vengeful hand of the Most High, 
Fer it is He that helps our enemies, 

And works for our destruetion.” Then the sea 
Surged o'er our path, and overwhelmed our host.” 


And again soon after: 


‘Thence they went forward three days, as Demetrius himself 
says, and the Holy Scripture agrees with him: but as he found 
there no sweet water, but bitter, at God’s command he cast the 
wood of a certain tree into the fountain, and the water became 
sweet. And thence they came to Elim, and found there twelve 
springs of water, and threescore and ten palm-trees. As to these, 
and the bird which appeared there, Ezekiel in Zhe Lwodus intro- 
duces some one who speaks to Moses concerning the palm-trees 
and the twelve springs thus: 

‘í See, my lord Moses, what a spot is found 
Fanned by sweet airs from yonder shady grove. 
For as thyself mayest see, there lies the stream, 
And thence at night the fiery pillar shed 
Its welcome guiding light. A meadow there 
Beside the stream in grateful shadow lies 
And a deep glen in rich abundance pours 
From out a single rock twelve sparkling springs. 
There tall and strong, and laden all with fruit, 
Stand palms threeseore and ten; and plenteous grass 
Well watered gives sweet pasture to our flocks.” 


474 


BOOK IX. CHAP. XXX 446 b 


‘Then lower down he gives a full description of the bird that ALEx- 
ANDER 
appeared : 
“ Another living thing we saw, more strange 
And marvellous than man e’er saw before. 
The noblest eagle scarce was half as large: 
His outspread wings with varying colours shone ; 
The breast was bright with purple, and the legs 
With crimson glowed, and on the shapely neck 
The golden plumage shone in graceful curves: 
The head was like a gentle nestling’s formed: c 
Bright shone the yellow circlet of the eye 
On all around, and wondrous sweet the voice. 
The king he seemed of all the wingèd tribe, 
As soon was proved; for birds of every kind 
Hovered in fear behind his stately form: 
While like a bull,-proud leader of the herd, d 
Foremost he marched with swift and haughty step.” 


And after a few words he adds that: 


‘Some one asked how the Israelites got weapons, as they came 
out unarmed. For they said that after they had gone out a three 
days’ journey, and offered sacrifice, they would return again. 
It appears therefore that these who had not been overwhelmed 
in the sea made use of the others’ arms.’ 


CHAPTER XXX 
S 

‘Bur Eupolemus says, in some comment on the prophecy of p. 447 
Elias, that Moses prophesied forty years; then Jesus the son 
of Nave thirty years, and he lived a hundred and ten years, and 
pitched the holy tabernacle in Silo. b 

‘And afterwards Samuel rose up as a prophet: and then by 
God’s will Saul was chosen king by Samuel, and died after a 
reign of twenty-one years. 

‘Then his son David reigned, who subdued the Syrians which 
live beside the river Euphrates, and Commagene, and the As- 
syrians in Galadene, and the Phoenicians; he also made expedi- 
tions against the Edomites, and Ammonites, and Moabites, and 
Ituraeans, and Nabathaeans, and Nabdaeans. c 

* And again he made an expedition against Suron king of Tyre 


475 


447 c 


ALEX- 
ANDER 


d 


p. 448 


b 


THE PREPARATION FOR THE GOSPEL 


and Phoenicia; and compelled these nations to pay tribute to the 
Jews; and contracted a friendly alliance with Vaphres king of 
Egypt. 

‘And when David wished to build a temple for God, he 
entreated God to point out to him a place for the altar; where- 
upon there appeared to him an angel standing above the place, 
where the altar is built in Jerusalem, who commanded him not 
to build the temple, because he was defiled with men’s blood and 
had passed many years in war. 

‘And the angel’s name was Dianathan; and he bade him 
commit the building of the temple to his son, but himself to 
prepare the things pertaining to the building, gold, silver, brass, 
stones, cypress wood and cedar. 

‘And on hearing this David built ships in Aelan a city of 
Arabia, and sent miners to the island Urphe which lies in the 
Red Sea, and contains gold mines. And thence the miners 
transported the gold into Judaea. 

‘When David had reigned forty years he gave over the govern- 
ment to Solomon his son, who was twelve years old, in the 
presence of Eli the High Priest and the twelve princes of the 
tribes, and delivered to him the gold and silver and brass and 
stone and cypress wood and cedar. Then David died, and 
Solomon was king, and wrote to Vaphres king of Egypt the letter 
which is transcribed below. 


CHAPTER XXXI 


c“ KinG SOLOMON TO VAPHRES KING OF EGYPT, HIS FATHER’S 


FRIEND, GREETING. 


“Know thou that I have succeeded to the kingdom of my 
father David by the help of the Most High God, who has also 
enjoined on me to build a temple to the God who made heaven 
and earth: and withal to write to thee, to send me some of thy 
peoples, who shall stay and help me, until we shall have completed 
all things that are required, according to the injunction laid 
on me.” 


476 


BOOK IX. CHAPS. XXXII-XXXIV 448 b 


ALEX- 


7 r 
CHAPTER XXXI ARDER 
c« King VAPHRES TO SOLOMON THE GREAT KING GREETING. 


“ I REJOICED much when I read thy letter, and both I and all my c 
kingdom kept a festive day in honour of thy succession to the 
throne after a man so good and approved by so greata God. But 
as to what thou writest to me concerning the men among our peoples 
here, I have sent thee eighty thousand, and have clearly explained 
to thee their numbers and the places from which they come: from 
the Sebrithitic nome ten thousand, and from the Mendesian and d 
Sebennytic twenty thousand: from the nomes of Busiris Leonto- 
polis and Athribites ten thousand each. And do thou carefully 
provide what things they require, and for the rest, that they may 
be in good order, and may be restored to their own country, as 
soon as they cease to be wanted.” 


CHAPTER, XXXII 


c“ King SOLOMON TO SURON KING OF TYRE AND SIDON AND 
PHOENICIA, HIS FATHER’S FRIEND, GREETING. 


“ Kxow thou that I have received the kingdom from my father 
David by help of the Most High God, who also enjoined on me to 
build a temple to the God who made the heaven and the earth, P. 449 
and withal to write to thee to send me some men from thy peoples, 
who shall stay and help us until we have fulfilled the require- 
ment of God, according to the injunction laid upon me. I have 
written also to Galilee, and Samaria, and the land of Moab, and 
Ammion, and Gilead, to supply them with necessaries from the 
country every month, ten thousand cors of corn (a cor is six 
artabae) and ten thousand homers of wine (the homer of wine 
is ten measures): and oil and the rest shall be supplied to them 
from Judaea, and from Arabia, victims for sacrifice on ‘which 
to feed.” b 


CHAPTER XXXIV 


&lt;“ SURON TO SOLOMON THE GREAT KING GREETING. 


“BLESSED be God, who made the heaven and the earth, who 
hath chosen a worthy son of a worthy father. As soon as I read c 


477 


449 c 


ALEX- 
ANDER 


d 


P. 450 


b 


THE PREPARATION FOR THE GOSPEL 


thy letter I rejoiced greatly, and gave praise to God for thy 
succession to the kingdom. 

“ And as to what thou writest concerning the men in our various 
peoples, I have sent thee of Tyrians and Phoenicians eighty 
thousand, and as chief architect I have sent thee a man of Tyre, 
of a Jewish mother of the tribe of David: on whatsoever thou 
shalt ask him of all things under heaven, relating to architecture, 
he will give thee advice, and will earry out the work. 

“And with regard to necessary provisions, and to the servants 
whom I send to thee, thou wilt do well in commanding the local 
governors, that all things necessary be provided.” ? 

‘When Solomon with his father’s friends had passed over 
to mount Lebanon with the Sidonians and Tyrians, he trans- 
ported the timber which had previously been cut by his father 
to Joppa by sea, and thenee by land to Jerusalem. And he 
began to build the temple of God when he was thirteen years 
old: and the work was done by the nations before-mentioned, 
and the twelve tribes of the Jews supplied the hundred and sixty 
thousand with all things necessary, one tribe each month; and 
they laid the foundations of the temple of God, sixty cubits 
in length, and sixty cubits in breadth, but the breadth of the 
building and of the foundations was ten cubits, for so had 
Nathan the prophet of God commanded him. 

‘And they built alternately a course of stone and a beam 
of cypress-wood, fastening the two courses together with bronze 
cramps of a talent in weight. And when he had built it thus, 
he boarded it outside with planks of cedar and eypress, so that the 
stone building was not visible: and covered the temple with 
gold on the inside, by piling up bricks of gold five cubits long, 
and nailing them to the walls with silver nails of a talent in 
weight, four in number, and shaped like a breast. 

‘Thus he covered it with gold from floor to roof, and the 
ceiling he made of golden panels, and the roof he made of brass, 
that is of brass tiles, having smelted brass and poured it into 
moulds. He made also two columns of brass, and covered them 
with pure gold, a finger’s breadth in thickness. 

‘And the columns were as high as the temple, and in size each 
pillar ten cubits in circumference: and they stood one on the 


478 


BOOK EX. CHAP, XXXIV 


450 c 


right side of the house, and the other on the left. [fe made also ¢ ALEx- 


golden lamp-stands, weighing ten talents each, having taken 
as a pattern the lamp-stand set by Moses in the tabernacle 
of the Testimony. 

‘And he set them on either side of the shrine, some cn the 
right and some on the left. He made also seventy golden lamps, 
so that there might be seven burning on each lamp-stand. He 
built also the gates of the temple, and adorned them with gold and 
silver, and roofed them over with panels of cedar and cypress. 

‘He made a porch also on the north side of the temple, and 
supported it on forty-eight pillars of brass. He made also 
a brazen laver, twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in 
width, and five cubits high. And upon it he made a brim 
projecting on the outside towards the base one cubit, in order that 
the priests might stand up on it, and wash their feet and hands. 
Also he made the bases of the laver, twelve in number, molten 
and chased, and of the height of a man, and set them at the 
hinder side beneath the iaver, on the right side of the altar. 

‘He made also a brazen step two cubits high, near the laver, 
that the king might stand upon it, when praying, so that he 
might be seen by the Jewish people. Also he built the altar 
of twenty-five cubits by twenty cubits, and twelve cubits high. 

‘He made also two brazen rings of chain-work, and set them 
upon machines rising twenty cubits in height above the temple, 
and they cast a shadow over the whole temple: and to each 
net-work he hung four hundred brass bells of a talent in weight, 
and the net-works he made solid, that the bells might sound, and 
frighten away the birds, that they might not settle upon the 
temple, nor nest upon the panels of the gates and porches, and 
defile the temple with their dung, 

‘He also surrounded the city Jerusalem with walls and towers 
and moats, and built a palace for himself. 

‘And the Lord’s house was at first called the Temple of Solomon 
(‘Iepév SoAonevos); afterwards by a corruption the city was named 
Hierusalem from the Temple, but by the Greeks was called 
Hierosolyma after the king’s name. 

‘And when he had completed the Temple and the walls of the 
city, he went to Shiloh, and offered a thousand oxen for a burnt- 
offering. And he took the Tabernacle, and the altar, and the 


479 


ANDER 


d 


p. 451 


b 


c 


451 


ALEX- 
ANDER 


c THE PREPARATION FOR THE GOSPEL 


vessels which Moses made, and brought them to Jerusalem, and 
put them in the house. 

‘Moreover the Ark, and the golden altar, and the lamp-stand, 
and the table, and the other vessels he deposited there, as the 
prophet commanded him. 

‘And he offered to God an immense sacrifice, two thousand 
sheep, three thousand five hundred calves. And the whole 

d amount of gold which was expended upon the two pillars and the 
temple was four millions six hundred thousand talents: and 
upon the nails and the rest of the furniture one thousand two 
hundred and thirty-two talents of silver: and of brass for the 
columns and the laver and the porch eighteen thousand and fifty 
talents. 

‘And Solomon sent away both the Egyptians and the Phoeni- 
cians each to their own country, having given to every man ten 
shekels of gold; now the shekel is a talent. And to Vaphres the 
king of Egypt he sent ten thousand measures of oil, a thousand 
measures of dates, a hundred vessels of honey, and spices. 

‘And to Suron at Tyre he sent the golden pillar which is 
dedicated in the temple of Zeus at Tyre. 


p.452 ‘But Theophilus says that Solomon sent the gold that remained 


over to the king of Tyre; and that he made a life-sized figure 
as an image of his daughter, and made the golden column into 
a covering for the statue. 

‘And Eupolemus says that Solomon made also a thousand 
golden shields, each of which weighed five hundred staters 
of gold. Ile lived fifty-two years, of which he reigned forty 
in peace.’ 


CHAPTER XXXV 


b ‘TimocHares, in his Life of Antiochus, says that Jerusalem 
has a circuit of forty furlongs, and is difficult to take, being 
shut in on all sides by abrupt ravines: and that the whole city 

c is flooded with streams of water, so that even the gardens are 
irrigated by waters which flow off from the city. But the country 
froin the city as far as forty furlongs is without water: but 
beyond the forty furlongs again it is well watered.’ 


480 


BOOK IX. CHAPS, XXXVI-XXXVIII 452d 


CHAPTER XXXVI Pory- 


HISTOR 
‘THE author of the Metrical Survey of Syria says in his first d 


book that Jerusalem lies upon a lofty and rugged site: and that 
some parts of the wall are built of polished stone, but the greater 
part of rubble; and that the city has a circuit of twenty-seven 
furlongs, and that there is also within the place a spring which 
spouts up abundance of water. 


CHAPTER XXXVII 


‘ PILo too says, in his Account of Jerusalem, that there is 
a fountain, and that it is dried up in winter, but becomes full p. 453 
in summer. And in his first Book he speaks thus: 
“Nnxdpevos &amp; èpúrepðe TÒ OapBnéctrarov GdAdAo 
dépxnOpov Cavvactéa) peyioTovxoro oerpois 
pevparos éumimdno: Babiy poov éfavieions.” 
‘And so forth. Again, lower down he adds to these a descrip- 
tion of the refilling : 
“For flashing from on high the joyous stream, 
Flooded by rain and snow, rolls swiftly on b 
Beneath the neighbouring towers, and spreading o'er 
The dry and dusty ground, far-shining shows 
The blessings of that wonder-working fount.” 
‘And the rest that follows. Then again, concerning the High 
Priest’s fountain and the canal that carries off the water, he 
proceeds as follows: 


“A headlong stream by channels under ground 
The pipes pour forth,” 


‘And all that follows this.’ 


Thus far then our quotations from Alexander Poly- 
histor. 


CHAPTER XXXVIII 


Bur Aristeas also, in the book which he wrote Con- 
cerning the Interpretation of the Law of the Jews, gives 
the following account of the waters in Jerusalem : 


453 a 3 These lines are so corrupt as to defy translation 


+ Li 481 


453 d THE PREPARATION FOR THE GOSPEL 


d ‘Now the house looks towards the East, and the back part of it 
ARISTEAS to the West. The whole site is paved with stone, and has slopes 
towards the proper places for the influx of the waters for the 
purpose of washing away the blood from the sacrifices: for 

many myriads of cattle are offered on the several feast-days. 
‘And there is an inexhaustible reservoir of water, as would 
be expected from an abundant spring gushing up naturally from 
within; there being moreover wonderful and indescribable 
cisterns under ground, of five furlongs, aceording to their showing, 
p. 454 all round the foundation of the temple, and countless pipes from 
them, so that the streams on every side met together. And all 
these works have been fastened with lead at the bottom and 
the side-walls, and over these has been spread a great quantity 

of plaster, all having been carefully wrought.’ 


CHAPTER XXXIX 


b Bezspes this, as Polyhistor has made mention of the 
prophecy of Jeremiah, it would be a most unreasonable 
thing for us to pass it over in silence. Let this then also 
be set down : 


Po.y- ‘Then Jonachim: in his time prophesied Jeremiah the prophet. 
HISTOR Je was sent by God, and found the Jews sacrificing to a golden 
image, the name of which was Baal. 

‘And he foreshowed to them the calamity which was to 
come. Jonachim then attempted to burm him alive: but he said 

c that with that fuel they should cook food for the Babylonians, 
and as prisoners of war should dig the canals of the Tigris and 
Euphrates. 

‘When Nebuchadnezzar, king of the Babylonians, had heard of 
the predictions of Jeremiah, he summoned Astibares, the king of 
the Medes, to join him in an expedition. And having taken with 
him Babylonians and Medes, and collected a hundred and eighty 
thousand infantry and a hundred and twenty thousand cavalry, 
and ten thousand chariots, he first subdued Samaria, and Galilee, 
and Scythopolis, and the Jews who lived in the region of 

d Gilead; and afterwards took Jerusalem, and made Jonachim, 


453 d 1 Aristeas, § 88 (Wendland) 
482 


BOOK IX. CHAP. XL 454d 


the king of the Jews, a prisoner. And the gold that was in the Pory- 
temple, and the silver and brass, they chose out and sent to HISTOR 
Babylon, except the Ark and the tables that were in it: but this 
Jeremiah retained.’ 


CHAPTER AL P- 455 
JOSEPHUS 
To this I must necessarily append also the account of b 


the captivity of the Jews under Nebuchadnezzar : 

‘Nebuchadnezzar having encountered the rebel and joined 
battle with him, both mastered him, and brought the country at 
once under his own rule. 

‘And it happened that his father Nabopallasar fell sick at this 
time, and departed from life in the city of Babylon, after having 
reigned twenty-one years. And when Nebuchadnezzar heard 
soon after of his father’s death, he set in order the affairs of C 
Egypt and of the rest of the country, and having committed the 
prisoners of the Jews and Phoenicians and Syrians, the nations 
uear Egypt, to certain of his friends, came to Babylon.’ 

After other statements he says: 


‘So then Nebuchadnezzar, after he had begun the wall before- 
mentioned, fell sick and died, after a reign of forty-three years, 
and his son Evil-Merodach became master of the kingdom. 

‘He governed the affairs of the kingdom in a lawless and 
outrageous manner, and was plotted against and put to death 
by his sister’s husband Neriglisar, after having reigned two years. 

‘And after he was slain Neriglisar, who had plotted against 
him, succeeded to the government and reigned four years. His 
son Chabaessoarach succeeded to the kingdom, though he was 
but a boy, and held it nine months; but because he showed 
many evil dispositions, a plot was made against him by hisd 
friends, and he was beaten to death. 

‘Upon his death, those who had plotted against him met 
together, and by common consent conferred the kingdom on 
Nabonnedus, who was a Babylonian and one of the same con- 
spiracy. 

‘In his reign the walls of Babylon adjacent to the river were 


455 b 3 Josephus, Against Apion, i. 19 
112 483 


455d THE PREPARATION FOR THE GOSPEL 


JOSEPHUS handsomely repaired with baked brick and asphalt. And in the 

P. 456 seventeenth year of his reign Cyrus came from Persia with a great 

force, and, after subduing all the rest of the kingdom, invaded 
Babylonia. 

‘Nabonnedus, on being informed of his advance, met him with 
his army, and having joined battle was defeated, and fled with 
a few attendants, and was shut up in the city Borsippus. 

‘ And Cyrus having taken Babylon, and ordered the demolition 
of the outer walls of the city because the city had proved very 
troublesome to him, and hard to take, moved his army to 
Borsippus, to besiege Nabonnedus. 

b ‘But as Nabonnedus did not wait for the siege, but gave him- 
self up beforehand, Cyrus treated him in a kindly manner, and, 
giving him Carmania to dwell in, sent him away from Babylonia. 
The rest of his time therefore Nabonnedus passed in that country, 
and there ended his life. 

‘This narrative contains the truth in agreement with our books. 
For in them it is written that Nebuchadnezzar in the eighteenth 

c year of his reign laid waste our temple, and it remained unre- 
garded fifty years. But in the second year of the reign of Cyrus 
the foundations were laid, and it was completed again in the 
tenth year of the reign of Darius.’ 


Thus far Josephus. 


CHAPTER XLI 


I rounp also the following statements concerning 
d Nebuchadnezzar in the work of Abydenus Concerning 
the Assyrians: 

Apypenus ‘Now Megasthenes says that Nebuchadnezzar was braver than 
Hercules, and made an expedition against Libya and Iberia, and, 
having subdued them, settled a part of their inhabitants on the 
right shore of Pontus. 

‘And afterwards, the Chaldeans say, he went up to his palace, 
and being possessed by some god or other uttered the following 
speech : 

‘&lt;Q men of Babylon, I Nebuchadnezzar here foretell to you 
the coming calamity, which neither Belus my ancestor, nor Queen 
Beltis are able to persuade the Fates to avert. 


484 


BOOK IX. CHAP. XLI 457 a 


‘“ There will come a Persian mule, aided by the alliance of p. 457 
your own deities, and will bring you into slavery. And the joint ABYDENUS 
author of this will be a Mede, in whom the Assyrians glory. 
O wonld that before he gave up my citizens some Charybdis 
or sea might swallow him up utterly out of sight; or that, 
turning in other directions, he might be carried across the 
desert, where there are neither cities nor foot of man, but 
where wild beasts have pasture and birds their haunts, that 
he might wander alone among rocks and ravines; and that, 
before he took such thoughts into his mind, I myself had found 
a better end.” 

‘He after uttering this prediction had immediately disappeared, b 
and his son Amil-marudocus became king. But he was slain 
by his kinsman Iglisar, who left a son Labassoarask. And 
when he died by a violent death, Nabannidochus, who was 
not at all related to him was appointed king. But after the 
capture of Babylon, Cyrus presents him with the principality of 
Carmania.’ 


Also concerning the building of Babylon by Nebu- 
chadnezzar the same author writes thus: 


‘It is said that all was originally water, and called a sea. 
But Belus put a stop to this, and assigned a district to each, and 
surrounded Babylon with a wall; and at the appointed time he c 
disappeared. 

‘And afterwards Nebuchadnezzar built the wall which re- 
mained to the time of the Macedonian empire, and was furnished 
with gates of brass.’ 


After other statements he adds: 


‘When Nebuchadnezzar had succeeded to the kingdom, he forti- 
fied Babylon with a triple circuit of walls in fifteen days, and he 
changed the course of the river Armacales, which is a branch of 
the Euphrates, and also of the Acracanus. To protect the city 
of the Sippareni he dug out a reservoir having a circuit of forty 
parasangs and a depth of twenty fathoms, and put gates to it, 
by opening which they mee the plain; and they call them 
Echetognomones. 

‘He also walled off the inundation of the Red Sea, andd 
built the city Terédon at the place of the incursions of the Arabs. 


485 


457d THE PREPARATION FOR THE GOSPEL 


ABYDENUS llis palace too he adorned with trees, and gave it the name of the 
Hanging Gardens.’ 


I have wished to make these quotations from the book 
before mentioned, because in the prophecy of Daniel it 
is said that Nebuchadnezzar, walking in the palace of 
his kingdom in Babylon, in proud thought spoke out 
arrogantly and said: ‘Is not this great Babylon, which I 

P. 458 have built for the royal dwelling place, by the might of my 
power and for the glory of my majesty?’ While the word is yet 
in his mouth the catastrophe which followed has come 
upon him. 


This then is enough for me to have quoted on the 
present subject. 


CHAPTER XLII 


b Bur after all let me add the statements from the 
Antiquity of the Jews by Josephus, where, after quoting 
word for word the sayings of numberless writers, he adds 
the following : 


JosepHus ‘Nevertheless the records of the Syrians and Chaldeans and 
Phoenicians suffice for the proof of our antiquity, and in addition 
to them so many writers among the Greeks, and yet further in 
addition to those mentioned Theophilus, and Theodotus, and 
Mnaseas, and Aristophanes, and Hermogenes, Euemerus also, and 

c Conon, and Zopyrion, and many others perhaps (for I have not 
read all the books) have made no slight or passing mention 
of us. 

‘Most, however, of the persons mentioned missed the truth of 
our earliest history beeause they had not read our Sacred Books: 
nevertheless all alike have borne testimony concerning our anti- 
quity, the subject on which I proposed to speak at this time. 
Demetrius Phalereus, however, and Philo the elder, and Eupolemus, 
did not go far astray from the truth. And they deserve to be 
excused, for it was not in their power to follow our scriptures 
with entire accuracy.’ 


45749 Dan. iv. 30 458 b 5 Josephus, Against Apion, i. 23 
486 


BOOK IX. CHAP. XLII 458d 


So says Josephus. And any one who is pleased to read d 
his statements concerning the Antiquity of the Jews will 
find very many testimonies agreeing with those which 
I have set forth. 

Also there pours in upon me a further great crowd of 
writers both ancient and modern as witnesses, who set 
their seal upon the like judgement with the authors who 
have been quoted; but being anxious to preserve the 
due limits of my discourse, I leave their utterances for 
students to search out and examine, and will myself 
pass on to fulfil the remainder of my promise. 


EYZEBIOY TOY TAM®IAOYT 
EYTATTEAIKHS MPOMAPASKETHS 


AOTOI IE 


EUSEBII PAMPHILI 


EVANGELICAE PRAEPARATIONIS 


LIBRI XV 


AD CODICES MANUSCRIPTOS DENUO COLLATOS RECENSUIT | 


ANGLICE NUNC PRIMUM REDDIDIT 
NOTIS ET INDICIBUS INSTRUXIT 


E. H. GIFFORD, 8.T.P. 


OLIM ARCHIDIACONUS LONDINENSIS 


TOMUS III. PARS POSTERIOR 


OXONII 
E TYPOGRAPHEO ACADEMICO 


M.CM.III 


OXONII 
Excudebat Horatius Hart 
Typographus academicus 


- THE INSTITUTE CF MEDIAEVAL STUDIES 
IO ELMSLEY PLACE 
TORONTO 6, CANADA, . 


EUSEBIUS 


THE PREPARATION FOR THE GOSPEL 


