                  IS THE "QUEEN OF HEAVEN" IN
                 JEREMIAH THE GODDESS ANAT?

                                  HERBERT COHN

  Though the name of the goddess Anat is never mentioned in the Bible, it
may be reasonable to speculate that the "Queen of Heaven" mentioned in
Jeremiah 7:18; 44:17,18,19,25, may be identified with her. In Canaanite ep-
ics, the goddess Anat distinguished herself with strength and courage. She
was a mighty warrior, identified also with fertility, and as such was consi-
dered to be the goddess of life. Her gracefulness and beauty were symbols for
the people.
  The cult of Anat passed from Phoenicia and Canaan to Egypt, where she
was believed to be the goddess of war. In one of the sanctuaries unearthed in
Bet She'an, built by Ramses II in the 13th century BCE, there was found a
pillar to Anat, the Queen of Heaven and wife of all gods.
  In a later period, her name occurs in documents found at Elephantine, an
island called "the Southern Gate," situated north of the first Nile rapids, op-
posite Aswan. In the fifth century BCE, Jewish mercenaries were stationed at
Elephantine. They brought with them the venerable religion of their ances-
tors, paid dues to the Temple in Jerusalem, and built in Elephantine a spa-
cious temple that had seven porches and a roof of cedar wood.
  Documents dated to around 400 BCE, unearthed in excavations at Elephan-
tine, reveal that three deities were worshipped in the temple there: Yahoo,
"the Master of Heaven," and the goddesses Ashima and Anat Bet-El, "the
Queens of Heaven."
  The name of "Anat" is similar to the names of several localities in the land
of Israel, among them Bet-Anat in the tribal territory of Naphtali (Josh.
19:38; Jud. 1:33) and of Judah (Josh. 15:59). It does not seem correct, how-
ever, to associate Anat with the town of Anatoth, birthplace of Jeremiah.
  Shamgar the son of Anat was the heroic judge who slew 600 Philistines
with an ox goad and delivered Israel (Jud. 3:31; 5:6). Here it is not clear if
                                                        1
"son of Anat" means the name of a parent or of a town.
Herbert Cohn, Ph.D., is the translator into Hebrew of the classical book Die Lehren des Juden-
tums nach den Quellen [The Teachings of Judaism according to the Sources] (Meisharim, Jeru-
salem, 1991). He chairs the Conservative congregation Etz Hayim in Ashdod, Israel and has
been active on Jewish issues for many years.
                                                                HERBERT COHN

  Josiah, King of Judah (640-609 BCE), carried out a great religious reform
by eradicating idolatry and proclaiming the sovereignty of the Torah. Within
50 years, the Babylonians had invaded the land and in 586 BCE, the Jerusa-
lem Temple was destroyed. There were those who attributed the calamities to
the cessation of the worship of "The Queen of Heaven," and they complained
bitterly to Jeremiah (Jer. 44:15-19):
                                                               2
      'Since we left off to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven [m-l-kh-t
      hashamayim] and to pour out drink offerings unto her, we have
      wanted all things and have been consumed by the sword and by fa-
      mine' (v. 18).

M-L-KH-T
  The term "m-l-kh-t hashamayim" in Jeremiah 44:18 was read by the trans-
lators of the Greek Septuagint and the Latin Vulgate as "malkat hashamayim
[Queen of Heaven]." When the masoretes of Tiberias vocalized the Hebrew
text in the ninth century CE, the word m-l-kh-t was to be read as melekhet
[‫]מלאכת‬, though this word does not make sense. Ramban (Nahmanides) ex-
plained that the letter "aleph" was actually missing in the word, this omission
being "one of the mysteries of the Scriptures." The meaning of the word m-l-
kh-t with the letter "aleph" added means "work," making the phrase "work of
heaven," connoting sun and stars.3 Moreover, the Aramaic Targum Yonathan
translated m-l-kh-t hashamayim as "kokhevet sh’maya [stars of heaven]."
  The vocalization of m-l-kh-t as melekhet prevented it from being read as
malkat [Queen of (Heaven)]," thus circumventing the fact that a section of
the Jewish people had in the past worshipped a female deity, who may have
been Anat.
  It appears that Josiah's religious reform did not succeed in totally eradicat-
ing idolatrous belief. On the other hand, the exiles in Babylon, the cream of
notables from Judah, continued in the spirit of the reform of King Josiah,
strengthened by the prophecies of Jeremiah, Ezekiel and Deutero-Isaiah.
With the Babylonian Exile, there is an end to idolatry and the true beginnings
of the Jewish religion.

NOTES



                                                     JEWISH BIBLE QUARTERLY
     IS THE 'QUEEN OF HEAVEN' IN JEREMIAH THE GODDESS ANAT?
     1. See U. Cassuto, The Goddess Anat, Canaanite Epics of the Patriarchal Age (Jerusalem: Mos-
     sad Bialik, 1965).
     2. The "Queen of Heaven" is an oft-studied figure. Scholars have variously identified her as
     Anat, or as the goddess called Ishtar in Babylonia and Astarte in Canaan. See: Judith M. Hadley,
     "The Queen of Heaven - Who is She?" in Athalya Brenner, ed., Prophets and Daniel: A Feminis-
     tic Companion to the Bible [second series] (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 2001) pp. 30-
     51.
     3. See, commentaries of Ramban to Genesis 24:1, Radak, Abarbanel and others on Jeremiah
     44:18.
     ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     ----


                           RESPONSES from
                      Rabbi Hayyim Halpern’s book
                         TORAH DIALOGUES

1.       There is reason from negative evidence to believe that the
     truth was carefully hidden from Jacob. Rashi comments on 50:15
     that the brothers often dined together but when Jacob died, the
     appearances no longer had to be maintained. The matter was of
     such importance that the Torah would surely have mentioned it if
     Joseph had revealed it to his father.

2.       Shifrah and Puah, the midwives; Yocheved and Miriam,
     mother and sister of Moses; Pharaoh's daughters; Zipporah, wife
     of Moses.

3.       He made ready his chariot (14:6). Rashi believes that the
     Torah would not mention this fact unless it was meant literally.
     Ibn Ezra rejects this interpretation and compares the phrase to
     Solomon built the house (I Kg. 6:14) which certainly isn't to be
     understood in the literal sense (see: Mechilta on 14:6).


     Vol. 32, No. 1, 2004
