                                                                                                                    39

  When Monsters Walked the Earth: Giants, Monster Theory,
  and the Reformulation of Textual Traditions in the Enochic
                   Book of the Watchers

                                             Matthew Goff
                                        Florida State University

Abstract: This article examines an Early Jewish text entitled the Book of the Watchers that is part of
a larger work known as 1 Enoch. The Book of the Watchers offers a vivid and disturbing portrait of
the excessive violence on earth that led to the flood, attributing the situation to destructive giants.
Watchers expands and interprets the account of the crisis that precipitated the flood in Gen 6:1-4.
Comparison of the two texts demonstrates that Watchers in particular expands the description in
Genesis 6 of the giants (sons of the angels) and the violence they perpetrate. Exegesis, however,
alone cannot explain this phenomenon. Appeal to monster studies can help us better understand the
issue. This article argues that the retelling of the flood story in the Book of the Watchers was popular
in ancient Judaism because it offers a compelling construction of the known world, and social customs
that are normative within it—including a prohibition against murder and the delineation of norms
regarding of food—by offering a shocking description of the antediluvian world, before divine
regulations regarding such behavior were promulgated. The heinous and cannibalistic violence of
the antediluvian era as presented in the Book of the Watchers helps justify the current (post-diluvian)
order by presenting a coherent account of how it came into being in a way that legitimates God’s
dominion over it. The essay also explores how attending to the theme of the monstrous can provide
insight into the Book of the Watchers in relation to older mythic traditions embedded in Genesis 1 and
the Babylonian creation poem, the Enuma Elish. The article also contends that Watchers’
reformulation of the flood story with its heightened monstrosity can be profitably explained against
the backdrop of cultural anxieties that were pervasive during the Hellenistic era during which it was
written.

Keywords: Exegesis, Cannibalism, monster theory, Giants, 1 Enoch, Book of the Watchers


        The Book of the Watchers offers a disturbing account of life on earth before the flood:

                 They devoured the labors of men. And when they were unable to supply
                 them, the giants grew bold against them and devoured the men. They began
                 to sin against birds, animals, reptiles and fish, and to eat the flesh of each
                 other. And they drank the blood. (1 En. 7:3-5)117

       While 1 Enoch is relatively unknown today, it was an important work in ancient Judaism and
early Christianity. One legacy that testifies to the importance of the book in antiquity is that it remains

117
   This essay is an extensively revised and expanded version of a paper I delivered at a conference in 2014 on Animals
and Monsters at St. Andrews, Scotland. An earlier form of this research can also be found on the “Flood of Noah”
website. This essay uses for the text and translation of 1 Enoch, with modification, in George Nickelsburg and James C.
VanderKam, 1 Enoch (Hermeneia; 2 vols.; Minneapolis: Fortress, 2001-12). For a basic overview of this composition,
see Matthew Goff, “1 Enoch,” in The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Books of the Bible (ed. M.D. Coogan; 2 vols.; New
York: Oxford University Press, 2011), 1.224-37. Feedback from the anonymous reviews of this article have enriched its
content. I also thank Alana Zimath for her assistance with this essay.
                                                                                                       40

to this day in the canonical Old Testament of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church, one of the oldest forms
of Christianity. For this reason the work in its entirety is preserved only in Classical Ethiopic (GeꜤez).
The Book of the Watchers, the first section in the text of 1 Enoch (chs. 1-36), is a Jewish work written
in the third century BCE. We know that it was composed originally in Aramaic, since fragments of
the composition, along with Aramaic fragments of other works now in 1 Enoch, were discovered
among the Dead Sea Scrolls. The Book of the Watchers puts forward a shocking description of the
days before the flood. The cannibalistic crimes recounted in 1 Enoch 7 are committed by giants who
rampaged across the world. According to most Ethiopic manuscripts of Watchers, they are of
incredible stature: 3,000 cubits tall, or well over a mile. Both their bodies and their crimes transgress
norms. The Book of the Watchers teaches that the giants are an important catalyst in the crisis that
led to Noah’s flood.
         The portrayal in the Enochic Book of the Watchers of the antediluvian crisis that triggered the
flood leaves readers with a clear question. The account of the flood in Genesis 6 never describes
cannibalistic giants causing havoc on the earth. So why would an ancient Jewish text offer such a
monstrous depiction of the flood? In this essay I would like to explore this issue. There is clearly an
exegetical aspect to Watchers’ presentation of the flood. While this conclusion is common in biblical
studies, I would like to highlight a key issue that is often not stressed—that Watchers reconfigured
the flood story in a way that transforms it into a much more monstrous tale than anything in the book
of Genesis.
         This leads to the other key point of this article: that reflection on the cannibalistic giants of
Enochic literature can be informed by the burgeoning field of monster studies. This is an
interdisciplinary field of scholarship that develops theoretical frameworks which help us comprehend
how and why humanity has been and remains interested in tales about horrifying and disturbing
creatures. Scholars of this field of knowledge often engage the issue of cannibalism—monsters who
devour human beings. As we shall see below, they often understand this issue by means of
psychoanalytic theory. They also emphasize that societies circulate stories about monsters as a way
to articulate norms of conduct since such tales recount the disturbing creatures who lurk beyond the
boundaries of what is known and accepted. In this way monster studies, as I would like to show, can
help us understand how Watchers recounts the flood, and in particular how it thematizes eating. The
essay will then suggest that examining the theme of the monstrous can illuminate how Watchers can
be interpreted in relation to mythic traditions in Genesis 1. This chapter is profitably compared to the
Babylonian creation account, the Enuma Elish, in which the chief god Marduk kills a sea monster
named Tiamat and fashions the known world out of her body. Genesis 1, formulated in the context
of the Babylonian exile, appropriates older mythic traditions in a way that does not highlight any
monstrous creature along the lines of Tiamat. The reformulation of Genesis traditions in Watchers,
by contrast, accentuates and heightens the monstrous. This return of the monstrous, I suggest, can be
helpfully situated against the backdrop of the Hellenistic age during which it was written. As experts
in monster theory discuss, the creation and dissemination of stories about monsters should be
expected from cultures dealing with moments of intense anxiety or crisis. While it is common to
understand the formation of the Book of the Watchers in terms of political violence perpetrated by
Hellenistic empires, the cultural climate of the early Hellenistic age, as I discuss below, is a conducive
context for the increase in monstrosity evident in Watchers.

         TEXTUAL REFORMATIONS OF AN ANTEDILUVIAN CRISIS
      The monstrosity of the account of the antediluvian period in the Book of the Watchers can be
demonstrated by comparing it with Genesis 6, in particular its first four verses:
              When people began to multiply on the surface of the earth, and daughters
              were born to them, the sons of God saw that they were fair; and they took
              wives for themselves of all that they chose. Then the Lord said, “My spirit
              shall not abide in mortals forever, for they are flesh; their days shall be one
              hundred twenty years.” The Nephilim were on the earth in those days—and
                                                                                                                      41

                also afterward—when the sons of God went in to the daughters of humans,
                who bore children to them. They are the mighty men who are of old, the
                men of renown (‫)הגבורים אשר מעולם אנשי השם‬.118
         This passage has long struck commentators as perplexing. These verses contain the first story
in the Hebrew Bible about angels. It is also arguably the oddest story in the Bible about angels. They
are referred to as “sons of God,” a common ancient Hebrew idiom for divine beings (e.g., Ps 29:1;
82:6).119 It construes them as coming down to earth to have sex. The offspring of the “sons of God”
and the women are called ‫הגבורים‬, literally “the mighty ones.” The ambiguous Hebrew term nǝphîlîm
can be understood as also signifying these children, but this is not clear on the basis of Genesis 6
itself. The word derives from the root ‫“( נפל‬to fall”) and has in the history of interpretation been
variously understood. Targum Pseudo-Jonathan, for example, interprets the term as signifying the
angelic fathers; they “fell” (‫ )נפלן‬from heaven.120 Compilers of the Torah presumably took the term
nǝphîlîm of Genesis 6 as signifying instead the children of the angels, as did its ancient Greek
translators since they employ the same word to translate both gibbōrîm and nǝphîlîm—gigantes
(“giants”; more on this below). The word nǝphîlîm occurs only one other time in the Hebrew Bible
(Num 13:33), to signify one of the original and gargantuan peoples of Canaan, the Anakim. The odd
locution in Gen 6:4 that the Nephilim were on the earth then “and also afterwards” (‫)וגם אחרי־כן‬
seems to reflect awareness that they appear later in the Bible, implying, on the basis of Num 13:33,
that the antediluvian gibbōrîm are the distant ancestors of the Canaanite giants. The root ‫ נפל‬on
several occasions in the Hebrew Bible denotes soldiers who have fallen in battle (as in, for example,
Judg 8:10 and 1 Sam 17:49). The term ‫ גבור‬likewise often describes elite and accomplished soldiers
(e.g., 2 Sam 23:16). In that sense nǝphîlîm would be a fitting term for soldiers who ‘fell’ long ago
(“the fallen ones” or “the ones who are fallen”). This is a reason why it is often suggested that the
gibbōrîm of Genesis 6 allude to an otherwise lost Israelite epic tradition of legendary warriors.121 The
relationship between the gibbōrîm and the nǝphîlîm, however, remains an ambiguous point.122
         Genesis 6:4 does, however, make two things clear about the gibbōrîm: that they are “of old”

118
   Ronald S. Hendel, The Text of Genesis 1-11: Textual Studies and Critical Edition (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1998), 132-33.
119
   For the present discussion it suffices to note that these creatures are from the heavenly world. While how exactly they
were understood when Genesis 6 was initially produced cannot be recovered, the text presumes that they are transmundane
and that their sexual interaction with women constitutes a violation of a designated boundary between the realms of
heaven and earth. This is suggested by the unusual offspring that are produced and the subsequent flood. Such sexual
activity is not presented as a sanctioned or regular occurrence. For the broader issue of the development and variety of
conceptions of angels in ancient Israel and the Second Temple period, see Annette Reed, Demons, Angels and Writing in
Ancient Judaism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2020), 65-81; Simon B. Parker, “Sons of (the) God(s),” in
Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible (ed. K. van der Toorn, Bob Becking, and Pieter W. van der Horst;
Leiden/Grand Rapids: Brill/Eerdmans, 1999), 794-800; R.M.M. Tuschling, Angels and Orthodoxy: A Study in Their
Development in Syria and Palestine from the Qumran Texts to Ephrem the Syrian (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2007);
Michael Mach, Entwicklungsstadien des jüdischen Engelglaubens in vorrabbinischer Zeit (TSAJ 34; Tübingen: Mohr
Siebeck, 1992).

120
    This late antique text uses Enochic traditions as an interpretative lens with which to understand Genesis 6, also
specifying that the “fallen ones” in question are Shemḥazai and Azael, the two key angels who descend to earth in
Watchers. See Annette Yoshiko Reed, Fallen Angels and the History of Judaism and Christianity: The Reception of
Enochic Literature (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 213; P.S. Alexander, “Targumim and Early Exegesis
of ‘Sons of God,’” JJS 23 (1972): 60-71.
121
  For an overview of this issue, see Brian R. Doak, The Last of the Rephaim: Conquest and Cataclysm in the Heroic
Ages of Ancient Israel (Boston/Washington, D.C.: Ilex Foundation/Center for Hellenic Studies, Trustees for Harvard
University, 2012), 54-66.
122
   For discussion of this issue, see Matthew Goff, “Warriors, Cannibals and Teachers of Evil: The Sons of the Angels in
Genesis 6, the Book of the Watchers and the Book of Jubilees,” SEÅ 80 (2015): 79-97 (82); Doak, The Last of the Rephaim,
54-66.
                                                                                                                     42

(‫ )מעולם‬and are “men of renown” (literally “men of the name”; ‫)אנשי השם‬. Interestingly, both
expressions are reasonably understood as positive, denoting that “the mighty ones” were on the earth
long ago and had a great reputation. What they did to achieve this fame is, however, not specified.
The emphasis on their fame is a core reason they are understood as warriors, as is their lineage. This
can be likened to Greek epic. The military prowess of the legendary Achilles is attributed to the fact
that he was not an ordinary human but rather a semi-divine being, with one human and one divine
parent (his mother was Thetis, a Nereid, and his father King Peleus). The famous warrior-king of
Mesopotamian tradition Gilgamesh likewise has a mixed human-divine parentage. So too the
gibbōrîm of Genesis 6.123 Understanding “the mighty men” of Genesis 6:1-4 in relation to such
comparisons can elucidate the odd fact that the passage describes them in positive, if brief, terms.
        But when one turns to the very next verse, the reader is confronted with a problem—
wickedness, Gen 6:5 states, spread throughout the earth. This raises an exegetical issue—how should
the legendary warriors of verse 4 be related to the increase of evil of verse 5?
        It is possible that the location of Gen 6:1-4 as prefacing the rest of the flood account may
indicate that some ancient scribes considered the children of the angels to be evil, despite the
passage’s somewhat laudatory description of them. The first four verses of the chapter are often
understood in biblical studies as an independent text that had some sort of editorial development and
tradition-history that are different from the rest of the flood narrative.124 Its placement at the
beginning of the flood narrative may reflect the opinion that the gibbōrîm are evil, and that the sexual
dalliance between angels and humans was inappropriate. This textual theory would offer a coherent
explanation of the question at hand, namely, how the angels and their sexual encounter on earth should
be understood vis-à-vis the flood. Understood in this way, it was the offspring of the angels and the
women who increased the evil on the earth that led to the flood. This understanding of the giants as
inherently negative may also help us understand why the Hebrew word gibbōrîm is translated with
gigantes in the form of Gen 6:4 found in the ancient Greek translation of the Torah.125 In Greek myth,
the gigantes are rebellious and vicious; they attempt and fail to challenge Olympian rule. 126 The
translation choice, carried out in the third century BCE, is a kind of interpretatio graeca. The
translators’ appeal to the gigantes as a way to understand the children of the angels conveys that they
understood them very negatively. It is perhaps possible to delineate a negative view of the offspring
of the angels that predates Watchers, suggesting that its reformulation of the tale may be in continuity
with an older, pre-Enochic interpretative tradition. In any case, despite what we can infer about how
ancient transmitters of Gen 6:1-4 understood it, its positive but terse account of the gibbōrîm remained
and this is what was preserved in the Masoretic text. The story as we have it leaves open the key issue
of how the evil that triggered the flood started or what form it took.
        The Torah in ancient (pre-Christian) Judaism was quite fluid in terms of its textual form.
Nevertheless, some writings from the period seem to engage versions of Torah passages that do not

123
   For an important effort to situate the sons of the angels in a broad comparative context, see Doak, The Last of the
Rephaim, 222-30.
124
   The scholarship on this point is extensive. See, for example, Doak, The Last of the Rephaim, 60; Ronald Hendel, “Of
Demigods and the Deluge: Toward an Interpretation of Genesis 6:1-4,” JBL 106 (1987): 13-26 (esp. 16); Gerhard von
Rad, See his Genesis: A Commentary (rev. ed.; London: SCM Press, 1972 [orig. pub., 1949]), 113; Hermann Gunkel,
Genesis (trans. M.E. Biddle; Macon: Mercer University Press, 1997 [orig. pub., 1901]), 59; Julius Wellhausen,
Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel (New York: Meridian Books, 1957 [orig. pub., 1878]), 317. See also Archie
T. Wright, The Origin of Evil Spirits: The Reception of Genesis 6:1-4 in Early Jewish Literature (rev. ed.; Minneapolis:
Fortress, 2015), 51-96.
125
   This explains the conventional description in English of the sons of the angels in Genesis 6 as “giants,” a broad term
used to describe a wide range of creatures that appear in the mythology of various cultures. Here the term has a specific
referent—the sons of the angels described in Genesis 6.
126
   Françoise-Hélène Massa-Pairault, ed. Géants et gigantomachies entre Orient et Occident. Acts du Colloque, Naples,
14–15 Novembre 2013 (Naples: Centre Jean Bérard, 2017).
                                                                                                                   43

appear to be substantially different from their form in the Masoretic text. The Book of the Watchers
constitutes a good example of this issue. This composition can be plausibly understood as telling a
similar but more expansive version of the flood story in Genesis.127 Genesis, for example, never
specifies how many angels came down to earth. None of the angels are named in Genesis; the book
also does not state where on earth they arrived when they descended from heaven. The Book of the
Watchers, however, is clear on all these points. It asserts that the total number of the angels who
descended was 200, and the names of their twenty chiefs are given. Watchers divulges further that
the arrival point of the angels on earth was Mount Hermon, a fitting locale, given that, as a large
mountain, it is a point on earth close to heaven.
         The Book of the Watchers exhibits very little interest in the flood itself. The concern of the
text is rather for the spread of evil and violence on the earth before the flood. According to 1 En.
10:2, God sent an archangel to explain to Noah that it was coming, but there are many core details of
the flood story as found in Genesis that are not in Watchers. These include the building of the ark, its
measurements, the number or kind of animals present on the vessel, and the chronological length of
the flood. Watchers is primarily interested in the flood as the means of punishing the watchers and
their offspring; the flood also serves as a model for eschatological judgment (1 Enoch 10-11).
         When it comes to the evil that preceded the flood, Watchers by contrast offers more narrative
than Genesis. 1 Enoch 8 recounts that the angels disclosed supernatural and unsanctioned knowledge
on various topics.128 In this way, Watchers provides an etiology for several types of knowledge that
are critical for human civilization (more on this below), such as metallurgy, that is, how to acquire
metals from the earth and how to make weaponry from this resource; they also reveal knowledge
about types of ornamentation used by women; these include antimony, a metallic compound used in
antiquity for the production of cosmetic eye-paint, and gems from the earth (8:1).129 This is a
gendered iteration of the angelic revelation that for Watchers plays a central role in the antediluvian
crisis that led to the flood. It has a ‘male’ aspect, in that being able to produce destructive weapons
triggered more violence, and a ‘female’ aspect, in the sense that innovation in female beautification,
in the androcentric mindset of the text, led to more temptation and promiscuity.130 Excesses of
violence and sex characterize the antediluvian period, according to Watchers.
         Watchers provides vivid and disturbing details about the children of the angels that are not
found in Genesis. The Enochic text appears to show awareness of the trope that they are warriors,
refashioning their martial prowess in horrific terms. They are no longer “men of renown.” They are
unspeakably violent. They do not just murder people—they eat them. This unsettling portrayal of
the angelic offspring offers a clear way to understand how they should be related to the rise of evil
and violence that necessitated the flood—they are its prime cause. Above I observed that it is unclear
in Genesis how to relate the gibbōrîm of Gen 6:4 to the increase of evil stated in verse 5 which
precipitated the flood. Watchers, by contrast, is clear on this point. The Enochic reconfiguration of
the gibbōrîm into terrifying, cannibalistic giants can be understood as offering a solution to an
exegetical problem.
         As is clear from the description of the antediluvian acts of the sons of the angels in 1 Enoch 7

127
      . This important issue is explicated in more depth below.
128
      For an overview of this theme, see Reed, Fallen Angels, 24-57.
129
    Fritz Graf, “Mythical Production: Aspects of Myth and Technology in Antiquity,” in From Myth to Reason? Studies
in the Development of Greek Thought (ed. R. Buxton; New York: Oxford University Press, 2002), 317-28.
130
   Matthew Goff, “Male and Female, Heaven and Earth: Claude Lévi-Strauss’ Structuralist Approach to Myth and the
Enochic Myth of the Watchers,” in The Dead Sea Scrolls and the Study of the Humanities. Method, Theory, Meaning:
Proceedings of the Eighth Meeting of the International Organization for Qumran Studies (Munich, 4-7 August, 2013) (ed.
S. Thomas, B. Hartog, and A. Schofield; STDJ 125; Brill, 2018), 77-91; Annette Yoshiko Reed, “Gendering Heavenly
Secrets? Women, Angels, and the Problem of Misogyny and Magic,” in Daughters of Hecate: Women and Magic in
Antiquity (ed. D. Kalleres and K. Stratton; Oxford: Oxford University Press), 108-51.
                                                                                                                      44

that was quoted at the outset of this article, they consumed blood. It is notable that the text emphasizes
this point. Since they are devouring humans, one could readily assume that they swallow blood when
they do so. The legal code in Leviticus asserts that blood is holy and belongs to God, not the person
in which it flows.131 It is an embodied way to conceive of life, and the act of being alive, as under
divine control. Leviticus 17:11 claims that the soul (‫ )נפש‬is in the blood; blood was conceptualized
as the seat of life. This ancient theorization of blood makes intelligible why it is treated with such
reverence in the sacrificial worship of ancient Israel and other religious traditions of the ancient Near
East. Understood against this religio-cultural backdrop, the ingestion of blood does more than break
a food taboo. It is affront against God. Describing the giants as consuming blood is a way to depict
them as evil and opposed to God.
        Watchers’ assertion that the giants ingest blood can also be understood as having an exegetical
aspect. It makes sense in relation to the account in Genesis 9 of God’s covenant with Noah and his
sons after the flood. Genesis 9:1-6 states:

                  God blessed Noah and his sons, and said to them “Be fruitful and multiply,
                  and fill the earth. The fear and dread of you shall rest on every animal of
                  the earth, and on every bird of the air, on everything that creeps on the
                  ground, and on all the fish of the sea; into your hand they are delivered.
                  Every moving thing that lives shall be food for you; and just as I gave you
                  the green plants, I give you everything. Only, you shall not eat flesh with
                  its life (‫)נפשו‬, that is, its blood. For your own lifeblood I will surely require
                  a reckoning: from every animal I will require it and from human beings,
                  each one for the blood of another, I will require a reckoning for human life.
                  Whoever sheds the blood of a human, by a human shall that person’s blood
                  be shed.”

        This pericope is generally attributed in biblical scholarship to the Priestly source.132 In it God
asserts that he will never send another flood and that humankind will maintain power over other
creatures on earth, provided that they keep two rules. People are not to eat blood or kill other people
(9:4-6). These commandments are found within a larger passage in which God grants humankind the
right to consume meat, a visceral expression of human dominion over other animals (v. 3). It may
strike readers as odd that God’s promise to never send another flood is based on people agreeing to
never ingest blood. Watchers can be plausibly interpreted as a consequence of reflection about the
diluvian laws God gives to humanity.133 This ban in Genesis 9 against consuming blood, its linkage
between killing and the swallowing of blood, and the fact that it brings up the issue of eating meat at
all, become easier to understand if the reader imagines the crisis that led to the flood as it is presented
in Watchers. With regard to the evil on earth that triggered the flood Genesis provides relatively few
details. Watchers offers an antediluvian narrative that is informed by some form of Genesis 9.
Additionally, because Gen 9:4 constitutes the first time the Hebrew Bible states that humans can

131
   I engage this issue in more depth in Matthew J. Goff, “Monstrous Appetites: Blood, Giants, Cannibalism and Insatiable
Eating in Enochic Literature,” JAJ 1 (2010): 19-42. Consult also Yitzhaq Feder, Blood Expiation in Hittite and Biblical
Ritual: Origins, Context, and Meaning (Atlanta: Society of Biblical Literature, 2014).
132
    For a helpful overview of this scholarly tradition, see the discussion of Genesis 9 in Alexander Rofé, Introduction to
the Composition of the Pentateuch (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1999), 28-45. Those interested in a recent and
extensive examination of the Priestly source can consult Liane M. Feldman, The Story of Sacrifice: Ritual and Narrative
in the Priestly Source (FAT 141; Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2020).

133
   Samuel L. Boyd has recently argued that 1 Enoch 7 (and also the iteration of the flood story in Jubilees 5) makes
explicit this same key point, which he argues is implicit in the Priestly text of Genesis 9—that animal consumption plays
a major role in the violence that triggered the flood. See his “The Flood and the Problem of Being an Omnivore,” JSOT
43 (2019): 163-78.
                                                                                                                          45

consume meat, the era before the flood can be imagined as a time of vegetarianism. This context
would make the giants’ cannibalistic violence even more shocking.134
        As I have sought to demonstrate, interpreting the Book of the Watchers as an exegetical text
can be an instructive exercise. We should not, however, anachronistically assert our modern notion
of canon onto ancient Jewish literature. It is evident that in the late Second Temple period there was
an extensive interest in traditional writings that were considered to have a form of authoritative status.
Many Jewish works from this period, including the Book of Jubilees, the Animal Apocalypse, the
Temple Scroll and the Genesis Apocryphon, in myriad ways explore and reconfigure specific texts
and themes of the Pentateuch. The Community Rule states that when at least ten members of the Dead
Sea sect are together, one of them must be reciting or expounding the Torah, day and night (1QS 6:6-
7). But there is not in this era a “Bible,” in the sense of the fixed canon of the Old Testament. Rather
there was a loose body of traditional lore in textualized form with which Jewish scribes could and did
display a great degree of literary creativity. Hindy Najman many years ago offered to explain the
textuality of ancient Judaism not through appeal to anachronistic biblical or scriptural categories of
analysis but rather what she termed “Mosaic Discourse.”135 The Dead Sea Scrolls offer a crucial
window into a lost Jewish textual world, in which scripture is important but before the Bible (a term
never found in the scrolls) comes into being as a textual and theological category.
        The material in Watchers from the third century BCE offers a fleeting glimpse into this lost
textual world. Watchers does not present itself as exegeting a scriptural text, in contrast to rabbinic
midrash, a genre that emerges later and is self-consciously modeled as a verse-by-verse exposition of
a sacred text. Rather Watchers, by using the pseudepigraphic device of attributing authorship to
Enoch, whom the text extols as a righteous scribe from the antediluvian age, presents the watchers
myth as what actually happened long ago, as an etiology of the flood, and as events witnessed and
recorded by Enoch.136 Watchers’ presentation of the watchers and their violent offspring betrays an
abiding concern with the deep past (an issue to which I return below). The composition’s articulation
of antediluvian events reflects reliance on early forms of Genesis texts—but not simply reliance on
them. Watchers expands and enlarges their content. As discussed above, the book of Genesis for
example never provides the names of the angels or much detail regarding the violent rampages on
earth that triggered the flood. To make this assessment one must posit that the scribes who produced
Watchers had access to a form of Genesis 6 that is by and large similar to the Masoretic form of the
text that became part of the Bible. This is, in my view, a reasonable position. While the Dead Sea
Scrolls show a great deal of variety regarding how they engage Genesis traditions, they also include
several manuscripts of Genesis that are quite similar to the later Masoretic versions of these texts,
suggesting that Genesis had a degree of textual stability in this period, as George Brooke has stressed,
that one does not find in this period with, say, the Psalms.137 Other compositions such as Jubilees or

134
   Yael Shemesh, “Vegetarian Ideology in Talmudic Literature and Traditional Biblical Exegesis,” Review of Rabbinic
Judaism 9 (2006): 141-66.

135
   Hindy Najman, Seconding Sinai: The Development of Mosaic Discourse in Second Temple Judaism (Leiden: Brill,
2003). See also Eva Mroczek, The Literary Imagination in Jewish Antiquity (New York: Oxford University Press, 2016);
ibid. “The Hegemony of the Biblical in the Study of Second Temple Literature,” JAJ 6 (2015): 2-35.
136
   Matthew Goff, Reading Jewish Wisdom From Before the Flood: Authorship, Prophecy, and Textuality in Enochic
Literature,” in Authorschaft und Autorisierungsstrategien in apokalyptischen Texten (ed. J. Frey, M.R. Jost and F. Tóth;
Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2019), 171-91; Annette Yoshiko Reed, “Pseudepigraphy and/as Prophecy: Continuity and
Transformation in the Formation and Reception of Early Enochic Writings,” in Revelation, Literature, and Community
in Late Antiquity (ed. Philippa Townsend and Moulie Vidas; Tubingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2011), 25–42.

137
   George J. Brooke, “Genesis 1-11 in the Light of Some Aspects of the Transmission of Genesis in Late Second Temple
Times,” HeBAI 1 (2012): 465-82 (471). While the Dead Sea Scrolls present Genesis as having some coherence as a book
(4Q8 [4QGenh] for example indicates that it could at that time circulate as a book with a title [‫ ]ברשית‬that is in accord
with its title in later Judaism, ‫)בראשית‬, it is not clear that Psalms existed as a single book in this period, as Mroczek, The
Literary Imagination, 51-85, argues.
                                                                                                                      46

the Genesis Apocryphon tell stories about the patriarchs which show detailed engagement—a kind of
ancient textual scholarship—with forms of Genesis texts that are again similar to what became the
book of Genesis.138 Annette Reed, who has justly criticized scholarship on Second Temple Judaism
for its overemphasis on biblical categories, emphasizes this point with regard to Watchers. Speaking
specifically about Gen 6:1-4, she writes: “What is allusive and unexplained in Genesis, however, is
expounded in spectacularly specific detail in the Book of the Watchers.”139 The overarching goal of
the composition was not necessarily to fill out an incomplete story in a scriptural text, or to
demonstrate that Genesis, when properly retold, is a consistent and comprehensive narrative.140
Rather Watchers constitutes reflection about the deep past that is informed by textual traditions found
in Genesis. Its presumed brief and incomplete account of antediluvian events constituted an
opportunity for creative reflection on this period.141 The transformation of the warriors of renown in
Genesis 6 into cannibalistic giants of the Book of the Watchers can be reasonably understood as a
form of exegesis on texts of Genesis, with “exegesis” employed here as a second-order term of
analysis, an etic rather than emic characterization of the content of Watchers. If it is interpreted in
this way, the composition’s disturbing, violent giants constitutes an odd, and monstrous, form of
exegesis.

              FORAYS INTO A MONSTROUS FIELD OF KNOWLEDGE
         It is reductive, however, to limit the significance of Watchers to exegesis. There is more to
the story. Although most people today have never heard of the composition, this was not the case in
antiquity. The Dead Sea Scrolls, on the basis of the fact that the composition was copied and
reworked, attest that some Jews in the second and first centuries BCE considered Watchers to have a
type of authoritative status. The New Testament Letter of Jude quotes from it, presuming that it has
some sort of authoritative status, and this comportment towards Watchers is continued in early
Christian writings. The core tale of Watchers, that angels descended from heaven to have sex with
women and produce children, was reconfigured and reimagined by numerous other ancient Jewish
texts, including the Animal Apocalypse, the Book of Jubilees and the Qumran Book of Giants. They
all came up with their own depictions of the giants, the sons of the angels. While scripture was an
important cultural category in ancient Judaism, the appeal and popularity between 200 BCE and 100
CE of such material—in part because none of these works explicitly frame themselves as exegeting
citations of Watchers—cannot be wholly explained through appeal to exegesis.
         I would like to suggest that we can arrive at a plausible understanding of both Watchers’
portrayal of violent, destructive giants and the popularity of stories about these antediluvian creatures
in ancient Judaism through engagement with scholarship on monsters and the monstrous.


138
  For an annotated translation of Jubilees that explicates how it reformulates material in Genesis (and Exodus) see
Matthew Goff, “Jubilees,” in The Jewish Annotated Apocrypha (ed. J. Klawans and L.M. Wills; New York: Oxford
University Press, 2020), 1-97.
139
   Reed, Demons, Angels and Writing, 199. For her criticism of forms of anachronistic applications of biblical
perspectives onto the study of Second Temple literature, see, for example, pp. 23-25. Reed’s sentiments regarding
Watchers vis-à-vis Genesis 6, with differing degrees of nuance, are common in biblical studies. See for example Julie
Galambush, Reading Genesis: A Literary and Theological Commentary (Macon: Smyth & Helwys, 2018), 40; James L.
Kugel, The Bible As It Was (Cambridge MA/London: Belknap Press, 1997), 110-12.
140
   In part to avoid such conclusions, scholars of ancient Judaism generally now no longer or only very sparingly use
“Rewritten Bible” as a category of analysis, which used to be employed with much more regularity. See Daniel Machiela,
“Once More, with Feeling: Rewritten Scripture in Ancient Judaism—A Review of Recent Developments,” JJS 61 (2010):
308-20.
141
    As discussed below, Watchers’ engagement with the primordial period is fully in accord with the intellectual currents
of the early Hellenistic period.
                                                                                                                      47

        What are monsters? The term denotes a second-order category of analysis used to interpret
creatures from a vast range of cultural and historical contexts. The term, as scholars of monster theory
(monstrologists?) know, originates from the Latin word monstrum, which can be related to the verb
monere, “to warn”; Augustine connects the noun instead to monstrare, “to show,” explaining that the
term denotes signs that “show by signifying something” (Civ. 21.8).142 The word monstrum often
was invoked to interpret something strange or unusual as some sort of ominous portent. The birth of
a child with a defect or the sighting of an odd creature could easily be construed as an omen, indicating
some sort of future calamity or hardship.143 As Jeffery Jerome Cohen has emphasized, a monster is
a signifier; it points to something that is beyond itself.144 Timothy Beal offers in his valuable book
Religion and Its Monsters (2002) the definition of monsters as “personifications of the Unheimlich.”
145
     This conception of the monstrous utilizes the Freudian locution that is normally rendered as
“uncanny.” A more literal translation would be “un-home-ly.” Following this thread, monsters are
creatures which cannot be bounded or confined within a normative sense of place. They disrupt
epistemological and taxonomic categories that conceptualize and articulate what is normal. So
understood, monsters constitute “threatening figures of anomaly.”146 The term “monster” frequently
refers to mixed, hybrid creatures that reconfigure component parts of actual animals in ways that do
not occur in nature, as with the sphinx or centaur.147 To this end Cohen argues that the monster
signifies a kind of “ontological liminality”; that is, the term can be applied to an entity that transcends
and is unconstrained by normativizing categories of classification.148 For this reason, he aptly
observes, one should discern a rise in interest in monsters during times of crisis. Political and military
events and forms of disaster, because they are moments of turmoil, change, and violence, compel
people to re-examine the world and the categories they deploy to understand it. This perspective is
quite valid with regard to ancient Judaism (a point I return to below).
        The interest people have in monsters is extensive and is not restricted to moments of crisis.
Cohen emphasizes that the monstrous as a cultural category offers an effective way to articulate, and
demonize, alterity. Monsters can represent the “dialectical Other,” and as such they do not only offer
us a way to conceptualize enemies who are invading.149 Monsters also offer a way to understand
142
   Terry Kirk, “Monumental Monstrosity, Monstrous Monumentality,” Perspecta 40 (2008): 6-15 (7). For the key
passage, see St. Augustine, The City of God (trans. Henry Bettenson; New York: Penguin Books,1984), 982.

  D. Felton, “Rejecting and Embracing the Monstrous in Ancient Greece and Rome,” in The Ashgate Research
143

Companion to Monsters and the Monstrous (ed. A. Simon Mittman and P. Dendle; Surrey: Ashgate, 2013), 103-32 (104).
144
    Jeffery Jerome Cohen, “Monster Culture (Seven Theses),” in Monster Theory: Reading Culture (ed. J.J. Cohen;
Minneapolis/London: University of Minnesota Press, 1996), 3-25 (4). See also Georges Canguilhem, “Monstrosity and
the Monstrous” (trans. T. Jaeger), Diogenes 40 (1962): 27-42.
145
   David Gilmore, Monsters: Evil Beings, Mythical Beasts, and All Manner of Imaginary Terrors (Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press, 2003), 5.
146
      Timothy K. Beal, Religion and Its Monsters (New York/London: Routledge, 2002), 4.

  Asa Simon Mittman, “Introduction: The Impact of Monsters and Monster Studies,” in The Ashgate Research
147

Companion, 1-16 (5); Gilmore, Monsters, 6.
148
    Cohen, “Monster Culture,” 6. See also idem, “Postscript: The Promise of Monsters,” in The Ashgate Research
Companion, 449-64 (452). Noël Carroll articulates the idea that monsters ignore and break through normative cultural
categories in his well-known study of horror films by terming this trope “fusion”—the blending of things together into
one entity that are in conceptually different categories, such as the zombie (which is both living and dead). He also
stresses that another common recurring characteristic feature of monsters is “magnification”—the increase of a creature’s
size far beyond biological norms. Since the giants of the Book of the Watchers are 3,000 cubits tall, they excessively
exemplify Carroll’s trope of “magnification.” See his The Philosophy of Horror or Paradoxes of the Heart (New York:
Routledge, 1990), 43-52. For discussion of the gigantic and the grotesque, consult Susan Stewart, On Longing; Narratives
of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir, the Collection (Durham: Duke University Press, 1993).
149
      Cohen, “Monster Culture,” 7.
                                                                                                                      48

places which are far away and different from the ones we consider normal. Lurking at the edge of
the known world, as map makers of earlier eras often asserted, hic sunt dracones (“here be
dragons”).150 Monsters in this sense demarcate the boundaries of normative space. They can do so
by providing a glimpse of how strange things are on the other side. Stories of this sort were often
told in the ancient world. Writers such as Herodotus and Ctesias, for example, gave expression to
India in the Greek imaginary as a region populated with fantastic creatures. They include cynocephali
(humans with heads of dogs or other animals), ants larger than foxes that burrow into the ground for
gold, or the martikora (manticore), a creature with a human face, a lion’s body, and the tail of a
scorpion.151
        Such writers also told stories about far-flung tribes to construct ethical norms that help define
civilization, by offering lurid depictions of the monstrous conduct beyond the pale.152 For example,
Herodotus claims that the Messagatae, an Iranian nomadic tribe that lives in Central Asia, devour and
sacrifice their elderly (1.216; cf. 3.25). He further asserts that other remote peoples such as the
Scythians are cannibals who have no conception of justice or law (4.18, 102, 106). Strabo around the
turn of the common era makes similar comments about the people of Ierna (Ἰέρνη), or Ireland. In his
construal, the Irish are cannibals who consume the bodies of their fathers when they die and that
among them incest is routine:

                  Besides some small islands round about Britain, there is also a large island,
                  Ierne, which stretches parallel to Britain on the north, its breadth being
                  greater than its length. Concerning this island I have nothing certain to tell,
                  except that its inhabitants are more savage than the Britons, since they are
                  man-eaters as well as heavy eaters, and since, further, they count it an
                  honorable thing, when their fathers die, to devour them, and openly to have
                  intercourse, not only with the other women, but also with their mothers and
                  sisters; but I am saying this only with the understanding that I have no
                  trustworthy witnesses for it; and yet, as for the matter of man-eating, that is
                  said to be a custom of the Scythians also, and, in cases of necessity forced
                  by sieges, the Celts, the Iberians, and several other peoples are said to have
                  practiced it (4.5.4; cf. 7.3.6).153

In this lurid mode of ethnography, the shocking conduct on the edge of the known world to the west


  Chet Van Duzer, “Hic sunt dracones: The Geography and Cartography of Monsters,” in The Ashgate Research
150

Companion, 387-436; idem, Sea Monsters on Medieval and Renaissance Maps (London: The British Library, 2014).
151
   For the large ants referred to by Herodotus, see 3.102. Aulus Gellius, in Attic Nights 9.4 (second century CE), asserts
that he read in Ctesias (fourth century BCE) and other works that there are “marvels in the Far East,” signifying India,
including men who have dog heads, monocoli, who hop around on one leg, and pygmies. Consult Lloyd Llewellyn-Jones
and James Robson, Ctesias’ History of Persia: Tales of the Orient (London: Routledge, 2010), 110 (also 33). For the
mantikora, see Felton, “Rejecting and Embracing the Monstrous,” 125. Note further Rudolf Wittkower, “Marvels of the
East: A Study in the History of Monsters,” in Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes 5 (1942): 159-97 (160-
61).
152
   I also discuss this material in “Deep Time, the Monstrous, and the Book of the Watchers in the Hellenistic Age,” in
Notions of Time in Deuterocanonical and Cognate Literature (ed. S. Beyerle and M. Goff; Berlin: de Gruyter,
forthcoming).
153
   Horace Leonard Jones, Strabo, Geography, Vol. II: Books 3-5 (Loeb Classical Library; Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1923), 261. Diodorus likewise construes the Scythians and the Irish as cannibals (5.32.3). Pliny asserts that the
Scythians engages in cannibalism and likens them to barbarian tribes north of the Alps (Nat. His. 7.2). For more on the
topic of cannibalism, consult Cătălin Avramescu, An Intellectual History of Cannibalism (trans. A. Ian Blyth; Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2009); Mark P. Donnelly and Daniel Diehl, Eat Thy Neighbour: A History of Cannibalism
(Stroud: Sutton, 2006).
                                                                                                                    49

reminds Strabo of the horrors in the distant east (Ireland and Central Asia, respectively). In either
direction, when one goes beyond the fringes of civilization, one encounters monstrous forms of life.
A similar presentation of imagined distant space is found in the Acts of Andrew and Matthias (third
or fourth century CE). In this account the apostle Andrew travels to the mysterious city of
Myrmidonia, whose inhabitants “ate no bread and drank no water but ate human flesh and drank their
blood. They would seize all who came to their city, dig out their eyes, [and] make them drink a drug
prepared by sorcery and magic” that would make their victims behave like animals.154
        One countervailing impulse in the study of the monstrous is to reflect not on the strange
creatures that roam in faraway lands but on the monster within. And one can note the odd relationship
between them. Beal’s conception of the monster as expressing das Unheimliche can be helpful here.
He wants to say more than that monsters embody a violation of a person’s normative values. Das
Unheimliche, the un-home-ly, is not just out there. As the saying goes, the call is coming from inside
the house. He terms this the paradox of the monstrous.155 David Gilmore in his Monsters: Evil
Beings, Mythical Beasts and All Manner of Imaginary Terrors (2002) makes a similar observation.
He promotes a psychoanalytical perspective with regard to monsters. He avers that the monster is
“not simply a political metaphor, but also a projection of some repressed part of the self.”156 The
monster represents the id, the classical Freudian term for the disturbing and animalistic instincts that
are found deep within the human unconscious, but in an externalized form. This understanding of
the issue offers a psychoanalytic way to explain the cross-cultural trope that monsters, while
conquered by heroes, typically survive to fight another day. 157 In this construal of the topic, the
monster and his overthrow constitute a projection of the id. It is effectively repressed but nonetheless
remains, lurking in the shadows of the human mind. The universality of the trope, in this line of
thinking, accords with the assessment that, despite the diversity of human cultures, the physical nature
of the brain and thus its inner workings remain constant.


          MONSTROUS, ANTHROPOPHAGOUS, ANTEDILUVIAN GIANTS
        The key question for the matter at hand, however, is not how the brain works. Rather it is -
how can monster theory assist our efforts to interpret the giants of the Book of the Watchers? A
Freudian, psychological perspective towards the issue strikes me as interesting. But very little is
known about whoever wrote the literature of 1 Enoch, which complicates speculation about their
psyches. The story of Watchers, however, clearly accords with the cannibalism that is a prominent
object of study in monster theory. Our own culture’s on-going obsession with the zombie apocalypse,
as evident in shows such as The Walking Dead, underscores this point. Gilmore hypothesizes that
cannibalism is “the primary form of human aggression.”158 In his perspective, cannibalism represents

154
    See David Frankfurter, Evil Incarnate: Rumors of Demonic Conspiracy and Satanic Abuse in History (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2006), 77. For an edition of the Acts of Andrew and Matthias, see Dennis R. MacDonald,
The Acts of Andrew and the Acts of Andrew and Matthias in the City of Cannibals (Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1990). Consult
also Lautaro Roig Lanzillota, “Cannibals, Myrmidonians, Sinopeans or Jews? The Five Versions of the Acts of Andrew
and Matthias and Their Sources,” in Wonders Never Cease: The Purpose of Narrating Miracle Stories in the New
Testament and its Religious Environment (ed. M. Labahn and B. J. Lietaert Peerbolte; London: T. & T. Clark, 2006), 221-
43.
155
      Beal, Religion and Its Monsters, 4.
156
  Gilmore, Monsters, 16. See also Jeffery Jerome Cohen, Of Giants: Sex, Monsters, and the Middle Ages (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1999), xii.
157
      Cohen, “Monster Culture,” 4.
158
      Gilmore, Monsters, 186.
                                                                                                           50

our desire to eat laid bare, revealing it to be a primordial, animalistic impulse that can be clearly
discerned as such when cultural norms about what one is supposed eat are removed. Gilmore asserts
further that the ubiquitous human fear of cannibalistic monsters attests the existence within the mind
of a primary desire, the raw and unmitigated urge to eat, which is then projected onto an external
entity, the monster.159 He also thinks that guilt is a core human response to having this disturbing and
yet essential desire. Following this theory, myths and lore about cannibalism signal a kind of
psychological drama, or perhaps fantasy, in which people wrestle with the urge to be both the eater
and the eaten, the expression of cannibalistic impulses and an interest in being devoured, as a product
of the guilt of having alimentary urges that are so disturbing.
         It is not necessary to endorse Gilmore or his orthodox Freudian approach to cannibalism in
toto. His perspective, however, underscores a key point—that the anthropophagous monsters of the
Book of the Watchers can be profitably understood as a way to engage a topic that might be described
as the ethics of food. It is de rigueur in biblical studies for scholars to understand that a central or
core theme in the literature of 1 Enoch is the origin of evil. But it is not evident, in my opinion, that
“evil” is the best descriptor for the behavior of the giants or their motivation, but it depends on how
one defines the term. They are not driven by a malicious intent to kill or harm people. Their actions
are not an effort to carry out a malevolent plot or a master plan to dethrone God. Instead, according
to Watchers, the crisis on earth that necessitated the flood was motivated by the base, animalistic urge
of the giants to eat, run amok (1 Enoch 7). The act of eating food is an essentially destructive activity
that is simultaneously necessary for life to continue. However, the consumptive act with regard to
the giants is harmful for all life on earth. Their horrific rampages occur because their appetites, in a
very literal sense, are unconstrained. They devour the food of humankind, then humans and then
each other. As already discussed, Genesis 9 highlights the perspective that the re-creation of the world
after the flood is predicated on the establishment of restrictions on eating practices. God exhibits
genuine concern about what the people of Israel should put inside their bodies, as is evident from the
copious laws in the Pentateuch regarding diet. One can reasonably interpret the Book of the Watchers
as highlighting this key point, with monsters. The composition offers an intriguing example of how
monsters can help articulate and enforce social norms, a point often emphasized by scholars of the
monstrous.160 Watchers does so with regard to food, by articulating a disturbing account of what
happened on the earth long ago when the desire to eat was wholly unimpeded.


      THE RETURN OF THE REPRESSED? ENUMA ELISH, GENESIS 1, AND
                     THE BOOK OF THE WATCHERS

        I would like to suggest one other way that attending to the theme of monstrosity can help us
better understand the Book of the Watchers in relation to older textual materials in Genesis. As is
well-known in biblical studies, a broadly attested creation motif is the so-called Chaoskampf, the
depiction of the formation of the world not as creatio ex nihilo, as many hold today, but rather as
asserting that the creator god heroically defeated some form of powerful monster who is associated
with chaos.161 While this scholarly trope is plausible, one should stress, as Debra Ballentine reminds
us, that utilization of the word “chaos” to denote the era before the reigning god assumed control
construes the perspective of his own dominion as an objective and neutral term of scholarly



159
      Ibid., 184.
160
      Cohen, “Monster Culture,” 12, argues that “the monster polices the border of the possible.”
161
  Gregory Mobley, The Return of the Chaos Monsters—And Other Backstories of the Bible (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans,
2012), 16-33.
                                                                                                                      51

analysis.162 The parade example of the ancient Near Eastern trope of creation via the killing of a
monster is the Mesopotamian text the Enuma Elish, a work often understood as having been produced
in the late second or early first millennium BCE.163 This composition was for centuries recited at the
Akitu festival, a major ceremony in ancient Babylonian religion. It was celebrated twice a year to
commemorate the spring and fall equinoxes. The spring Akitu festival is also a ceremony for the
New Year. Its most visible and central component involved a procession of a cult statue of Marduk,
the chief god of Babylon, along other deities and the king out of the city, and their return three days
later. This gave spatial and physical expression to a triumphant renewal of the religious-political
order after a brief period of chaos, re-asserting the legitimacy of the normative order with Marduk
and the king at the center.164 This public procession articulated core elements of the drama of the
Enuma Elish itself, the reading of which was a component of this festival.165 In this work the stability
of the world and the rule of the gods is endangered because of the machinations of Tiamat, a
monstrous sea dragon who became the mother of a horde of other monsters. They include snakes and
dragons, along with various hybrid creatures such as scorpion men, fish men, and bull men. Together
they contest the rule of the gods (1.134-46).166 The problem they pose to the gods is resolved by the
deity Marduk. He does more than slay her. He segments her body into pieces and forms the known
world out of those portions. Marduk’s grand victory over Tiamat constitutes the etiology of his
enthronement as king of the gods and provides a rationale for his centrality in the cult of the city of
Babylon.
         Genesis 1 is generally and plausibly thought in biblical studies to have been initially written
in the sixth century BCE by priestly scribes (to whom the so-called P source of the Pentateuch is
attributed), in the context of the Babylonian exile.167 The scribes responsible for it would very likely
have known about the Marduk-Tiamat creation motif of Babylonian religion found in the Enuma
Elish. As mentioned above, this was not an obscure text but at the center of a major Babylonian



162
  Debra Scoggins Ballentine, The Conflict Myth and the Biblical Tradition (New York: Oxford University Press, 2015),
186.
163
   For discussion of the dating of the composition of the Enuma Elish, see W. G. Lambert, Babylonian Creation Myths
(Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns, 2013), 439-44. This source also includes a text and translation of the text (pp. 50-133). One
can also consult Philippe Talon, Enūma Eliš: The Standard Babylonian Creation Myth (Helsinki: The Neo-Assyrian Text
Corpus Project, 2005), and, for an accessible English translation, Stephanie Dalley, Myths from Mesopotamia (Oxford:
Oxford University Press), 228-77.
164
   Lauren Ristvet, Ritual, Performance and Politics in the Ancient Near East (Cambridge; Cambridge University Press,
2014), 153-58; Beate Pongratz-Leisten, Ina šulmi īrub: die Kulttopographische und ideologische Programmatik der
akītu-Prozession in Babylonien und Assyrien im 1. Jahrtausend v. Chr. (Mainz am Rhein: Verlag Philipp von Zabern,
1994). See also Paul J. Kosmin, Time and Its Adversaries in the Seleucid Empire (London/Cambridge, MA: Belknap
Press, 2018), 30-34.
165
   There are different scholarly reconstructions as to how public the recitation of the Enuma Elish was during the Spring
Akitu festival. Compare, for example, Ristvet, Ritual, Performance and Politics, 153 (who describes the ceremony
beginning with a priest publicly reading aloud the Enuma Elish) with Takayoshi Oshima, Babylonian Prayers to Marduk
(Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2011), 36 (who describes the high priest of Esagila, the central temple to Marduk in Babylon,
reciting the poem during the Akitu without any audience). See also Anette Zgoll, “Schauseite, verborgene Seite und
geheime Deutung des babylonischen Neujahrsfestes. Entwurf einer Handlungstheorie von ‚Zeigen und Verbergen,’” in
Die gezeigte und die verborgene Kultur (ed. B. Streck; Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 2007), 165-89. As is clear from the
discussion below, my argument does not hinge on whether the text was recited publicly or not.
166
      Mobley, The Return of the Chaos Monsters, 18.
167
   For a concise overview of why biblical scholars attribute Genesis 1 to a Priestly source, see Rofé, Introduction to the
Composition of the Pentateuch, 18, 36. For a more extensive discussion of this issue, see Mark S. Smith, The Priestly
Vision of Genesis 1 (Minneapolis: Fortress, 2010).
                                                                                                                        52

festival, the Akitu.168 How the Babylonians praised and described the dominion of Marduk changed
how the Israelites in exile extolled their own deity, particularly with regard to creation. With the
priestly authors of Genesis 1, they incorporated some core aspects of the Chaoskampf myth but at the
same time sought to avoid recounting a scenario that was too similar to that of Marduk and Tiamat.
        According to Genesis 1, the foundation of the normative order of the cosmos testifies to the
ability of God to exert his will over the primeval waters which is associated with unformed matter
(tohu va-vohu; NRSV: “a formless void”; Gen 1:2). The term “deep” in Gen 1:2 (tehom), signifying
the watery abyss, is generally regarded as related to the Akkadian name Tiamat. The Bible (to my
chagrin) does not begin with a battle royale between God and a sea dragon. Tiamat, however, lurks
beneath the surface. The chapter puts forward an abstract iteration of this conflict, perhaps to avoid
the suggestion that there is no creature, however powerful, who poses a legitimate threat to God’s
control. This move also avoids the direct inference that there was a time when God was not in control.
But Genesis 1, despite its theological hesitations, incorporates the core idea found in the Chaoskampf
tradition as exemplified by the Enuma Elish by repeatedly asserting that God has full and unfettered
control over the waters, as is clear from Gen 1:6-9, and also by the fact that “the great sea monsters”
(ha-tanninim ha-gedolim) were the first creatures he fashioned—without any sense whatsoever that
they pose a threat (v. 21; cf. Job 40:19). Other biblical texts do not share the same restraint with
regard to asserting that God killed a dragon when he created the world. Psalm 74, for example, praises
his manipulation of the waters during his creation in a way that poetically combines it with his defeat
of a sea monster: “You divided the sea by your might, you broke the heads of the dragons in the
waters; you crushed the heads of Leviathan” (vv. 13-14; cf. 89:10-12; cf. Isa 51:9). The motif of
creation à la Genesis 1 utilizes older ancient Near Eastern creation traditions but, when compared to
the Enuma Elish, the battle with monsters is absent. The Book of the Watchers, through its effort to
portray the flood as the divine defeat of transgressive giants, writes monsters back into the story.
Creation and the flood are thematically parallel in that both delineate the formation of the world via
divine control over water. The Book of the Watchers reasserts the theme of monstrosity not with a
sea dragon but rather through its violent giants and the re-creation of the world through the flood.
The popularity and appeal of monsters offers a way to understand how the monstrous re-emerged into
accounts of the primordial past (the return of the repressed?), after some scribes, such as the priestly
intellectuals responsible for Genesis 1, sought to neuter this theme.


                    THE MONSTROSITY OF THE HELLENISTIC AGE

168
    Even if one does not hold that the Enuma Elish was publicly recited during this festival, it is still likely that exiled
Judeans in Babylon, along with the city’s population in general, knew at least the basic story of the Enuma Elish—that
the natural order was established by Marduk’s defeat of Tiamat, and that this conquest was deployed to legitimate the
authority of the king, by homologizing him with Marduk. The affinities between the Enuma Elish and Genesis 1 do not
require that Judean scribes engaged in a close and careful textual study of the former composition to write the latter, only
that they knew core elements of its narrative. Since the Enuma Elish provided mythic backstory to the very public
procession of the spring Akitu festival, this is a reasonable view.
          Also note that the Enuma Elish itself advocates the teaching of its core theme of the kingship of Marduk to
people at all levels of Babylonian society. It concludes by stressing that one is to teach the fifty names that extol the
dominion of Marduk: “The wise and learned should confer about them, a father should repeat them and teach them to his
son, one should explain them to shepherd and herdsman” (VII.146-48; Lambdin, Babylonian Creation Myths, 133).
          Because of the political utility of the cosmogonic myth of the Enuma Elish, that the victory of Marduk over
Tiamat can legitimate monarchic power, there is also some evidence that the composition was adapted to other spheres
of political power in a Syro-Mesopotamian context. There is for example an Assyrian version of the Enuma Elish that
was promoted by that monarchy which prioritizes not Marduk but Ashur, the state deity of the Assyrian monarchy. This
evidence for the spread and reception of the Enuma Elish, aside from its utilization during the Akitu festival, also speaks
to the possibility that the core narrative elements of the composition were broadly known in the Mesopotamian world and
not restricted to an esoteric priestly elite. See W.G. Lambert, “The Assyrian Recension of Enūma Eliš,” in Assyrien im
Wandel der Zeiten: XXXIXe rencontre assyriologique internationale, Heidelberg, 6.-10. Juli 1992 (ed. H. Waetzoldt;
Heidelberg: Heidelberger Orientverlag, 1997), 77-79.
                                                                                                                 53


         It is helpful, however, to explain the expansion of the monstrous in Watchers beyond that of
Genesis not simply through appeal to a universalist, perennial interest in monsters. It is interesting
to inquire if any more specific insights can be acquired by examining why we see this renewal of the
monstrous in the third century BCE, the time when Watchers was written.169 A traditional explanation
of the giants and their violence is that of Nickelsburg. He argued that they represent the Diadochi
(“successors”), the generals of Alexander the Great who fought brutal wars with each other in the
Near East in the fourth century BCE after the death of the conqueror and the dissolution of his
empire.170 Such an interpretation is possible. But it offers no compelling way to explain why a
representation of these brutal generals would be set in the primordial period. A leading reformulation
of the interpretation of the giants offered by Nickelsburg has been more recently put forward by
Anathea Portier-Young. She argues that Watchers constitutes “symbolic resistance to imperial
violence and hegemony.”171 This constitutes one part of her larger scholarly project, to articulate
Jewish apocalyptic literature and its origins as a form of theological resistance to empire.172 The core
move is not to stress the Diadochi as did Nickelsburg but rather the contemporary difficulties of living
under an empire—violence perpetrated by the state, and its concomitant humiliation and indignation,
that are a natural result of being a subject people under the thumb of a hostile power. In the context
of the third century BCE, Judea was controlled by the Ptolemaic Empire of Egypt and in 198 BCE
dominion over the region shifted to the Seleucid Empire. In Portier-Young’s formulation, Jews in the
third century BCE were powerless to overthrow their unjust rulers by force, so some launched more
cerebral forms of resistance. Watchers offers, according to her formulation, an anti-imperial
alternative construal of the world. Important in this perspective is that Watchers appropriates Greek
myth—the traditional lore of the hegemonic rulers—and repurposes it so that the story now disrupts
their worldview. Watchers’ account of the giants for her represents an inversion of the gigantomachy
of Greek myth, the basic contours of which were laid out above. The Greek gigantes, like the children
of the watchers in 1 Enoch, are violent and upend the normative order. The appropriation of this myth
however in her reading constitutes a type of inversion in that in Watchers the violent giants represent
Hellenistic rulers. The Greeks are recoded as the true barbarians.
         I am, to some extent, sympathetic to the perspectives on the giants offered by Nickelsburg and
Portier-Young. The third century was a time of strife in Judah and was the central site in which a
long series of wars between the Ptolemaic and Seleucid empires, often called the Syrian Wars. It is
certainly possible that the violence of the giants represents the violence of the period. But this
interpretation does not square well with key aspects of Watchers itself. It has already been mentioned
that this viewpoint does not offer a good explanation why the narrative is set in the time of the flood.
Also Watchers very much does relate the antediluvian crimes of the giants to its contemporary world-
-but not to Judah’s Ptolemaic overlords, or any other sort of king. The bodies of the giants are
destroyed but their spirits are condemned to roam the earth and harass humankind as evil spirits (1
Enoch 15). This is an etiology of demonic forces in the world, not of political opponents. While it
is not difficult to construe imperial opponents in demonic terms, a move clearly made for example in
the book of Revelation, the evil spirits of 1 Enoch 15 do things that one finds attributed to evil spirits
cross-culturally, not imperial rulers. The evil spirits for example in particular attack pregnant women,

169
      See also my “Deep Time, the Monstrous, and the Book of the Watchers.”
170
      Nickelsburg, 1 Enoch 1, 170.
171
   Anathea Portier-Young, “Symbolic Resistance in the Book of the Watchers,” in The Watchers in Jewish and Christian
Traditions (ed. Angela Kim Harkins, Kelley Coblentz Bautch, and John C. Endres, S.J.; Minneapolis: Fortress Press,
2014), 39-49 (here 39). See also eadem, “Constructing Imperial and National Identities: Monstrous and Human Bodies
in Book of Watchers, Daniel, and 2 Maccabees,” Interpretation 74 (2020): 159-70.
172
   Anathea Portier-Young, Apocalypse Against Empire: Theologies of Resistance in Early Judaism (Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans, 2011).
                                                                                                     54

because they, as 1 En. 15:12 states, resent that they themselves were born from women. Fearsome
demonic creatures, such as Lamashtu in a Mesopotamian context, or Obyzouth as described in the
late antique Testament of Solomon (ch. 13), take particular pleasure in harming women during the
liminal moment of giving birth. It was a way in antiquity to explain the dangers of giving birth by
positing that particularly powerful spiritual forces would go after pregnant women. The giants do in
Watchers represent and explain problems that contemporary people faced in the third century BCE—
but the difficulties that are enumerated involve topics such as disease and problems in childbirth, not
violence or injustice perpetrated by the state. Portier-Young’s idea that Watchers reconfigures the
Greek gigantomachy works only if one starts from the perspective that the giants represent Hellenistic
rulers. This is a possible but not necessary starting point.
        Moreover, understanding the giants of Watchers as representing the violence of Hellenistic
empire does not fit well with the basic point elucidated in the previous section of this essay—that
Genesis 1 in its account of creation writes the monsters of the Chaoskampf out of the story, whereas
Watchers, in its account of the re-creation of the world through the flood, puts them back in. Genesis
1, as mentioned above, was likely written in the context of the Babylonian exile. The priestly scribes
responsible for this text were among the elites taken there when the powerful Babylonian empire
destroyed Jerusalem and its temple and conquered Judea. The Enuma Elish was a core part of the
majority religion in the context of the exile in Babylon, while the Jews were a minority community.
In this context, as I have already suggested, the priestly writers of Genesis 1 took on elements of the
core act that legitimated Marduk’s sovreignity, his defeat of Tiamat, and applied them to their own
deity while avoiding an explicit and overt connection to the creation myth of the city and its empire
that was subjugating them. The people responsible for Genesis 1 in the sixth century BCE and
Watchers in the third century BCE were both under the thumb of empire—the Babylonians and the
Ptolemies, respectively. In the former case the monsters were written out the story but in the latter
they were written back in. This suggests to me that appeal to living under empire, and all the violence
and injustice which that entails, is in and of itself not sufficient for explaining the watchers myth of
1 Enoch and its giants.
        In terms of how to move forward here too monster studies can be instructive. As mentioned
above, scholars such as Cohen have argued that we should expect a rise in monsters and interest in
them in times of crisis, moments in which normative and conventional explanations are easily seen
as insufficient. The Babylonian exile was humiliating and traumatic. Some biblical texts reflect the
raw emotions of that difficult period. Psalm 137, for example, offers a form of revenge fantasy, . It
depicts Israelites weeping by the rivers of Babylon while being taunted, wishing that Babylonian
infants be bashed to death against rocks. But the Hellenistic period was a crisis of a different sort.
Political violence and imperial aggression were clearly part of the Hellenistic era, as the work of
Portier-Young emphasizes. But the challenges and anxieties of the period should not be reduced to
state violence.
        While the Hellenistic era is a macro-descriptor, a label that extends to several centuries and
very different cultures, two overarching factors can be stressed. One, the Hellenistic period
constitutes an expansion of the boundaries of the known world. Alexander the Great had extensive
military campaigns in India, and the cultures of a vast area, from Egypt to what is today Afghanistan,
came under the influence of a set of similar cultural factors. Despite their differences people were
exposed, often in the medium of the Greek language, not only to Greek culture but also that of other
peoples in a new way. Space does not permit a comprehensive treatment of this complex issue but
this cultural situation led to a degree of epistemological uncertainty and anxiety. Conventional claims
regarding ethnic self-identity had to contend with a new pluralistic environment in which conflicting
constructions of knowledge were in circulation. Berossus (third century BCE), for example, was a
priest of Marduk who wrote in Greek the Babyloniaca, an account of the early history of the world
that prioritized Mesopotamian traditions. He drew on the archaic Mesopotamian apkallu tradition.
These ichthymorphic, antediluvian sages were revered as custodians and originators of antediluvian
wisdom. According to Berossus, foundational aspects of civilization such as writing, mathematics
and agriculture, were bestowed to humankind by a giant fish monster, by the name of Oannes. In the
                                                                                                                     55

Hellenistic era such claims were contested and debated by intellectuals, as part of a vibrant discourse
about the origins of civilization.173 The Egyptians, or at least some Egyptian intellectuals, bristled at
such accounts, as they conflicted with Egyptian accounts of early human history. One Hellenistic
Egyptian philosopher, Chaeremon, also writing in Greek, claimed that this the Babylonian story about
Oannes is a type of ‘fake news’. He asserts that the putative sea monster was really a king of old
disguised in a fish costume.174 Hellenistic culture is defined not simply by the spread of Homer and
Greek ideas throughout the Near East. Various national traditions that had been developed as a way
to make the world intelligible were challenged when the boundaries of the world became larger.
Different scribal intellectuals wrestled with ways to construe human history in universalistic terms
and the origins of knowledge evident throughout the Hellenistic world, such as writing and
astronomy. A common move was to engage in a type of heurematography by positing a single source
of such knowledge, a culture hero, from whom it disseminated outward to other cultures and the rest
of the world.175 As with Berossus on Oannes, scribes often extoled cultural heroes in a way that gave
pride of place to their own indigenous mythic traditions.
        This raises a second important overarching factor regarding the Hellenistic era. A people
generally regarded, even by themselves, as young (the Greeks), conquered several peoples regarded
as much, much older—not just the Jews but also the Egyptians, the Babylonians, and Iranians. Age
and antiquity were important values and were accorded value and respect. In this perspective there
was something ‘backward’ about the Hellenistic era—particularly from the perspective of the ancient
peoples under Greek rule. Not only do they not have national sovereignty—they have more wisdom
and knowledge than their upstart rulers. The son has dominion over the father. This is not only a
political crisis but a cultural one.176 The problem is not simply state violence but also a more
unsettling sense of Unbehagen—a pervading sense of unease and anxiety about the status quo.
        The factors under discussion help explain why there was a renewed interest in the distant,
primordial past in the Hellenistic Near East. It served as a cultural space in which intellectuals of
various ethnicities could highlight the accomplishments and traditions of their own people, while
presenting the knowledge of other cultures as secondary and derivative. At roughly the same time as
Berossus, Manetho, an Egyptian priest of the goddess Neith, wrote a chronology of Egyptian kings
that stresses the profound antiquity of this monarchic tradition.177 While their writings are only
preserved in later sources, the floruit of both Berossus and Manetho makes them roughly
contemporary with the Book of the Watchers. It offers a cultural context that explains why Jewish
scribes in the same period were interested in the primordial epoch, and in articulating it terms of their
own national traditions. Enoch becomes valorized as an antediluvian sage—a viewpoint never
espoused in the Hebrew Bible—whose knowledge is preserved. The book of Jubilees asserts that
Enoch was the originator of writing and was the first to acquire genuine astronomical knowledge
(4:17); the latter claim is implicit in the other booklet of 1 Enoch written in the third century BCE,
the Astronomical Book (chs. 72-82). Both writing and astronomy were common topics in Hellenistic
discourse about the origins of civilization. The desire of these contemporary intellectuals to reach

173
   I deal with this issue at more length in “A Blessed Rage for Order: Apocalypticism, Esoteric Revelation, and the
Cultural Politics of Knowledge in the Hellenistic Age,” HeBAI 5 (2016): 193-211. See also William McCants, Founding
Gods, Inventing Nations: Conquest and Culture Myths from Antiquity to Islam (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2011); Sandra Blakely, Myth, Ritual, and Metallurgy in Ancient Greece and Recent Africa (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2006).
174
      Pieter Willem van der Horst, Chaeremon: Egyptian Priest and Stoic Philosopher (Leiden: Brill, 1987), 10-11.
175
      Leonid Zhmud, The Origin of the History of Science in Classical Antiquity (Berlin: de Gruyter, 2006), 23-44.
176
   Interpreting the Enochic literature of the early Hellenistic age in terms of cultural concerns rather than only state-
sanctioned violence is also endorsed by Reed, Demons, Angels, and Writing, 102-5.
177
      John Dillery, Clio’s Other Sons (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2015).
                                                                                                                    56

back to the deep past and describe it in a way that emphasizes their own native lore testifies to a type
of cultural anxiety evident in the Hellenistic Near East.
        Understanding the Hellenistic era as a time of cultural crisis helps explain why we see a return
of the monstrous in this period. This is not to dismiss the thrust of Portier-Young’s work that imperial
violence and injustice play a role in understanding Enochic literature. My sense is that one should
also consider other cultural factors in order to understand Watchers and its giants. That sense that
something is out of place or not quite right is, as scholars of monsters such as Cohen have emphasized,
a time when we should expect a rise in monstrosity. The cultural backdrop of the early Hellenism of
the Near East, with its anxieties about the new political norm and emerging interest in the primordial
past, offers a way not just to understand why Watchers reformulated traditions found in Genesis 6 in
a way that made them more monstrous but also why the scribes carrying out this textual work were
interested in the antediluvian period in the first place. This also provides a way to understand the
valid parallels that Portier-Young observes between the Greek gigantes and Jewish traditions about
antediluvian sons of angels (which were also recognized in antiquity, as is clear from Josephus [Ant.
1.73]). The relationship between the two myths involving the defeat of primordial colossal warriors
is not necessarily one inverting the other. As is clear from the Pergamon altar, in the second century
BCE the gigantes of Greek myth were depicted in monstrous form, as having snakes for legs and
wings, the hybrid combination of elements of various animals.178 If one looks at older visual
depictions of the depictions of the gigantomancy, the gigantes are not anguipedes but rather hoplites,
that is, humanoid warriors, as at the Siphnian Treasury in Delphi (6th century BCE) or in
thedescription of them in Hesiod (Theog. 185), whose writings are often dated to the 8th century
BCE.179 With the gigantes one can discern an increased monstrosity in the Hellenistic period. This
does not contrast but rather complements the move from the sons of the angels in Genesis 6 as
legendary warriors to the monstrous giants recounted in Watchers. Both the Greek and Jewish
examples testify to a cultural environment during the Hellenistic age in which traditions about the
primordial past could be re-imagined in a way that made them more monstrous. The issue surely
requires further elaboration, but here I have attempted to sketch out the basic cultural contours of the
period in which these developments can be understood.


                                               CONCLUSION

       One can reasonably understand the Enochic Book of the Watchers as engaging in a kind of
monstrous exegesis. The scribal intellectuals who produced the work in the third century BCE
reconfigured older textual traditions regarding the flood in a way that made the sons of the angels
much more monstrous. The composition reinvents the gibbōrîm from legendary warriors into
cannibalistic giants. As I have tried to show, this development is not simply an exegetical issue. I
have also attempted to demonstrate that this transformation is intelligible in the Hellenistic context in
which the book was written. The field of monster studies helps us understand the giants’
anthropophagous rampages as not only acts of profound violence but also a way to delineate social
norms and conduct, especially regarding food, by putting forward disturbing portrayals of life on
earth before such norms were in effect. The heightened monstrosity of the Book of the Watchers,

178
   Carlos A. Picón and Seán Hemingway, eds. Pergamon and the Hellenistic Kingdoms of the Ancient World (New York:
The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2016); Erich Gruen, “Culture as Policy: The Attalids of Pergamon,” in From Pergamon
to Sperlonga: Sculpture and Context (ed. N.T. de Grummond and B.S. Ridgway; Berkeley: University of California Press,
2000), 17-31; Max Kunze, Der Pergamonaltar: Seine Geschichte, Entdeckung und Rekonstruktion. 1992, Staatliche
Museen zu Berlin Antikensammlung Preußischer Kulturbesitz (Mainz am Rhein: Verlag Philipp von Zabern, 1992).
179
   Richard T. Neer, “Framing the Gift: The Politics of the Siphnian Treasury at Delphi,” Classical Antiquity 20 (2001):
273-344; Livingston Vance Watrous, “The Sculptural Program of the Siphnian Treasury at Delphi,” AJA 86 (1982): 159-
72.
                                                                                                    57

discernible when compared to older Genesis traditions, becomes intelligible in the context of a climate
of cultural anxiety and epistemological uncertainty that was pervasive in the early Hellenistic period.
It is a valuable exercise to engage ancient Jewish literature through the lens of monster theory.
