at Cl 


vi 
0 


School of Theolo 


iii 





| 


| 


384206 
































LNA. 


THE APOCRYPHA * 
AND PSEUDEPIGRAPHA 


OF THE 


QUE De S AVE 


PN E NG TSE 


VITH INTRODUCTIONS AND CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTES. 
TOVTHE SEVERAL BOOKS 


EDITED IN CONJUNCTION WITH MANY SCHOLARS BY 


R. &. CHARLES, D.Litt, DD: 


FELLOW OF MERTON COLLEGE, OXFORD 
FELLOW OF THE BRITISH ACADEMY 


VOLUME II 
PSEUDEPIGRAPHA 
f 

Gyr KD 


AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 


Or 3 








Theology Geen e - ae : by 
vi SCHOOL OF TfOLOGY . , ; re, 
Se ool Saw GLAREMON Taam 
3 California she TD are ey . 









OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS oA ale a 
“LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW NEW YORK ere 
TORONTO MELBOURNE BOMBAY 

HUMPHREY MILFORD M.A, | 


PUBLISHER ‘TO THE UNIVERSITY 









et 





PREFACE 


For students both of the Old and New Testaments the value of the non-Canonical 
Jewish literature from 200 B.c. to a.p. 100 is practically recognized on every side 
alike by Jewish and Christian scholars. But hitherto no attempt has been made to 
issue an edition of this literature as a whole in English... Indeed, such an undertaking 
would have been all but impossible at an earlier date, seeing that critical editions of | 
some of the Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha have not been published till within 
the last few years. : 


The method observed in thts work. 


In all the contributions one and the same method has been observed. Each 
contribution consists of an introduction, an English translation from the best critical 
text—in a few cases the Revised Version has been adopted and emendations suggested 
in the notes—and of a critical and exegetical commentary.2. As regards the intro- 
ductions, the subjects dealt with in them have, so far as possible, been treated in 
the same order to facilitate the use of the work. Though a large discretion has 
naturally been given to the various editors, the following order has more or less 
been observed as a guide or been actually carried out. 


§ 1. Short account of the book, embodying its leading features and the editor's 
chief conclusions. 
Title of the book. 
Tie NSS. 
The Ancient Versions. 
Date of (a) the original text, (6) of the Ancient Versions. 
Integrity or composite nature of the text. 
Authorship. 
Influence of the book on later literature—(a) Jewish ; (4) Christian. 
Theology of the book. 
10. Bibliography— 
(z) Chief editions of the text (and of the Ancient Versions). 
(6) Chief critical inquiries. 
(c) Chief editions of the book. 


: 


Se oe 


) 
0 
) 
) 
0 
) 
) 
) 
Q 


1 Kautzsch published an edition in German in 1900, but on a smaller scale than the present work and embracing 


"er books of this literature (vol. i. 1-507; vol. ii. 1-540). 
2 In the case of Sirach and Tobit the editors have been allowed much beyond the normal number of pages for 


sir critical apparatus, which they have used to good purpose. 
i iii 


~~ 


PREFACE 


The extent of the present work. 


The first volume contains what is generally known as the Apocrypha Proper, 
which constitutes the excess of the Vulgate over the Hebrew Old Testament, which 
excess was in turn borrowed from the LXX. But this volume differs from the 
Apocrypha Proper at once in the way of excess and in the way of defect. 3 Maccabees 
has been added after 2 Maccabees, since it is contained in many MSS. of the 
LXX, and 4 Ezra has been transferred to Volume ii since it is essentially a 
Pseudepigraph. 

Volume ii contains all the remaining extant non-Canonical Jewish books written 
between 200 B.c. and a.D. 100 with possibly one or two exceptions. The greater part 
of these books have hitherto been accessible only in expensive editions—such as 
Jubilees, 1 Enoch, Testaments of the XII Patriarchs, 2 Baruch, 4 Ezra, Psalms 
of Solomon, Pirké Aboth, the Story of Ahikar, &c. As regards the last two, it is 
not necessary to make any apology for their introduction into the present work, 
although they do not properly fall within the true limits above defined, but they 
were used, at all events partially, by Jewish readers within this period, nor can they 
be rightly designated Pseudepigraphs. The Fragments of a Zadokite Work are of 
an historical character, and are valuable in throwing light on a lost chapter of Jewish 
religious history. They contain likewise apocalyptic material of an interesting nature. 


‘The General Editor, in conclusion, wishes to express his thanks to the Delegates 
of the Press for undertaking this work, and to the Officers of the Press, whose help 
and counsel were always ready to meet each difficulty as it arose. The Editor is 
also under deep obligations to the many scholars who, notwithstanding the pressure 
of other duties, have yet given themselves so unsparingly to the tasks they had 
undertaken, that in every instance most valuable service has been rendered to the 
student and the scholar, while in not a few instances their contributions form actual 
monographs within the limits assigned. His thanks are due to Messrs. A. and C. Black, 
the publishers of his editions of Jubilees, Martyrdom of Isaiah, Testament of the XII 
Patriarchs, Assumption of Moses, 2 Baruch, for permission to reprint the translation 
and make use of the introduction and notes contained in those editions. Finally, he 
would acknowledge his indebtedness to the Rev. A. LI. Davies, who has acted 
throughout as his secretary and also made the General Index. 


R. H. CHARLES: 


24 BARDWELL ROAD, OXFORD. 
March, 1913. 


ee 


CONTENTS OF VOLUME II 


PAGES 
CONTRIBUTORS . Vi 
THE PSEUDEPIGRAPHA OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 
GENERAL INTRODUCTION (Charles) . : : : : ; : ; : Vii 
ADDENDA ET CORRIGENDA é : , : ; ; ; : : : ; xii 


PRIMITIVE HISTORY REWRITTEN FROM THE STANDPOINT OF fee LAW— 
THE BOOK OF JUBILEES (Charles) . é : . ‘ : : : ; 1-82 


SACRED LEGENDS— 


ie bevrnk OF ARISTEAS (Andrews)? 29° AO) ) ¢ ,. Lo Se ee 83-122 
THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE (Wells) . d : d ; 4 123-154 
THE MARTYRDOM OF ISAIAH (Charles). tars Beer , 155-162 
APOCALYPSES— 
1 ENOCH (Charles). : : : : b , : 163-281 
THE TESTAMENTS OF THE XII PATRIARCHS aie : : . : 282-367 
THE SIBYLLINE ORACLES (Lanchester)  . : : : k 368-406 
THE ASSUMPTION OF MOSES (Charles) . ee : : : AOR aes 
2 ENOCH, OR THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH (Forbes and 1 Chaves) 425-469 
2 BARUCH, OR THE SYRIAC APOCALYPSE OF BARUCH (Charles). : ; 470-526 
a BARUCH, OR THE GREEK APOCALYPSE OF BARUCH (Hughes) . at ; 527-541 
4 Ezra (Box) . : : . 3 ‘ : : ; ‘ : x E 542-624 
PSALMS— 
THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON (Gray) . : 4 ; 3 : ANTS 625-652 


ETHICS AND WISDOM LITERATURE— 


4 MACCABEES (Townshend) ; : : : : , : ; ; : 653-085 

PirKE ABOTH (Herford) . é ‘ : : , : : i : 686-714 

‘THE STORY OF AHIKAR (Harris, Lewis, coer : : : A 2 715-784 
HISTORY— 

THE FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK (Charles). ; } ‘ : : 785-834 


GENERAL INDEX : : : ; : : ee : : . + 835-871 





CONTRIBUTORS TO: VOIUiiE 


ANDREWS, HERBERT T., B.A. (Oxford), D.D. (Aberdeen), Professor of New Testament Exegesis, 
Hackney and New College, London: The Letter of Aristeas. 


Box, G. H. (see list of Contributors to Vol. I): 4 Ezra. 


CHARLES, R. H.: 2 Baruch, 1 Enoch, 2 Enoch, Martyrdom of Lsaiah, Book of Fubilees, Assumption 
of Moses, Testaments of the XII Patriarchs, Fragments of a Zadokite Work. 


CONYBEARE, F. C., M.A., D.D. (Giessen), formerly Fellow of University College, Oxford ; Fellow of 
the British Academy ; Officier d’Académie: Story of Akikar (Armenian Version). 


Davies, A. LL, M.A., formerly Scholar of Queen’s College, Oxford: The General Index. 


FORBES, NEVILL, M.A., Reader in Russian and the other Slavonic Languages: 2 Enoch 
(translation). 


GRAY, G. BucHANAN, D.D., D.Litt., Professor of Hebrew and Old Testament Exegesis, Mansfield 
College, Oxford: The Psalms of Solomon. 


HARRIS, J. RENDEL, Litt.D., LL.D., Director of Studies at the Friends’ Settlement, Woodbrooke : 
Lhe Story of Ahikar (Syriac, Aramaic, and Greek Versions), 


HERFORD, R. TRAVERS, B.A.: Pirké Aboth: The Sayings of the Fathers. 
HUGHES, H. MaLpwyn, D.D. (London); 3 Baruch. 


LANCHESTER, H.-G. O:, M.Ag formerly Fellow of Pembroke College, Cambridge: The Stbylline 
Oracles. 


LEWIS, AGNES SMITH, Hon. Phil. Doc. (Halle, Wittenberg), LL.D. (St. Andrews), D.D. (Heidelberg) : 
Lhe Story of Ahikar (the Arabic Version). 


TOWNSHEND, R. B., M.A., formerly Scholar of Trinity College, Cambridge: 4 Maccabees. ‘i 


Wetts, L. Si A. M.A, formerly Tutor in Ripon Theological College; The Books of Adam ~ 
and Eve, 


Pa reObpUCTION TO VOLUME. Il, 


§ 1. The apocalyptic and legalistic sides of pre-Christian Pharisaism—starting originally from the 


same source—adeveloped ultimately into Christianity and Talmudic Fudaism. 


_ APOCALYPTIC Judaism and legalistic Judaism were not in pre-Christian times essentially 
antagonistic. Fundamentally their origin was the same. Both started with the unreserved recog- 
nition of the supremacy of the Law. This is to be expected in regard to legalistic Pharisaism, which 
was therein only adopting the teaching of the priesthood.1_ But it is enforced also in apocalyptic 
Pharisaism. Thus the most universalistic and ethical of all the apocalyptic writings, i.e. the Testa- 
ments of the XII Patriarchs, declares that this Law is ‘the light that lighteth every man’. To all 
Jewish apocalyptic writers the Law was of eternal validity, but they also clung fast to the validity of 
the prophetic teaching as the source of new truth and the right of apocalyptic as its successor in 
this respect. We have early evidence of this conjunction of legalism and apocalyptic in the Book 
of Joel. The Law is there recognized as authoritative, its ritual as of the highest import, while at the 
same time the impending advent of the kingdom of God is depicted in highly apocalyptic colouring. 
In the Book of Jubilees, the narrowest book that ever emanated from legalistic Judaism, the same 
conjunction is manifest, though naturally the theology is of a much more advanced type. 

Thus devotion to the Law is the note that characterizes apocalyptic from its earliest beginnings. 
It appears in the declaration of Mattathias, the father of the Maccabees; it was voiced by the Jews 
in their uprising against Caligula’s attempt to set up his statue in the Temple, and it is stereotyped 
in words placed in the mouth of the Quietist saint in the Assumption of Moses: ‘ Let us die rather 
than transgress the commands of the God of our fathers’ (ix. 6). 

This original and fundamental identity of apocalyptic and legalistic Pharisaism in respect to 
devotion to the Law needs to be emphasized, because Jewish scholars in the past, and to a consider- 
able extent in the present, have denied to apocalyptic its place in the faith of pre-Christian orthodox 
Judaism. This action on their part is unintelligible, seeing that Talmudic Judaism, no less than 
Christianity, owes its spiritual conceptions of the future to apocalyptic. 

The affinity then between Jewish apocalyptic and legalism is essential, since the Law was for both 
valid eternally, but when apocalyptic passed over into Christianity and therein naturally abandoned 
this view of the Law, it became in a measure anti-legalistic.? Even before the Christian era each of 
these two sides of Pharisaism necessarily tended to lay more and more emphasis on the chief factor 
in its belief and study to the almost complete exclusion of the other, and thus legalistic Pharisaism 
in time drove out almost wholly the apocalyptic element as an active factor (though it accepted some 
of its developments) and became the parent of Talmudic Judaism, whereas apocalyptic Judaism 
developed more and more the apocalyptic, i.e. prophetic, element, and in the process came to 
recognize, as in 4 Ezra, the inadequacy of the Law for salvation. From this it follows that the 
Judaism that survived the destruction of the Temple, being almost wholly bereft of the apocalyptic 
wing which had passed over into Christianity, was not the same as the Judaism of an earlier date. 
Before A.D. 70 Judaism was a Church with many parties: after A.D. 70 the legalistic party succeeded 
in suppressing its rivals, and so Judaism became in its essentials a Sect. In modern times Judaism 


is striving to recover the liberty of prophesying. 


1 One of the elements that contributed to this recognition was the identification of the Law and Wisdom. This 
is already an accomplished fact in Sirach, though it had probably been long a current belief: cp. xix. 10, xxiv. 23: 
see vol. i. 305 sq. But the most absolute assertion of the supremacy and everlastingness of the Law in pre-Christian 
Judaism is to be found in Jubilees. See this vol., 1 sq. : 

2 The Law is not mentioned even once in the great New Testament Apocalypse. 


vil 


INTRODUCTION TO VOLUME II 


§ 2. Fewesh apocalyptic has been always pseudonymous from the third century B.C. onwards. This 
pseudonymity due to the absolute supremacy of the Law, which left no room for prophecy. The 
prophetic spirit cannot openly declare itself in Fudaism save by a breach with Talmudic 


Fudaism. 

Apocalyptic works written before the third century B.C. were not pseudonymous. Joel is 
perhaps the latest apocalyptist in the Old Testament whose work was not pseudonymous. But 
Zech. ix-xiv and Isaiah xxiv-xxvii—not to speak of other later additions to the earlier prophets— 
were in all probability pseudonymous. At all events, from the third century B.C. onwards apoca- 
lyptic has always been pseudonymous in Judaism. On the other hand in Christianity, for the first 
century at any rate, apocalyptic ceased to be pseudonymous, and the seer came forward in his own 
person. Of these strange and conflicting phenomena explanations have been advanced by various 
scholars, and the latest by Gunkel, but they are all partial or inadequate. The present writer 
is of opinion that he has arrived at an hypothesis which will satisfy all the conditions of the 
problem. 

We have already adverted to the fact that in the third century B.c. the Law had come to be 
conceived as the final and supreme revelation of God. When once this idea of an inspired Law— 
adequate, infallible, and valid for all time—had become an accepted dogma of Judaism, as it became 
in the post-Exilic period, there was no longer room for independent representatives of God appearing 
before men, such as the pre-Exilic prophets. God had, according to the official teachers of the 
Church, spoken His last and final word through the Law, and when the hope was expressed that in 
the coming age a prophet will arise, he was only conceived as one whose task was to decide ques- 
tions of ritual or priestly succession, or legal interpretation in accordance with the Law. Thus in 
1 Macc. iv. 46 the stones of the defiled altar of burnt-offering were to be put aside till a prophet 
arose, and similarly in xiv. 41 (cf. ix. 27) the high-priesthood of Simon was to be provisionally acknow- 
ledged till a prophet arose, who could decide on the validity of his high-priesthood. Accordingly 
the first fact we are to recognize is, that from the time of Ezra and Nehemiah the Law has not 
only assumed the functions of the ancient pre-Exilic prophets, but it has also, so Sar as tt lay in tts 
power, made the revival of such prophecy an impossibility. The prophet who issued a prophecy 
under his own name after the time of Ezra and Nehemiah could not expect a hearing unless his 
prophecy had the imprimatur of the Law. 

This is exactly the view of the Rabbinic scholars. Thus they taught that whereas the Prophets 
and Hagiographa will in the future cease to be, for there is nothing in them which is not suggested 
in the Law (Jer. Meg. 70d), the Law itself would endure for ever (Taanit 9a); and that ‘Any 
prophet who attempted to annul one of its laws would be punished by death’ (Toseph. xiv. 13), 
and that ‘ though all mankind should combine, they could not abolish one yod of it’ (Cant. Rava 
Lev. R. xix; Num. R. xvii, &c.). (See Jewish Encye. xii. 197.) 

It is now clear, I think, that from Nehemiah’s time onward prophecy could not gain a hearing, 
whether the prophecy was genuine—that is, appeared under the name of its actual author—or was 
anonymous, unless it was acceptable in the eyes of the Law. From the class of genuine and 
anonymous works we pass on to the third division, the pseudonymous. There are at all events two 
of them in the Old Testament, Ecclesiastes and Daniel. With the former we have here no concern. 
But how are we to explain the pseudonymity of Daniel and the other apocalyptic works of the second 
century B.C., such as Enoch, Jubilees, and the Testaments of the XII Patriarchs? This pseudo- 
nymity has already in part been explained. These apocalyptists do not merely repeat the old truths, 
which in so many cases had become the mere shibboleths of a petrified orthodoxy, they not only 
challenged many of the orthodox views of the time and condemned them, but they also carried 


_ 7 Nay more, according to Zech. xiii. 1-5 (a late work written from the priestly standpoint), if a man declared 
himself to bea prophet his father and his mother were to put him to death. By such drastic measures prophecy was 
driven forth from the Losom of Judaism, and has never since been suffered to return. The task of leading the people 
into more spiritual conceptions, alike as regards the present life and that which is to come, devolved henceforth on 
apocalyptic, and that a pseudonymous apocalyptic. : 


Vill 


INTRODUCTION TO VOLUME II 


forward the revelation of God in the provinces of religion, ethics, and eschatology. Against the 
reception of such fresh faith and truth the Law stood in the way, unless the books containing them 
came under the aegis of certain great names in the past. Against the claims and authority of such 
names the official representatives of the Law were in part reduced to silence, at all evets in the case 
of the Book of Daniel. But there is another ground for the adoption of pseudonymity, and when 
we combine it with the autocracy claimed and exercised by the Law we have the grounds for which 
we are in search. This second ground is the formation of the threefold Canon of the Law, the 
Prophets, and the Hagiographa. Before the formation of the prophetic Canon anonymous prophetic 
writings could gain currency and acceptance on the ground of their inherent worth, but when once 
the prophetic Canon was closed, no book of a prophetic character could gain canonization as such. 
Now the collection of the Prophets existed pretty much in its present form about 200 B.C., though 
additions may have been made to Hosea, Isaiah, and Zechariah, &c., subsequently to that date. Into 
the Hagiographa were received all books of a religious character, of which the date was believed to 
go back as far as to the time of Ezra. To this third division of the Canon books were admitted 
down to A.D. 100, and the last were Canticles, Ecclesiastes, and Esther. Daniel was admitted to 
this third Canon at some period in the second century B.C. 

Daniel was admitted into the Canon in the belief that it was written by the ancient worthy of 
that name; but not among the Prophets, for the prophetic Canon was closed, but among the 
Hagiographa. The example of Daniel was followed by Jewish apocalyptic down to the thirteenth 
century A.D. It was pseudonymous and remained pseudonymous; for the Law was supreme, 
inspiration was officially held to be dead, and the Canon was closed. Moreover, all the great Jewish 
apocalypses which were written before A.D. 10, and which carried on the mystical and spiritual side 
of religion as opposed to the legalistic, Judaism dropped and banned after its breach with Chris- 
tianity, just as it dropped and banned the Greek translation of the Old Testament. Thereupon 
Legalism became absolute, and determined henceforth the character of Judaism. Apocalyptic, 
which had exercised a determining influence in many of the great crises of the nation, and had 
given birth to and shaped the higher theology of Judaism, was driven from its position of 
secondary authority, and either banished absolutely or relegated wholly into the background. 
Owing to this fact Jewish scholars like Jost and Graetz have denied the great significance of 
apocalyptic in Judaism. But this blunder is every day becoming more impossible, and now we 
find that Jewish scholars like Buttenwieser (Jewish Encyc. i. 676) maintain that the courage and 
persistency of the Jews in their faith, their indomitable hope under persecution, their scorn of 
death, were all nourished by apocalyptic from the times of the Maccabees down to the thirteenth 
century A.D. ‘The darker the present grew... the more eagerly did their minds turn to the 
comfort offered by apocalyptic promises, which predicted the end of their suffering and the dawn 
of their delivery.’ 

All Jewish apocalypses, therefore, from 200 B.C. onwards were of necessity pseudonymous if 
they sought to exercise any real influence on the nation; for the Law was everything, belief in 
inspiration was dead amongst them, and their Canon was closed.’ 


§ 3. The ethical advance in Fudaism. 


Prophecy has always been recognized as the greatest ethical force in the ancient world. Such 
also was apocalyptic in its time, and yet an attempt has recently been made by advanced liberals 
to differentiate prophecy and apocalyptic on the ground that apocalyptic and ethics are distinct, and 
that ethics are the kernel and apocalyptic the husk which Christianity shed when it ceased to need 
it. How any scholar who was really acquainted with the texts could make such a statement 
I cannot understand. Apocalyptic was essentially ethical. To use the mixed metaphor of St. Paul, 
it was rooted and grounded in ethics, and that an ethics based on the essential righteousness of God. 


1 See my Lschatology®, pp. 193-205. 
ix 


INTRODUCTION TO VOLUME II 


In every crisis of the world’s history, when the good cause was overthrown and the bad triumphant, 
its insistent demand was ever: ‘Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?’ and its uncom- 
promising optimism, its unconquerable faith under the most overwhelming disasters, was : ‘ God reigns, 
and righteousness shall ultimately prevail ’. 

The ethical element is the fundamental element in the chief books of this literature. What else 
but an inexpugnable sense of truth and duty to truth inspire the refusal of the three children in 
Daniel to fall down and worship the image that the king had set up? When the king demands: 
‘Who is that God that shall deliver you out of my hands?’ mark the splendid heroism of their reply : 
‘ There is a God whom we serve who is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and He will 
deliver us out of thy hand, O king. But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve 
thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up’ (iii. 17 sqq.). 

Now let us turn to the apocalyptic books outside the Canon. 

What an expressive ethical statement is that in Jubilees (xxi. 22) addressed to Israel ! 

‘ Beware lest thou walk in their ways 
And tread in their paths, 
And sin a sin unto death against the Most High God, 
And so He deliver thee back again into the grip of thy transgression.’ 

Or, turning to a different theme, let us hear what the Testaments of the XII Patriarchs say of 
the faithful doer of the word of God: 

‘Every man that knoweth the law of the Lord shall be honoured, 
And shall not be a stranger whithersoever he goeth... 
For though there be a leading into captivity, 

And cities and lands be destroyed, 
And gold and silver and every possession perish, 
The wisdom of the wise can nought take away, 
Save the blindness of ungodliness, 
Or the callousness (that comes) of sin... . 
Even among his enemies shall wisdom be a glory to him, 
And ina strange country a fatherland, 
And in the midst of foes shall prove a friend.’ 
(1. Levi, xiti.<9, 7—8,) 

Or again, in 2 Enoch (xliii. 2-3):* As one year is more honourable than another, so is one man 
more honourable than another. This man on account of having possessions, that man on account of 
the wisdom of the heart, another on account of understanding, another on account of purity, another 
on account of strength... but let it be heard everywhere; there is none greater than he that 
feareth God.’ 

Or again, when the apocalyptist says of the unceasing service of an order of heavenly beings : 
‘They rest not day nor night ; for unto them thanksgiving is rest.’ 

There are numberless other passages showing the moral depth and inwardness of this literature. 
What nobler advice could the best ethical Christian teacher give to a defeated rival than this i4 Vea 
man is prospered beyond you, do not be vexed, but even have ‘recourse unto prayer on his behalf, 
that he may be prospered to the full’ (T. Gad vii.1)? Or again: ‘If any man seeketh to do evil 
unto you, do him a good turn, and pray for him, and so from all evil ye shall be redeemed of the 
Lord’ (T. Jos. xviii. 2). Or again : ‘The holy man is merciful to him that revileth him, and holdeth 
his peace’ (T. Benj. v. 4). 

Now it would be possible to fill many pages in setting forth the teaching of apocalyptic on such 
ethical subjects as conscience, courage, endurance, longsuffering, justice, truthfulness, temperance, 
singleness of heart, deceit, calumny, folly ; on religious themes of an ethical character as love, faith, 
works, forgiveness, compassion, humility, reverence, covetousness, lust ; or on metaphysical themes 
influencing ethics, as foreknowledge, freedom, determinism, heredity, individualism, universalism ; 
but we have established our thesis sufficiently for our present purpose. 


role Reprinted from my Eschatology (2nd ed.), 190 sqq., where the renderings differ slightly in diction from those 
given in this volume. 


x 


INTRODUCTION TO VOLUME II 


The ethical teaching on these subjects in apocalyptic is a vast advance on that of the O.T., and 
forms the indispensable link which in this respect connects the O.T. with the N.T. 

This ethical element is present also in Talmudic literature, but somehow it lacks the fire and 
inspiration that distinguish it in the Pseudepigrapha. It is more nearly related to the average 
morality and practical wisdom of the Proverbs of the Old Testament. The chief work on Ethics 
in the Talmud, which is reproduced in the Jewish Book of Common Prayer, i.e. The Sayings 
of the Fathers, has been translated and added to this volume, in order that the student might 
have before him the best that Later Judaism produced in the domain of Ethics. It will be 
obvious even to the most cursory reader that a great gulf divides the Ethics of the Testaments 
of the XII Patriarchs, and even those of 2 Enoch, from these excellent but very uninspiring 
sayings of Jewish sages belonging to the legalistic wing of Judaism. It is quite true that many 
a fine saying is found in the other tractates of the Talmud and other Rabbinic writings, but the 
harvest that rewards the diligent reaper is slight in comparison of the toil, and the number of 
really fine sayings that were uttered before A.D. 100 is far from great. 


1 For avery favourable account of this side of Rabbinic Judaism see Schechter, Some Aspects of Rabbinic Theology, 
1909. ‘The chapter on the ‘ Joy of the Law’ (pp. 148-69) is well worth study. It shows that in all ages in Judaism 
the joy that the Psalmists felt in the service of God was experienced likewise by many a Jew in the fulfilment of the 
innumerable later requirements of the Law—requirements which to the non-Jew could only prove an intolerable and 
unspiritual burden, and which were felt even by many spiritually-minded Jews to be a yoke that neither they nor their 
fathers had been able to bear (Acts xv.10). But this type of mind which reaches its fullest satisfaction in unquestioning 
submission to an external commandment is, of course, to be found in all religions. It is not progressive or prophetic 
in character, but it helps to preserve some of the best elements in the past. See also Oesterley and Box, Zhe Religion 
and the Worship of the Synagogue, chap. vii. 


ADDENDA ET CORRIGENDA TO VOLUME II 


P. 386 (The Sibylline Books). 

Sibyll. III. 396-397. Instead of the rendering in the text, which is right indeed grammatically, we should 
unquestionably render as follows : — 

‘Yet after leaving one root, which the Destroyer shall cut off 
From among ten horns, he shall put forth a side shoot? 
The ‘one root’ was Antiochus V, Eupator, who was murdered by Demetrius I, son of Seleucus IV. He was the 
last of ten horns, i.e. ten kings. We appear here to have an almost contemporary interpretation of the ten 
horns in Daniel vii. 7-8, for the latest date of this section is 140 B.c. The above rendering has the support of 
Rzach, Geffcken, and Schiirer—Gen. Eprror. 

P. 473 (2 Baruch). 1. 23 from bottom read ‘ Sukka’ for ‘Sakka’, 

P. 474 seq. On these pages I have given an analysis of the various elements of 2 Baruch, with their approxi- 
mate dates from a.p. 60 to 100. But owing to the fact that Mr. Box, in his admirable Commentary on 4 Ezra, 
has accepted Rosenthal’s view that 2 Baruch was derived from the school of R. Aqiba and written in the year 
A.D. 115, it is necessary to consider the grounds from which Rosenthal draws this conclusion. Mr. Box’s Com- 
mentary was not published when the edition of 2 Baruch for the present work was prepared. We shall now 
deal with Rosenthal’s thesis, 

Rosenthal (Vier apokryphische Bucher aus der Zeit und Schule R. Akibas, Berlin, 1885) sought to prove 
that the Assumption of Moses, 4 Ezra, 2 Baruch, and the Book of Tobit were written by members of the school 
of R. Aqiba. 

As regards the Assumption of Moses and the Book of Tobit no scholar would now agree with Rosenthal. 
But for the learned and admirable Commentary of Mr. Box on 4 Ezra it would not be necessary to reconsider 
Rosenthal’s views on 2 Baruch. Mr. Box (Lhe Ezra Apocalypse, p. \xv sq.), however, writes: ‘We may there- 
fore conclude that our book (4 Ezra) emanates from a school of apocalyptic writers who reflect the school of 
Shammai ; just as the companion Apocalypse of Baruch (i.e. 2 Baruch) represents an apocalyptic school under 
the influence of Aqiba. This important distinction has been well brought out by Rosenthal.’ 

With this statement I must join issue. On Pp. 95-100 Rosenthal gives five grounds from which he con- 
cludes the influence of R. Aqiba in 2 Baruch. The fifth is so beside the mark and irrelevant—being common- 
places about the last plagues—that I will take no account of it here. The rest, indeed, are not much better, but 
need to be considered owing to Mr. Box’s acceptance of Rosenthal’s conclusion. These are as follows : 

(1) 2 Baruch (xi, x sq.) and Aqiba (Sire on Deut. § 43) alike complain of the prosperity of Rome and the 
desolation of Zion, and both alike comfort their teaders with the promised restoration of Zion. This would 
naturally be a commonplace with most Jewish writers after a.p. 70, just as corresponding complaints and hopes 


coming restoration of Jerusalem. But the same actual combination of complaint and comfort with regard to 
Rome and Jerusalem respectively is found in the Psalms of Solomon ii. 1 Sqq-, 30-41, and the Assumption of 
Moses vi. 8-9, x. 8-10. Hence no dependence of 2 Baruch on Aqiba can be deduced from this fact. 

(2) Both believed strongly in the freedom of the will. But this does not prove anything. According to 
Josephus (Azz. xiii. 5. 9) the Sadducees believed in the complete freedom of the will, while the Pharisees believed 
alike in the freedom of the will and in Providence. Now according to this view the teaching of our book is 
that of ordinary Pharisaism. Thus in A’ (i.e. liv-Ixxiv) we find the vigorous assertion of free-will: ‘each of us has 
been the Adam of his own soul’ (liv. 19). And yet throughout the section the supremacy of Providence is acknow- 
ledged ; cf. Ixix. 2, Ixx. 2, Exactly the same teaching is found in the Psalms of Solomon. Thus in ix. 7 we have: 

‘Our works are subject to our own choice and power 
To do right or wrong in the works of our hands ; 
And in Thy righteousness Thou visitest the sons of men.’ 
Beebe v. 4-6. Philo also (Quod Deus sit immutabths 10) speaks in the strongest terms of man’s God- 
reedom. 

(3) The next ground adduced by Rosenthal is that 2 Baruch and R. Aqiba alike bring forward the 
chastening effects of adversity. But this teaching is found in Deut. viii, 55 Ps. xxxii. 1, 5, Ixxiii. 14, Ixxxix, 
30734, CXIX. 71, 753 Prov. iii. 12, xiii, 24 ; frequently in the Prophets and the Pseudepigrapha. For the latter 
cf. Pss. Sol. ii. 16, vii. 3, Vill. 7, 27, &C. 

(4) The fourth ground is that 2 Baruch and R. Aqiba held that none who denied the resurrection would 
share in it, According to Sanh, goa R. Agiba made this Statement, but nowhere in 2 Baruch is such an 


Xil 


given 


ADDENDA ET CORRIGENDA TO VOLUME II 


affirmation made, though no doubt its various writers believed in the resurrection. Yet Rosenthal thinks he 
finds it there, and cites two passages, i.e. xxx. 1, which in the present form of the text speaks, however, not of 
belief in the resurrection of the dead, but in the hope of the Messiah, The second passage betrays an extra- 
ordinary misunderstanding of Ceriani’s Latin rendering of 2 Baruch Ixv. 1, i.e. ‘Manasses... cogitabat tempore 
suo quasi ac futurum non esset ut Fortis inquireret ista.’ This of course means: ‘Manasses . . . thought that 
in his time the Mighty One would not inquire into these things.’ But Rosenthal took it as meaning: ‘ Manasses 
thought in his time that there would be no future life !’ 

Thus the doctrines, which 2 Baruch and Aqiba hold in common, are commonplaces even of pre-Christian 
Pharisaism, and furnish no evidence for Rosenthal’s hypothesis, while all the internal evidence of 2 Baruch 
postulates various dates for its several constituents from a.p. 60 to 100. Moreover, whereas Agiba declared that 
the Ten Tribes would never return, 2 Baruch emphasizes this hope repeatedly ; cf. Ixxvii. 6, Ixxviii. 5, 6, 7, 
Ixexiviee, Soro, 1.4. 

From the above it is clear that there are no grounds of evidence for Rosenthal’s contention. 2 Baruch, 
if it belongs to any school, belongs to that of Hillel, who was the great rival of Shammai. Its main theses 
are certainly in accord with much that is known of Hillel. Even its latest sections are too early to be the 
products of R. Aqiba’s school, as is clear from the following dates, At the earliest Aqiba was born about 
A.D. 40-50. As he did not attend the Rabbinic schools till he was forty, and did not become himself 
a teacher till he had studied for thirteen years (see Aboth R. N, vi. 29, ed. Schechter), it follows that his school 
was founded about the beginning of the second century a.p. Now, according to lxviii. 5-6, the Temple was 
standing when A® was written (and also A' and A’), while as regards the other elements of 2 Baruch the 
evidence is against any later date than a.p. go—100.—GeEn. Ep1Tor.* 

P, 528 (3 Baruch). 1. 29 from bottom read ‘ Apoc.’ for ‘ apoc.’ 

P. 625 (Psalms of Solomon). 1. 11 from top for ‘(H)’ read (V)’. 

1. 6 from bottom for ‘H’ read ‘V’ 

P, 738 (Story of Ahikar). col. 3, 1. 6 from top for ‘get thy boon fragrant’ read ‘get a good name’, the 
former reading being due to a corruption in the MSS.—ConyseEare. 

P. 809 (Fragments of a Zadokite Work). In line 2 for ‘make atonement for’ read ‘ pardon’, 

P. 814 (Fragments of a Zadokite Work). In the first note on this page the statement regarding Simon 
ben Shetach is wholly wrong, and is to be deleted. This Pharisee did not appropriate the sacrifices of the 
Nazirites, but by means of a gross lie to the king enabled them to offer their sacrifices at half the cost, By 
falsely stating that he would bear half the expenses of the sacrifices, if King Jannaeus would bear the other 
half, he prevailed on the king by this mendacious assertion to do so. The most remarkable point about the 
incident, if it is wholly authentic, is that Simon ben Shetach appears to have been wholly unconscious of having 
done any wrong.—Gen. Eprror. 


1 Mr. Box has recently in a letter informed me that he is willing to accept the earlier dates I have assigned to 
certain of the sections of 2 Baruch, but that he regards them as redacted by an editor or editors of the school of 
Aqiba. This hypothesis, however, is quite different from that of Rosenthal. 


Xill 


SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS EMPLOYED IN INTRODUCTIONS, 





TEXT ANDINOTEsS 


Xx1V 





See special lists as under :— Sirach vol. I. 315. Test. XII Patr. vol. IT. 295. 
1 Esdras vol. I. 19, 20. Prayer of Manasses_ ,, I. 620. 2 Baruch ey Ula cba 
Tobit 53) de 20D. 1 Enoch els 7s 4 Ezra ») IT. 560. 
See also under Versions and MSS. in the different books, 
A! &c. See 2 Bar. § 7 Hiph. Hiphil Sir. Sirach 
A.J.Th. American Fournal of Theo- Hom. Homer Slav. Bar. See vol. ii. 131 
Aboth Pirké Aboth (logy Il. lliad Slav. Vit. Slavonic Vita Adae et Evae. 
Ab. R. Nathan =Aboth Rabbi Nathan Int. Crit. Comm. = Zzternational Critical See Books of Adam and 
am. dey. oreip. drag AeySpuevov or eipnuevov Commentary Soph. Sophocles [Eve 
Apoc.Abrah, Apocalypse of Abraham Intr, Introduction Stob. Stobaeus 
Apoc. of Baruch =2 Baruch Jel: Jewish Encyclopaedia : Symm. Symmachus 
Apoc. Zeph. Apocalypse of Zephaniah J.Q.R. Fewish Quarterly Review : Syncell. Syncellus; 
Aq. Aguila akeAnos Journal of the Royal Asiatic Syr. Syriac 
Ar. Arabic Soceety f , Syr. H. Hexaplaric Syriac 
Aram. Frag. AramaicFragment. See Test. aleSs Fournalof Theological Studies Syr. W. Syriac Version in Walton’s 
App. II Jalkut Schim. = Jalkut Shimeoni Polyglot 
Arm. Armenian Jashar Book of Jashar Sok. Sokolov’s Text of 2 Enoch 
Asc. Is. Ascension of Isaiah Jer. Joma &c.=Joma in Jerusalem Tal- T.A. &e. See under “Testaments? dn 
Ass. Mos. Assumption of Moses mud list of symbols prefixed to 
Aug. Augustine Jerus. Targ. Jerusalem Targum Index. 
B! &c. See 2 Bar. §7 Jos. Ant, &c. Josephus, Antequdties, &c. bs Babylonian Talmud 
BD. Bible Dictionary Jub. Book of Jubilees Targ. Jer. Jerusalem Targum 
B.S. Deissmann, Azblical Studies Jiid. Theol? Fidische Theologie? (Weber) Targ. Jon. Targum Pseudo- Jonathan 
1 Bar. Apocryphal Book of Baruch K. Kautzsch Th. Gram. Thackeray, Grammar of Old 
2 Bar. Syriac Apocalypse of Baruch KAGE, Schrader, Die Ketlinschriften Testament Greek 
3 Bar. Greek Apocalypse of Baruch und das Alte Testament Theod. Theodotion 
Ber. Rabb. Bereshith rabba Kit. Kittel Theoph. Theophilus 
Berach. or Berakh. = Berachoth L.A.E. Deissmann, Light from the Tebt. P. Tebtuneh Papyrus 
Beresh. Bereshith Ancient East Tert. Tertullian 
GaeG: Corpus Inscriptionum Grae- desl Weber, Dze Lehren des Tal- Test. Testament 
carum ii muds Test.Sim, See vol. ii. 153 
COs Cuneiform Inscriptions and L. & S. Liddell and Scott Test. XII Patr. = Testamentsof the erelne 
the Old Testament. See LXx. Septuagint Version Patriarchs 
K.A.T. Lact. Lactantius Tisch. Tischendorf 
Cat. Niceph. Catalogue of Nicephorns Libs Ved. Libri Veteres Testamentt Tob. Tobit 
Chag. Chagigah (Talmud) ue: Lucian V.L. or Vet. Lat. = Versio VetusLatina. Old 
Chron, Pasch. = Chronicon Paschale Lucr. Lucretius ee ? 
Clem. Alex. Clement of Alexandria MS. Manuscript Vit. Ad. Vita Adae 
Clem.Recog. Pseudo-Clementine Recogni- MT. Massoretic Text Wrike, Vuleate 
Gout Codex [tions | 1 Macc. &c. First, &c., Book of Maccabees WP. Walton's Palyclor 
D.B. Dictionary of the Bible Macrob. Macrobius Wellh. Wellhausen ve 
Dan. Daniel Mart. Is. Martyrdom of Isaiah AWeeal Book of Wisdom 
Diod. Sic. Diodorus Siculus Mass. Massoretic ZT AW, Lettschrift fiir die A. T. Wise 
Diog. Laert. Diogenes Laertius - Megill. Megilla senschaft 
EnAG See 4 Ezra, § 7, and ii. 560 Menach, Menachoth (Talmud) Z.D.M.G. Zetischrift der Deutschen 
E.B. or Bi. Lxcyclopaedia Biblica Mg. Margin ; oy Morgenlindischen Gesell 
Edd. Editions meds Tee pers ace A hajt (b= 
1 En. I Enoch or Ethiopian Enoch N.H.W. Neuhebraisches Worterbuch * ; $ ; 
2 En. 2 Enoch or Sieane Enoch INGA New Testament ESE Ce oft Tie 
Encye. Brit. Ezcyclopaedia Britannica ORR. Old Testament A ieee ; é 
Be tar, Be . Barnabas Onk. Onkelos, Targum of EWE SoZ ey The Sir 
Ep. Jer. Epistle of Jeremy Onom. Sacr. Oxomasticon Sacrum : S 
Epiph, Epiphanius Or. Sibyll. Sibylline Oracles Niake : Regl 
Eth. Ethiopic Orph, Frag. Orphic Fragment Rat indicate an intrusion into the 
Eus. Eusebius 12) Bed de Palestine Exploration Fund original text 
Ev. Nicod. Lvangelium Nicodemt PP: Petrie Papyri + 4 indicate that the word or 
4 Ez. Fourth Book of Ezra P.R. Eliezer Pirke Rabbi Eliezer passage so enclosed is cor- 
Fayum P. Fayum Papyri Poor Real-Encyclopadie fiir pro- rupt 
Fr. or Frag. Fragment test. Theologie und Kirche =) Serene 
oe Greek Version P.S.B.A. Proceedings of the Society of ( ) or italics indicate that the 
G.d.Jud. Geschichte des Fudenthums Biblical Archaeology word or words so enclosed 
GaleV Schiirer’s Geschichte des jui- Pesikt. Pesikta or printed are supplied for 
dischen Volkes Ps. Clem. Recog. = Pseudo - Clementine the sake of clearness. 
G.V.I. Geschichte des Volkes Israel Recognitions + indicates that the authority 
Gen. rabb. Genesis rabba Ps. Jon. Targum Psendo-Jonathan or authorities quoted insert 
Gk. Greek Ps. of Sol. Psalms of Solomon the word or words follow- 
Gk. Frag. Greek Fragment. See Test. | RB, Rabbi ing this mark. 
App. Il R.E. Real-Encyhklopidie sa: : 
Gr. Gis R.E.J. Revue des pee Jjutves a see bre gs ee 
Gr. of O.T, Greek Grammar of Old Testa- | Rel. des Jud. Religion des Fudenthums ae eee 
oe the word or words follow- 
ment Greek (Thackeray) Sam. Samaritan inohicinas 
_ SOMES Hastings’ Dictionary of the Sam. Chron. Samaritan Chronology me ag 
Bible Sanh. Sanhedrin « » indicate a restoration in the 
H. J.P. History of the Fewish People Schiirer,E.T. Schiirer’s History of the Yew- text. 
Heb. Gr. Hebrew Grammar ash People, English Trans- Thick type indicates an emendation in 
Herm. Hermas, Pastor Sept. Septuagint [lation the text, 
Hes. Hesiod Shabb. Shabbath 


~~ 


siinGe OO Ds PEDTEEES 


INTRODUCTION 


§ 1. SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE BOOK. 


THE Book of Jubilees is in certain limited aspects the most important book in this volume for 
the student of religion. Without it we could of course have inferred from Ezra and Nehemiah, 
the Priests’ Code, and the later chapters of Zechariah the supreme position that the law had 
achieved in Judaism, but without Jubilees we could hardly have imagined such an absolute supremacy 
of the law as finds expression in this book. This absolute supremacy of the law carried with it, as 
we have seen in the General Introduction, the suppression of prophecy—at all events of the open 
exercise of the prophetic gifts. And yet these gifts persisted during all the so-called centuries of 
silence—from Malachi down to N.T. times, but owing to the fatal incubus of the law these gifts 
could not find expression save in pseudepigraphic literature. Thus Jubilees represents the triumph of 
the movement, which had been at work for the past three centuries or more. 

And yet this most triumphant manifesto of legalism contained within its pages the element 
that was destined to dispute its supremacy and finally to reduce the law to the wholly secondary 
position that alone it could rightly claim. This element of course is apocalyptic, which was the 
source of the higher theology in Judaism, and subsequently was the parent of Christianity, wherein 
apocalyptic ceased to be pseudonymous and became one with prophecy. 

The Book of Jubilees was written in Hebrew by a Pharisee between the year of the accession of 
Hyrcanus to the high-priesthood in 135 and his breach with the Pharisees some years before his death 
in 105 B.C. It is the most advanced pre-Christian representative of the midrashic tendency, which 
has already been at work in the Old Testament Chronicles. As the Chronicler had rewritten the 
history of Israel and Judah from the basis of the Priests’ Code, so our author re-edited from the 
Pharisaic standpoint of his time the history of events from the creation to the publication, or, 
according to the author’s view, the republication of the law on Sinai. In the course of re-editing he 
incorporated a large body of traditional lore, which the midrashic process had put at his disposal, 
and also not a few fresh legal enactments that the exigencies of the past had called forth. His 
work constitutes an enlarged Targum on Genesis and Exodus, in which difficulties in the biblical 
narrative are solved, gaps supplied, dogmatically offensive elements removed, and the genuine spirit 
of later Judaism infused into the primitive history of the world. His object was to defend Judaism 
against the attacks of the hellenistic spirit that had been in the ascendant one generation earlier and 
was still powerful, and to prove that the law was of everlasting validity. From our author’s conten- 
tions and his embittered attacks on the paganisers and apostates, we may infer that Hellenism had 
urged that the levitical ordinances of the law were only of transitory significance, that they had not 
been observed by the founders of the nation, and that the time had now come for them to be swept 
away, and for Israel to take its place in the brotherhood of the nations. Our author regarded all 
such views as fatal to the very existence of Jewish religion and nationality. But it is not as such that 
he assailed them, but on the ground of their falsehood. The law, he teaches, is of everlasting 
validity. Though revealed in time it was superior to time. Before it had been made known in 
sundry portions to the fathers it had been kept in heaven by the angels, and to its observance hence- 
forward there was no limit in time or in eternity. { 

Writing in the palmiest days of the Maccabean dominion, in the high-priesthood of John Hyrcanus, 
he looked for the immediate advent of the Messianic kingdom. This kingdom was to be ruled over 
by a2 Messiah sprung, not from Levi—that is, from the Maccabean family, as some of his contem- 
poraries expected—but from Judah. This kingdom would be gradually realized on earth, and the 
transformation of physical nature would go hand in hand with the ethical transformation of man till 
there was a new heaven and a new earth. Thus, finally, all sin and pain would disappear and men 
would live to the age of 1,000 years in happiness and peace, and after death enjoy a blessed 
immortality in the spirit world.t : 

1 Three-fourths of this section is reprinted from the present writer’s Introduction to his Commentary on the Book 
of Jubilees. 


B 
1105.2 ! 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 


§ 2. VARIOUS TITLES OF THE BOOK. 


Our book was known by two distinct titles even in Hebrew. 

(a) Jubilees = ra ’lwBnAaia or of IwBnAator = ordayn. 

(6) The Little Genesis = 7 Aemry Téveots = NDT NWN. 

(c) Apocalypse of Moses and other alleged names of the book. ‘ 

(2) Fubilees. This appears from Epiphanius (aer. xxxix. 6) to have been its usual designa- 
tion. It is found also in the Syriac Fragment entitled ‘Names of the Wives of the Patriarchs 
according to the Hebrew Book of Jubilees,’ first published by Ceriani, Mon. sacra et profana, ii. 1. 9-10, 
and reprinted by the present writer in his edition of The Ethiopic Version of the Hebrew Book of 
Fubilees, p. 183. This name admirably describes the book, as it divides into jubilee periods of 
forty-nine years each the history of the world from the creation to the legislation on Sinai. The 
writer pursues a perfectly symmetrical development of the heptadic system. Israel enters Canaan 
at the close of the fiftieth jubilee, i.e. 2450. oa 

(2) The Little Genesis. The epithet ‘little’ does not refer to the extent of the book, for it is 
larger than the canonical Genesis, but to its character. It deals more fully with details than the 
biblical work. The Hebrew title was variously rendered in Greek. 1° 4 Aemrh Péveots (or Aentiy Téveots) 
as in Epiphanius, Syncellus, Zonaras, Glycas. 2° 4 Aemroyéveois in Didymus of Alexandria and in 
Latin writers, as we may infer from the Decree of Gelasius. 3° ra Aenra Tevécews in Syncellus. 
4° 7 Mixpoyéveos in Jerome, who was acquainted with the Hebrew original. 

(c) 1° The Apocalypse of Moses. 

2° The Testament of Moses. 

3° The Book of Adam’s Daughters. 

4° The Life of Adam. 

1° The Apocalypse of Moses. This title had some currency in the time of Syncellus (see i. 5, 49). 
It forms an appropriate designation since it makes Moses the recipient of all the disclosures in the 
book. 2° The Testament of Moses. This title is found in the Catena of N icephorus, i. 175, where it 
precedes a quotation from x. 21 of our book. It has, however, nothing to do with the Testament of 
Moses, which has become universally known under the wrong title—the Assumption of Moses. 
Ronsch and other scholars formerly sought to identify Jubilees with this second Testament of Moses, 
but this identification is shown to be impossible by the fact that in the Stichometry of Nicephorus 
4,300 stichoi are assigned to Jubilees and only 1100 to this Testament of Moses. On the proba- 
bility of a Testament of Moses having been in circulation—which was in reality an expansion 
of Jubilees ii-iii see my edition of Jubilees, p. xviii. 3° Lhe Book of Adam’s Daughters. This 
book is identified with Jubilees in the Decree of Gelasius, but it probably consisted merely of certain 
excerpts from Jubilees dealing with the names and histories of the women mentioned in it. Such 
a collection, as we have already seen, exists in Syriac, and its Greek prototype was used by the scribe 
of the LXX MS. no. 135 in Holmes and Parsons’ edition. 4° The Life of Adam. This title is 
found in Syncellus i. 7-9. It seems to have been an enlarged edition of the portion of Jubilees, 
which dealt with the life of Adam. 


§ 3. THE ETuHiopic MSS. 


There are four Ethiopic MSS., add, the first and fourth of which belong to the National Library 
in Paris, the second to the British Museum, and the third to the University Library at Tiibingen. 
Of these a 0 (of the fifteenth and sixteenth century respectively) are the most trustworthy, though they 
cannot be followed exclusively. In a, furthermore, the readings of the Ethiopic version of Genesis 
have replaced the original against bcd in iii. 4, 6, 7, 19, 29; iv. 4,8, &c. For a full description of 
these MSS. the reader can consult Charles’s £ thiopic Version of the Hebrew Book of Fubilees, 


Pp. Xii seqq. 
§4. THE ANCIENT VERSIONS—GREEK, ETHIOPIC, LATIN, SYRIAC. 


(a) The Greek Version is lost save for some fragments which survive in Epiphanius mept Meérpwv 
kal Zrabuev xxii (ed. Dindorf, vol. iv. 27-8). This fragment, which consists of ii. 2-21, is published 
with critical notes in Charles’s edition of the Ethiopic text. Other fragments of this version are 
preserved in Justin Martyr, Origen, Diodorus of Antioch, Isidore of Alexandria, Isidore of Seville, 
Eutychius, Patriarch of Alexandria, John of Malala, Syncellus, Cedrenus. Syncellus attributes to 
the Canonical Genesis statements derived from our text. This version is the parent of the Ethiopic 
and Latin Versions. 

(6) The Ethiopic Version. This version is most accurate and trustworthy and indeed as a rule 

2 


INTRODUCTION 


servilely literal. It has, of course, suffered from the corruptions naturally incident to transmission 
through MSS. Thus dittographies are frequent and lacunae are of occasional occurrence. but the 
version is singularly free from the glosses and corrections of unscrupulous scribes, though the tempta- 
tion must have been great to bring it into accord with the Ethiopic version of Genesis. To this 
source, indeed, we must trace a few perversions of the text: ‘my wife’ in iii. 6 instead of ‘wife’: 
XV. 12; xvii. 12 (‘her bottle’ instead of ‘the bottle’); xxiv. 19 (where the words ‘a well’ are 
not found in the Latin version of Jubilees, nor in the Mass., Sam., LXX, Syr., and Vulg. of 
Gen. xxvi. 19). ’ In the above passages the whole version is influenced, but in a much greater 
degree has this influence operated on MS. a. Thus in iii. 4, 6, 7, 19, 29, iv. 4, 8, v. 3, vi. 9, &c., the 
readings of the Ethiopic version of Genesis have replaced the original text. In the case of 4 there 
appears to be only one instance of this nature in xv. 15 (see Charles’s Text, pp. xii seqq.). 

For instances of corruption native to this version, see Charles on ii. 2, 7, 21, vi. 21, vii. 22, 
Sc Ona Vi. LO, XXIV: 20, 290, XxxI: 2, Xxxix. 4; xli. 15, xlv. 4, xlviil. 6. 

(c) The Latin Version. This version, of which about one-fourth has been preserved, was first 
published by Ceriani in his Monwmenta sacra et profana, 1861, tom. i. fasc. i. 15-62. It contains 
the following sections: xiii. 10°-21; xv. 20°-31"; xvi. 5°-xvii. 6°; xviii. 10°-xix. 25; xx. 5°-xxi. 
TO*; xxii. 2-19; xxiii. 8°-23°; xxiv. 13-xxv. 1°; xxvi. 85-23%; xxvii. 11°-24*; xxviii. 16°-279; 
xxix. 8°-xxxi. 19; xxxi. 9°18, 29°32; xxxii. 1-8*, 18°-xxxiii. 9°, 18b-xxxiv. 5°; xxxv. 3°-128; 
REXVI. 20°-xXxxvii. 5*5 XXxvilil. 19-16"; xxxix. 9-xl. 8*; xli. 6°-18; xlii. 2-149; xlv. 8—xlvi. 1, 
12-xlviii. 5; xlix. 7°-22. This version was next edited by Rénsch in 1874, Das Buch der Fubiliien 
... unter Beifiigung des revidirten Textes der... lateinischen Fragmente. This work attests 
enormous industry and great learning, but is deficient in judgement and critical acumen. Rd6nsch 
was of opinion that this Latin version was made in Egypt or its neighbourhood by a Palestinian 
Jew about the middle of the fifth century (pp. 459-60). In 1895 Charles edited this text afresh in 
conjunction with the Ethiopic in the Oxford Anecdota (The Ethiopic Version of the Hebrew Book 
of Fubilees). Yo this work and that of Ronsch above the reader must be referred for a fuller 
treatment of this subject. Here we may draw attention to the following points. This version, 
where it is preserved, is almost of equal value with the Ethiopic. It has, however, suffered more at 
the hands of correctors. Thus it has been corrected in conformity with the LXX in xlvi. 14, where 
it adds ‘et Oon’ against all other authorities. The Ethiopic version of Exod. i. 11 might have been 
expected to bring about this addition in our Ethiopic text, but it did not. Two similar instances 
will be found in xvii. 5, xxiv. 20. Again the Latin version seems to have been influenced by the 
Vulgate in xxix. 13. xlii. 11 (cazos meos where our Ethiopic text = pov ro yijpas as in LXX of 
Gen. xlii. 38); and probably also in xlvii. 7, 8,and certainly in xlv. 12, where it reads ‘in tota terra’ 
for ‘in terra’. Of course there is the possibility that the Latin has reproduced faithfully the Greek 
and that the Greek was faulty; or in case it was correct, that it was the Greek presupposed by our 
Ethiopic version that was at fault. 

Two other passages are deserving of attention, xix. 14 and xxxix.13. In the former the Latin 
version ‘ et creverunt et iuvenes facti sunt’ agrees with the Ethiopic version of Gen. xxv. 27 against 
the Ethiopic version of Jubilees and all other authorities on Gen. xxv. 27. Here the peculiar reading 
can be best explained as having originated in the Greek. In the second passage, the clause ‘eorum 
quae fiebant in carcere’ agrees with the Ethiopic version of Gen. xxxix. 23 against the Ethiopic 
version of Jubilees and all other authorities on Gen. xxxix. 23. 

On the other hand, there is a large array of passages in which the Latin version preserves the 
true text over against corruptions or omissions in the Ethiopic version: cf. xvi. 16, xix. 5, LO, II, 
Sexe Oy 10, x12.) xxi. 395 Sc. (see my Text, p: xvi). ; 

(d) The Syriac Version. The evidence as to the existence of a Syriac is not conclusive. It is 
based on the fact that a British Museum MS. (Add. 12154, fol. 180) contains a Syriac fragment 
entitled, ‘ Names of the Wives of the Patriarchs according to the Hebrew Book called Jubilees.’ It 
was first published by Ceriani in his Monamenta Sacra, 1861, tom. ii. fasc. i. g-10, and reprinted by 
Charles as Appendix III to his Text of Jubilees (p. 183).’ 


§ 5. THE ETHIOPIC AND LATIN VERSIONS—TRANSLATIONS FROM THE GREEK, 


Like all the biblical literature in Ethiopic, Jubilees was translated into Ethiopic from the Greek. 
Greek words such as Sdpis, Badavos, Ai, cxivos, Papayé, &c., are transliterated into Ethiopic. 
Secondly, many passages must be retranslated into Greek before we can discover the source of their 
corruptions. And finally, many names are transliterated as they appear in Greek and not in 
Hebrew. 


1 (4), (c), and (d) reprinted from the present writer’s Commentary. 7a: 
3 2 


“THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 


That the Latin is derived directly from the Greek is no less obvious. Thus in KXxIX, 12 
timoris = detdas, a corruption of dovdelas ; in xxxviii. 13 Lonorem = tyjv, which should have been 
rendered by ¢ributwm. Another class of mistranslations may be seen in passages where the Greek 
article is rendered by the Latin demonstrative as in huius Abrahae xxix. 16, huic [strael xxxi. 15. 
Other evidence pointing in the same direction is to be found in the Greek constructions which have 
been reproduced in the Latin; such as xvii. 3 ‘ memor fuit sermones’” = éuvjodn Tovs Aoyous : in Xv. 22 
‘consummavit loquens’ = cvreréAeoe NaAGy : in xxii. 8 ‘in omnibus guzbus dedisti’ = év Taow ols edwxas. 


§ 6. THE GREEK—A TRANSLATION FROM THE HEBREW. 


The early date of our book—the second century B. C.—and the fact that it was written in Palestine 
speak for a Semitic original, and the evidence for such an original is conclusive. But the question 
at once arises, was the original written in Hebrew or Aramaic? Certain proper names in the Latin 
version ending in -zz seem to bespeak an Aramaic original, as Cettin xxiv. 28; Adurin xxxviii. 8,9 ; 
Filistin xxiv. 14-16. But since in all these cases the Ethiopic transliterations end in -# and not in 
-v, it is not improbable that this Aramaising in the Latin version is due to the translator, who, as 
Ronsch has concluded on other grounds, was a Palestinian Jew. Again, in the list of the twelve 
trees suitable for burning on the altar some are transliterations of Aramaic names. But in a late 
Hebrew work—vwritten at the close of the second century B.C.—the popular names of such objects 
would naturally be used. Moreover, in certain cases the Hebrew may have already been forgotten, 
or, when the tree had been lately introduced, been non-existent. 

But the arguments for a Hebrew original are many and weighty. (1) A work which claims to be 
from the hand of Moses would naturally be written in Hebrew; for Hebrew, according to our author, 
was the sacred and national language, xii. 25-6; xliii.15. (2) The revival of the national spirit is, 
so far as we know, accompanied by a revival of the national language. (3) The existing text must 
be retranslated into Hebrew in order to explain unintelligible expressions and restore the true text. 
Thus 1a‘éléja in xliii. 11 = éy euot, which is a mistranslation in this context of °2; for ‘2 here 
= déouai, ‘pray, as in Gen. xliv. 18. In xlvii.g the text = ‘domum (=n"3) Faraonis’, but the 
context demands ‘filiam (=n) Faraonis’, though here the argument is not conclusive, since n‘3 
might have been corruptly written for nn3, which in Aramaic = ‘daughter’. Again in xxxvi. 10 
(cp. also xxxix. 6) the text = ot« dvaByjoera (= ja‘arg) els 75 BiBAlov ris Cofs. But ja‘arg must 
= ‘will be recorded’. Now this meaning is unattested elsewhere in Ethiopic, but the difficulty is 
solved when we find that it is a Hebrew idiom: see 1 Chron. xxvii. 24, 2 Chron. xx. 34. (4) Many 
paronomasiae discover themselves on retranslation into Hebrew, as in iv. 9 there is a play on the 
name Enoch, in iv. 15 on Jared, in viii. 8 on Peleg, &c. (5) Many passages are preserved in 
Rabbinic writings, and the book has much matter in common with the Testaments xii Patriarchs, 
which was written about the same date in Hebrew. Both books, in fact, use a chronology peculiar 
to themselves. (6) Fragments of the original Hebrew text or of the sources used by its author are 
to be found in the Book of Noah and the Midrasch Wajjisau in Jellinek’s Beth-ha-Midrasch, 
ili. 155-6, 3-5, reprinted in Charles’s edition of the Ethiopic text on pp. 179-81. 


§ 7. TEXTUAL AFFINITIES. 


A minute study of the text shows that it attests an independent form of the Hebrew text of 
Genesis and the early chapters of Exodus. Thus it agrees with individual authorities such as the 
Samaritan or the LXX, or the Syriac, or the Vulgate, or the Targum of Onkelos against all the rest. 
Or again it agrees with two or more of these authorities in opposition to the rest, as for instance 
with the Massoretic and Samaritan against the LX X, Syriac and Vulgate, or with the Massoretic and 
Onkelos against the Samaritan, LXX, Syriac, and Vulgate, or with the Massoretic, Samaritan and 
Syriac against the LXX or Vulgate. But the reader must here be referred to Charles’s Book of 
Jubilees (pp. xxxiii-xxxix) for a full classification of these instances. A study of these phenomena 
proves that our book represents some form of the Hebrew text midway between the forms pre- 
supposed by the LXX and the Syriac ; for it agrees more frequently with the LX X, or with com- 
binations into which the LXX enters, than with any other single authority. Next to the LXX it 
agrees most often with the Syriac or with combinations into which the Syriac enters. On the other 
hand, its independence of the LXX is shown by a large array of readings, where it has the support 
of the Samaritan and Massoretic, or of these with various combinations of the Syriac, Vulgate and 
Onkelos, From these and like considerations we may conclude that the textual evidence points to 
the composition of our book at some period between 250 B.C. and 100 A.D. and at a time nearer 
the earlier date than the latter. 


4 


INTRODUCTION 


§ 8. THE VALUE OF THE BOOK OF JUBILEES IN THE CRITICISM OF THE MASSORETIC TEXT 
OF THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


From a study of the facts which are referred to in the preceding Section it will be clear that 
both before and after the Christian era the Hebrew text did not possess any hard and fast tradition. 
It will further be obvious that the Massoretic form of this text, which has so long been generally 
assumed as conservative of the most ancient tradition and as therefore final, is after all only one of 
the many phases through which the text passed in the process of over 1,000 years, i.e. 400 B.C. till 
A. D. 600, or thereabouts. 

As we pursue the examination of the materials just mentioned we shall see grounds for 
regarding the Massoretic text as the result partly of conscious recension and partly of unconscious 
change extending over many centuries. How this process affected the text in the centuries 
immediately preceding and subsequent to the Christian era, we have some means of determining in 
the Hebrew-Samaritan text which, however much it may have been tampered with on religious or 
polemical grounds, still preserves in many cases the older reading, even as it preserves the older 
form of the alphabet. Next we have the LXX of the Pentateuch, to which we may assign the 
date 200 B.C.; next the Book of Jubilees just before the Christian era; the Syriac Pentateuch before 
A.D. 100; the Vulgate of the fourth century ; the Targums of Onkelos and Ps.-Jon. in their present 
form A.D. 300-600. 

We have above remarked that the evidence of $6 shows that the Massoretic text is only one 
of the phases through which the Hebrew text has passed; and if we consider afresh the materials 
of evidence suggested in that Section in connexion with their dates, and given in some fullness in 
the Introductions to Charles’s Text and Commentary, we shall discover that in some respects 
it is one of the latest phases of the Hebrew Pentateuch that has been stereotyped by Jewish 
scholars in the Massoretic text. 

This conclusion will tally perfectly with the tradition that all existing Massoretic MSS. are 
derived in the main from one archetype, i.e. the Hebrew Codex left behind him by Ben Asher, who 
lived in the tenth century, and whose family had lived at Tiberias in the eighth. 

We shall now proceed to give a list of readings in the Massoretic text which should be corrected 
into accord with the readings attested by such great authorities as the Sam., LXX, Jub., Syr., Vulg. 

The following list was published in Charles’s Ethiopic Version of the Hebrew Book of Fubilees 
in 1895. More than two-thirds of the emendations of the Book of Genesis here suggested were 
subsequently accepted independently, on the evidence of the Sam., LXX, Syr., Vulg., without 
a knowledge of Jubilees, by C. J. Ball in his edition of the Hebrew Text of Genesis, 1896, by Kittel 
in his edition of the Hebrew Text of Genesis, 1905, and more than half in the recent Commentary 
of Gunkel. 


In Gen. viii. 19 for #7 ba Riyanday wD mna-P2 we should read RINT wroan-bay Aivanbay mnn-d3 
with the Sam., Sam. Vers., Jub. (v. 32), Vulg. (‘omnia animantia iumenta et reptilia quae reptant super terram’), 
and Arabic. ‘The LXX and Syr. confirm our emendation (see my Ethiopic text, p. 21, note 29). Here Onk. 
only supports the Massoretic. The restoration is confirmed by Gen. i. 26 where the very combination WD 
WINNT is actually found. 

In xi. 8 after VYO add bayam with Sam., LX-X, and Jub. (x. 24), against Mass. and Vulg. 

In xi. 31 DAN I8¥" we have a reading that should be emended into DAN N¥" with Jub. (xii. 15) and Syr., 
or into ON& Nyi* with the Sam., LXX, Itala, and Vulg. Only Onk. supports the Massoretic. 

In xii. 3 for pep read pee with Sam., LXX, Jub. (xii. 23), Syr., Vulg. The reading of the Mass. is 
the first movement in the change of plurals into singulars, which is completed in Onk. and Ps.-Jon., where 
both the participles are in the singular. A few Hebrew MSS., however, preserve the original reading. 

In xv. 21 after ‘YIDN-NN) add “HI-NN) with the Sam., LXX, and Jub. (xiv. 18), against Mass., Syr., and 
es xvii. 14 after indy add ‘wn OPI with Sam., LXX, and Jub. (xv. 14), against Mass., Syr., and Vulg. 

In xvii. 16 for MAID read YAIID with Sam., LXX, Jub. (xv. 16), Syr., and Vulg. Only Onk. supports 
the Mass. For Ana of Mass., Sam., and Onk. read 7°) with LXX, Jub. (xv. 16), Syr., and Vulg. For 7313) 
of Mass., Sam., and Onk. read 3399 with LXX, Jub., Syr., and Vulg. 

In xvii. 19 add 3 before wu? with Sam., LXX, Jub. (xv. 19), Syr., Vulg., and Arab. Only Onk. supports 
Besa ei. 8 after PRYYNYS add 2 with Sam. LXX, and Jub. (xvii. 1), against Mass., Syr., Vulg., and Onk, 

In xxi. 13 after nos add nt with Sam., LXX, and Jub, (xvii. 6), against Mass., Syr., Vulg., and Onk. 


In xxi. 13 after 2 read bin) with Sam., LXX, Jub. (xvii. 6), Syr., Vulg., Arab. Only such late 
authorities as Mass., Onk., and Ps.-Jon. omit on religious and polemical grounds, the last giving quite 
a different turn in expression of national hatred, DMD’) DY, ‘nation of robbers.’ 


o 


“THE BOOK ‘OF JUBIGEES 


In xxii. 13 for 708 read 758 with some Hebrew MSS., Sam., LXX, Jub. (xviil. 12), Syr., Ps.-Jon., 
Graec.-Ven., against Mass. and Vulg. Onk. combines both readings. Rs 

In xxii. 16 after JEON add °23) with Sam., LXX (dv eué), Jub. (xvii. 15), Syr., Vulg. (propter me). 
Only the Targums support the Mass. oA ; . 

In xxv. 8 for YAY) read DD YIW4, as in Gen. xxxv. 29, with Sam., LXX, Jub. (xxiii. 8, cf. xxi. 1; xxii. 7), 
Syr., Vulg., Arab. Onk. supports the Mass. ; 

In xxvi. 18 for "2 of Mass. and Onk. read "JY with Sam., LXX, Jub. (xxiv. 18), Vulg. Syr. combines 
both readings. ; ; ; 

In xxvii. 27 after TIY add ndp with Sam., LXX, Jub. (xxvi. 22, Lat.), Syr. Vet. (¢este Diodoro), Vulg. 
Onk. supports Mass. in omitting. e { 

In xxviii. 4 after DIS add PAX with Sam., LXX, Jub. (= "38 xxvii. 11). Mass., Syr., and Vulg. omit. 

In xxix. 27 for 7392) of Mass. and Onk. read 7278) with Sam., LXX, Jub. (xviii. 8), Syr., Vulg., and Arab. 

In xli. 56 for Da AWN read 12 O72 WY NMS with Jub. (xlii. 3), LXX rods ovroBodGvas and Onk. NOSIS 
Nay j173-, also Targ., Jer., and Ps.-Jon., Syr., and Vulg., support N38, while 72 is actually found in the 
Sam., which reads 13 DAI AWN. . 

In xliv. 31 after 1Y30 add 398 with Sam., LXX, Jub. (xliii. r2), Syr., Vulg., Arab. Mass. and Onk. stand 
here alone. : 

In xly. 28 after 22 read % with LXX, Jub. (xlili. 24), Syr., Vulg., and Onk. against Mass. and Sam. 

In xlvi. 13 for 5 read 1818 with Sam., LXX, Jub. (xliv. 17), Syr., Vulg., Onk. 1 Chron. vii. 1 confirms 
this emendation. age ¥ 

In xlvi. 13 for 3 of Mass., Vulg., and Onk. read 3Y* with Sam., LXX, and Jub. (xliv. 17)... 2° Chron, 
vil. I confirms this emendation. 

In xlvi. 24 for n>w read DN with Sam., Jub. (xliv. 30), and 1 Chron. vii. 136 The Syr. pode and LXX 
SvAAnp support the former. ; 

In xlvi. 28 for NID read nist with Sam., Syr., or nin with Jub. (xliv. 9) and Onk, or ninpnp with 
LXX. : ; 


§9. DATE OF (2) THE ORIGINAL TEXT AND (J) OF THE VERSIONS. 


(a) Jubilees was written between 153 B.C. and the year of Hyrcanus’ breach with the Pharisees. 
(1) It was written during the pontificate of the Maccabean family, and not earlier than 155 B.C., 
when this office was assumed by Jonathan the Maccabee. For in xxxii. 1 Levi is called a ‘ priest 
of the Most High God.’ Now the only Jewish high-priests who bore this title were the Maccabean, 
who appear to have assumed it as reviving the order of Melchizedek when they displaced the 
Zadokite order of Aaron. Despite the objections of the Pharisees, it was used by the Maccabean 
princes down to Hyrcanus II (Jos. Amz. xvi, 6. 2). (2) It was written before 96 B.C.; for since our 
author was of the strictest sect a Pharisee and at the same time an upholder of the Maccabean 
pontificate, Jubilees cannot have been written later than 96, when the Pharisees and Alexander 
Jannaeus were openly engaged in mortal strife. (3) It was written before the public breach between 
Hyrcanus and the Pharisees when Hyrcanus joined the Sadducean party. As Hyrcanus died in 
105, our book was written between 153 and Ios. 

But it is possible to define these limits more closely. The book presupposes as its historical 
background the most flourishing period of the Maccabean hegemony—such as that under Simon 
and Hyrcanus. The conquest of Edom, which was achieved by the latter, is referred to in 
XXXviii. 14. Again our text reflects accurately the intense hatred of Judah towards the Philistines in 
the second century B.C. It declares that they will fall into the hands of the righteous nation, and 
we learn from 1 Macc. and Josephus that Ashdod and Gaza were destroyed by Hyrcanus and 
Alexander Jannaeus respectively. But it is in the destruction of Samaria, which is adumbrated 
in the destruction of Shechem, xxx, 4-6, that we are to look for the true terminus a quo. Now all 
accounts agree in representing the destruction of Samaria as effected by Hyrcanus about four years 
before his death. Hence we conclude that ¥ubilees was written between 109 and 105 B.C. 

Many other phenomena point to the second-century origin of our book, which are given in 
Charles’s edition, pp. lviii-lxvi. Amongst these we might mention the currency of older and 
severer forms of the halacha than prevailed in the rabbinical schools, or were registered in the 
Mishnah. The severe halacha regarding the sabbath in 1. 8, 12, were indubitably in force in the second 
century B. C., if not earlier, but were afterwards mitigated by the Mishnah and later Judaism. Again 
the strict halacha in xv. 14 regarding circumcision on the eighth day was a current, probably the 
current, view in the second century B. C. and earlier, since it has the support of the Samaritan text and 
the LXX. This strict law was subsequently relaxed in the Mishnah. In xxxii. 1 5 the severe law 
of tithing found in Lev. xxvii. 15 is enforced, but rabbinic tradition sought to weaken the statement. 
As regards the halacha laid down in iii. 31 regarding the duty of covering one’s shame, it is highly 

6 


INTRODUCTION 


probable that such a halacha did exist in the second century B.C., when Judaism was protesting 
against the exposure of the person in the Greek games. See also iii. 8-14 notes and xx. 4 note. i 

Other cases of strict rules afterwards relaxed are the limitation of trees for use with burnt- 
offerings (see xxi. 12-15 notes), the restriction of the eating of the passover to the court of the 
Lord’s house (see xlix. 20 note), the close adherence to the exacting demand of Lev. xix. 24 that 
the fourth year’s fruit should be holy (see vii. 36 notes), though here we have a variant reading. 
Note that the rest of the firstfruits belong to the priests, who are to eat them ‘before the altar.’ 
On the other hand, the thank-offerings in xxi. 8-10 do not belong to the priest. The computation 
of the Feast of Weeks is different from the later prevalent Pharisaic reckoning (see xv. 1 note; 
esi xliv. 4-5), while the account of the Feast of Tabernacles in xvi. 21-31 is peculiar to 

ubilees. : ; 

Finally, we might draw attention to the fact that the Pharisaic regulation about pouring water 
on the altar (Jer. Sukk. iv. 6; Sukk. 44 a) at the feast of tabernacles appears to have been unknown 
to him. We know that the attempt of the Pharisees to enforce its adoption on Alexander Jannaeus 
resulted in a massacre of the former. Attention might also be drawn to the fact that the Priests 
and Levites still numbered in their ranks, as in the days of the author of Chronicles, the masters of 
the schools and the men of learning, and that these positions were not filled as in the days of 
Shammai and Hillel by men drawn from the laity. This inference is to be deduced from the fact 
that the Levites are represented as the guardians of the sacred books and of the secret lore 
transmitted from the worthies of old time (x. 4, xlv. 16). 

(0) Date of the Ethiopic and Latin Versions. There is no evidence for determining the exact 
date of the Ethiopic version, but since it was practically regarded as a canonical book it was 
probably made in the sixth century. Ronsch, as we have already pointed out in § 4, gives some 
evidence for regarding the Latin version as made in the fifth century. 


§ 10. JUBILEES FROM ONE AUTHOR BUT BASED ON EASTERN BOOKS AND TRADITIONS. 


Our book is the work of one author, but is largely based on earlier books and traditions. The 
narrative of Genesis forms of course the bulk of the book, but much that is characteristic in it is 
due to his use of many pseudepigraphic and ancient traditions. Amongst the former might be 
mentioned the Book of Noah, from which in a modified form he borrows vii. 20-39, x. 1-15. In 
vii. 26-39 he reproduces his source so faithfully that he leaves the persons unchanged, and forgets 
to adapt this fragment to its new context. Similarly our author lays the Book of Enoch under 
contribution, and is of great value in this respect in determining the dates of the various sections of 
this book. See Introd. to 1 Book of Enoch, zz /oc. For other authorities and traditions used by our 
author see Charles's edition, § 13. 


§ 11. JUBILEES IS A PRODUCT OF THE MIDRASHIC TENDENCY WHICH HAD BEEN ALREADY 
AT WORK IN THE O.T. BOOKS OF CHRONICLES. 


The Chronicler rewrote with an object the earlier history of Israel and Judah already recounted 
in Samuel and Kings. His object was to represent David and his pious successors as observing all 
the prescripts of the law according to the Priests’ Code. In the course of this process all facts 
that did not square with the Chronicler’s presuppositions were either omitted or transformed. Now 
the author of Jubilees sought to do for Genesis what the Chronicler had done for Samuel and 
Kings, and so he rewrote it in such a way as to show that the law was rigorously observed even 
by the Patriarchs. The author represents his book to be as a whole a revelation of God to Moses, 
forming a supplement to and an interpretation of the Pentateuch, which he designates ‘the first 
law’ (vi. 22). This revelation was in part a secret republication of the traditions handed down 
from father to son in antediluvian and subsequent times. From the time of Moses onwards it was 
preserved in the hands of the priesthood, till the time came for its being made known. aay 

Our author’s procedure is of course in direct antagonism with the presuppositions of the Priests 
Code in Genesis, for according to this code ‘ Noah may build no altar, Abraham offer no sacrifice, 
Jacob erect no sacred pillar. No offering is recorded till Aaron and his sons are ready’ (Carpenter, 
The Hexateuch,i.124). This fact seems to emphasize in the strongest manner how freely our 
author reinterpreted his authorities for the past. But he was only using to the full a right that had 
been exercised for nearly four centuries already in regard to Prophecy and for four or thereabouts 
in regard to the law. , 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 


§ 12. OBJECT OF JUBILEES—THE DEFENCE AND EXPOSITION OF JUDAISM FROM THE 
PHARISAIC STANDPOINT OF THE SECOND CENTURY B.C. 


The object of our author was to defend Judaism against the disintegrating effects of Hellenism, 
and this he did (a) by glorifying the law as an eternal ordinance and representing the patriarchs as 
models of piety; (4) by glorifying Israel and insisting on its separation from the Gentiles; and 
(c) by denouncing the Gentiles and particularly Israel’s national enemies. In this last respect 
Judaism regarded its own attitude to the Gentiles as not only justifiable but also just, because it 
was a reflection of the divine. 

But on (a) it is to be observed further that to our author the law, as a whole, was the realization 
in time of what was in a sense timeless and eternal. It was observed not only on earth by Israel 
but in heaven. Parts of the law might have only a time reference, to Israel on earth, but in the 
privileges of circumcision and the Sabbath, as its highest and everlasting expression, the highest 
orders of archangels in heaven shared with Israel (ii. 18, 19, 21; xv. 26-28). The law, therefore, 
was supreme, and could admit of no assessor in the form of Prophecy. There was no longer any 
prophet because the law had made the free exercise of his gift an offence against itself and God. 
So far, therefore, as Prophecy existed, it could exist only under the guise of pseudonymity. The 
seer, who had like Daniel and others a message for his time, could only gain a hearing by issuing it 
under the name of some ancient worthy. 


§13. THE AUTHOR—A PHARISEE WHO RECOGNIZED THE MACCABEAN PONTIFICATE AND 
WAS PROBABLY A PRIEST. 


Since our author was an upholder of the everlasting validity of the law, and held the strictest 
views on circumcision, the Sabbath, and the duty of complete separation from the Gentiles, since 
he believed in angels and demons and a blessed immortality, he was unquestionably a Pharisee of 
the strictest sect. In the next place, he was a supporter of the Maccabean pontificate. He glorifies 
Levi's successors as high-priests and civil rulers, and applies to them the title ‘ priests of the Most 
High God ’—the title assumed by the Maccabean princes (xxxii. 1). He was not, however, so 
thoroughgoing an admirer of this dynasty as the authors of Test. Lev. xviii. or Ps. ex, who expected 
the Messiah to come forth from the Maccabean family. Finally, that our author was a priest might 
reasonably be inferred from the exaltation of Levi over Judah (xxxi-xxxii), and from the statement 
in xlv. 16 that the secret traditions, which our author claims to publish, were kept in the hands of 
Levi's descendants. . 


§ 14. INFLUENCE ON LATER LITERATURE. 


On the influence of Jubilees on 1 Enoch i-v, xci-civ, Wisdom (?}, 4 Ezra, Chronicles of 
Jerachmecl, Midrash Tadshe, Book of Jasher, the Samaritan Chronicle, on Patristic and other 
writings, and on the New Testament writers, see Charles’s edition, pp. 1xxiii-Ixxxvi. 


§ 15. THEOLOGY. SOME OF OUR AUTHOR’S VIEWS. 


Freedom and determinism. The author of Jubilees isa true Pharisee in that he combines belief 
in Divine omnipotence and providence with the belief in human freedom and responsibility. He 
would have adopted heartily the statement of the Pss. Sol. ix. 7 (written some sixty years or more 
later) ra Epya nuav €v exdoyn kal e€ovola tis Woxijs fav, rod Tojoa Oucavootvyy Kal ddixtav ev pyors 
Xelpav juGv: Vv. 6 avOpwros cal 7 pepls adrod Tapa col év orabue, od tpocOnoe. Tod mAEOVdo aL Tapa TO 
pia cov, 6 Oeds. Thus the path in which a man should walk is ordained for him and the judgement 
of all men predetermined on the heavenly tablets: ‘ And the judgment of all is ordained and written 
on the heavenly tablets in righteousness—even the judgment of all who depart from the path which 
is ordained for them to walk in’ (v. 13), This idea of an absolute determinism underlies man 
conceptions of the heavenly tablets (see Charles’s edition, iii. 10 note). On the other hand feet 
freedom and responsibility are fully recognized: ‘If they walk not therein, judgment is written 
down for every creature’ (v. 13): ‘ Beware lest thou walk in their ways, And tread in their paths 
And sin a sin unto death before the Most High God. Else He will give thee back into the hata 
of thy transgression.’ Even when a man has sinned deeply he can repent and be forgiven (xli 
24 seq.), but the human will needs the strengthening of a moral dynamic: ‘ May the Most Hi fi 
God ... strengthen thee to do His will’ (xxi. 25, xxii. IO). Rt 
Lhe Fall. The effects of the Fall were limited to Adam and the animal creation. Adam was 
8 


INTRODUCTION 


driven from the garden (iii. 17 seqq.) and the animal creation was robbed of the power of speech 
(iii. 28). But the subsequent depravity of the human race is not traced to the Fall but to the 
- seduction of the daughters of men by the angels, who had been sent down to instruct men (v. 1-4), 

and to the solicitations of demonic spirits (vii. 27). The evil engendered by the former was 
brought to an end by the destruction of all the descendants of the angels and of their victims by 
the Deluge, but the incitement to sin on the part of the demons was to last to the final judgement 
(vil. 27, x. I-15, xi. 4 seq., xii. 20). This last view appears in 1 Enoch and the N.T. 

The Law. The law was of eternal validity. It was not the expression of the religious con- 
sciousness of one or of several ages, but the revelation in time of what was valid from the beginning 
and unto all eternity. The various enactments of the law, moral and ritual, were written on the 
heavenly tablets (iii. 31, vi. 17, &c.) and revealed to man through the mediation of angels (i. 27). 
This conception of the law, as I have already pointed out, made prophecy impossible unless under 
the guise of pseudonymity. Since the law was the ultimate and complete expression of absolute 
truth, there was no room for any further revelation: much less could any such revelation, were it 
conceivable, supersede a single jot or tittle of the law as already revealed. The ideal of the faithful 
Jew was to be realized in the fulfilment of the moral and ritual precepts of this law : the latter were 
of no less importance than the former. Though this view of morality tends to be mainly external, 
our author strikes a deeper note when he declares that, when Israel turned to God with their whole 
heart, He would circumcise the foreskin of their heart and create a right spirit within them and 
cleanse them, so that they would not turn away from Him for ever (i. 23). Our author specially 
emphasizes certain elements of the law such as circumcision (xvi. 14, xv. 26, 29), the Sabbath 
(il. 18 seq., 31 seq.), eating of blood (vi. 14), tithing of the tithe (xxxii. 10), Feast of Tabernacles 
(xvi. 29), Feast of Weeks (vi. 17), the absolute prohibition of mixed marriages (xx. 4, xxii. 20, 
xxv. I-10). In connexion with many of these he enunciates halacha which belong to an earlier 
date than those in the Mishnah, but which were either modified cr abrogated by later authorities. 

The Messiah. A\though our author is an upholder of the Maccabean dynasty he still clings 
like the writer of 1 Enoch Ixxxiii-xc to the hope of a Messiah sprung from Judah. He 
makes, however, only one reference to this Messiah, and no role of any importance is assigned to 
him (see Charles’s edition, xxxi. 18 n.). The Messianic expectation showed no vigorous 
life throughout this century till it was identified with the Maccabean family. If we are right in 
regarding the Messianic kingdom as of temporary duration, this is the first instance in which the 
Messiah is associated with a temporary Messianic kingdom. 

The Messianic kingdom. According to our author (i. 29, xxiii. 30) this kingdom was to be 
brought about gradually by the progressive spiritual development of man and a corresponding 
transformation of nature. Its members were to attain to the full limit of 1,000 years in happiness 
and peace. During its continuance the powers of evil were to be restrained (xxiii. 29). The last 
judgement was apparently to take place at its close (xxiii. 30). This view was possibly derived 
from Mazdeism. 

The writer of Jubilees, we can hardly doubt, thought that the era of the Messianic kingdom 
had already set in. Such an expectation was often cherished in the prosperous days of the 
Maccabees. Thus it was entertained by the writer of 1 Enoch Ixxxiii-xc in the days of 
Judas before 161 B.C. Whether Jonathan was looked upon as the divine agent for introducing the 
kingdom we cannot say, but as to Simon being regarded in this light there is nodoubt. Indeed, his 
contemporaries came to regard him as the Messiah himself,as we see from Psalm cx, or Hyrcanus in 
the noble Messianic hymn in Test. Levi 18. The tame effusion in 1 Macc. xiv. 8-15 is a relic of such 
literature, which was emasculated by its Sadducean editor. Simon was succeeded by John Hyrcanus 
in 135 B.C. and this great prince seemed to his countrymen to realize the expectations of the past ; 
for according to a contemporary writer (Test. Levi 8) he embraced in his own person the triple office 
of prophet, priest, and civil ruler (xxxi. 15), while according to the Test. Reuben 6 he was to ‘ die 
on behalf of Israel in wars seen and unseen’. In both these passages he seems to be accorded the 
Messianic office, but not so in our author, as we have seen above. Hyrcanus is only to introduce 
the Messianic kingdom, over which the Messiah sprung from Judah is to rule. 

Priesthood of Melchizedek. That there was originally an account of Melchizedek in our text 
we have shown in the note on xiii. 25, and, that the Maccabean high-priests deliberately adopted the 
title applied to him in Gen. xiv, we have pointed out in the note on xxxii. I, It would be interest- 
ing to inquire how far the writer of Hebrews was indebted to the history of the great Maccabean 
king-priests for the idea of the Melchizedekian priesthood of which he has made so fruitful a use in 
chap. vii as applied to our Lord. : 

The Future Life. 1n our text all hope of a resurrection of the body is abandoned. The souls 
of the righteous will enjoy a blessed immortality after death (xxiii. 31). This is the earliest 


9 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 


attested instance of this expectation in the last two centuries B.C. It is next found in 1 
Enoch xci-civ. x 

The Fewish Calendar. For our author’s peculiar views see Charles’s edition § 18 and the notes 
on vi. 29-30, 32, Xv. I. 

Angelology. We shall confine our attention here to notable parallels between our author and 
the New Testament. Besides the angels of the presence and the angels of sanctification there are 
the angels who are set over natural phenomena (ii. 2). These angels are inferior to the former. 
They do not observe the Sabbath as the higher orders ; for they are necessarily always engaged in 
their duties (ii. 18). It is the higher orders that are generally referred to in the New Testament ; 
but the angels over natural phenomena are referred to in Revelation: angels of the winds in vii. I, 2, 
the angel of fire in xiv. 18, the angel of the waters in xvi. 5 (cf. Jub. ii. 2), Again, the guardian 
angels of zzdzviduals, which the New Testament refers to in Matt. xviii. 10 (Acts xii. 15), are 
mentioned, for the first time in Jubilees xxxv. 17. On the angelology of our author see Charles’s 
edition. 

Demonology. The demonology of our author reappears for the most part in the New 
Testament : 

(a) The angels which kept not their first estate, Jude 6; 2 Peter ii. 4, are the angelic watchers 
who, though sent down to instruct mankind (Jub. iv. 15), fell from lusting after the daughters of 
men. Their fall and punishment are recorded in Jub. iv. 22, v. 1-9. 

(4) The demons are the spirits which went forth from the souls of the giants who were the 
children of the fallen angels, Jub. v. 7,9. These demons attacked men and ruled over them (x. 3, 6). 
Their purpose is to corrupt and lead astray and destroy the wicked (x. 8). They are subject to the 
prince Mastéma (x. 9), or Satan. Men sacrifice to them as gods (xxii. 17). They are to pursue 
their work of moral ruin till the judgement of Mastéma (x. 8) or the setting up of the Messianic 
kingdom, when Satan will be no longer able to injure mankind (xxiii. 29). ; 

So in the New Testament, the demons are disembodied spirits (Matt. xii. 43-5; Luke xi. 24-6). 
Their chief is Satan (Mark iii. 22). They are treated as divinities of the heathen (1 Cor. x. 20). 
They are not to be punished till the final judgement (Matt. viii. 29). On the advent of the 
Millennium Satan will be bound (Rev. xx. 2~3). 

Fudgement. The doctrine of retribution is strongly enforced by our author. It is to be individual 
and national in this world and in thenext. As regards the individual the law of exact retribution is 
according to our author not merely an enactment of human justice—the ancient /ex ¢alionis, eye for 
eye, tooth for tooth ; it is observed by God in His government of the world. The penalty follows 
in the line of the sin. This view is enforced in 2 Macc. v. 10, where it is said of Jason, that, as he 
robbed multitudes of the rites of sepulture, so he himself was deprived of them in turn, and in 
XV. 32 seq. it is recounted of Nicanor that he was punished in those members with which he had 
sinned. So also in our text in reference to Cain iv. 31 seq. and the Egyptians xlviii. 14. Taken 
crassly and mechanically the above law is without foundation, but spiritually conceived it repre- 
sented the profound truth of the kinship of the penalty to the sin enunciated repeatedly in the New 
Testament: ‘Whatsoever a man sows that shall he also reap’ (Gal. vi. 7); ‘he that doeth wrong 
shall receive again the wrong that he hath done’ (Col. iii. 25, &c.). Again in certain cases the 
punishment was to follow instantaneously on the transgression (Geavile 27), 

The final judgement was to take place at the close of the Messianic kingdom (xxiii. 30). This 
judgement embraces the human and superhuman worlds (v. 10 seq., 14). At this judgement there will 
be no respect of persons, but all will be judged according to their opportunities and abilities (v. 
15 seq.). From the standpoint of our author there could be no hope for the Gentiles. 


§16. BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


(a) Greek Version : see above, § 4 (a). Ethiopic Version: this text was first edited by Dillmann from two 

MSS. cd in 1859, and by R. H. Charles from four MSS. adcd. The Ethiopic Version of the Hebrew Book of Jubilees 
. . with the Hebrew, Syriac, Greek, and Latin fragments, Oxford, 1895. Latin Version: see above, 4 (a). 

(6) Translations. Dillmann, Das Buch der Jubilden ... aus dem Aethiopischen tibersetzt (Ewald’s Jahrbiicher 
d. bibl. Wissensch., 1850-1, ii. 230-56; iii. 1-96). This translation is based on only one MS. Schodde, The Book of 
JSubilees, translated from the Ethiopic (‘ Bibliotheca Sacra,’ 1885-7): Charles, The Book of Jubilees, translated from 
a text based on two hitherto uncollated Ethiopic MSS. (Jewish Quarterly Review, 1893, v. 703-8 ; 1894, vi. 184-217, 
710-45 ; 1895, vii. 297-328): Littmann, Das Buch der Jubilien (Kautzsch’s Apokryphen und Pseudepigraphen des 
A. T., 1900, il. 31-119). This translation is based on Charles’s text. 

é ©) ue Charles, Zhe Book of Jubilees, 1902. Rénsch published a Commentary on the Latin Version. 
ee above, § 4. 

(d) Critical Inquiries. Dillmann, ‘ Pseudepigraphen des A. T.,’ Herzog’s R. £.*, xii. 364-5; ‘Beitrage aus dem 
Buche der Jubilaen zur Kritik des Pentateuch-Textes’ (Sztzungsberichte der kel. preussischen Aha, 1883); Beer, Das 
Buch der Jubiléen, 1856; Singer, Das Buch der Jubilien, 1898; Bohn, ‘ Die Pedeutung des Buches der Jubilien’ 
(Theol. Stud. u. Kritiken, 1900, 167-84). For a full bibliography see Charles’s Commentary or Schiirer. 

IO 


GEEY BOOK OR |UBILEES 


Moses receives the tables of the law and instruction on past and future history which he is to inscribe 
in a book, 1-4. Apostasy of Israel, 5-9. Captivity of Israel and ¥udah, 10-13. Return of 
Fudah and rebuilding of the temple, 15-18. Moses’ prayer for Israel, 19-21. God's promise to 
redeem and dwell with them, 22-5, 28. Moses bidden to write down the future history of the 
world (the Book of Fubilees ?), 26. And an angel to write down the law, 27. This angel takes 
the heavenly chronological tablets to dictate therefrom to Moses, 29. 


THIS is the history of the division of the days of the law and of the testimony, of the events of | 
the years, of their (year) weeks, of their Jubilees throughout all the years of the world, as the Lord 
spake to Moses on Mount Sinai when he went up to receive the tables of the law and of the com- 
mandment, according to the voice of God as he said unto him, ‘ Go up to the top of the Mount.’ 


1; And it came to pass in the first year of the exodus of the children of Israel out of Egypt, in the 2450 
third month, on the sixteenth day of the month, that God spake to Moses, saying: ‘Come up to Me Anno 
on the Mount, and I will give thee two tables of stone of the law and of the commandment, which Mundi. 

2 I have written, that thou mayst teach them.’ And Moses went up into the mount of God, and the 
3 glory of the Lord abode on Mount Sinai, and a cloud overshadowed it six days. And He called 
to Moses on the seventh day out of the midst of the cloud, and the appearance of the glory of the 
4 Lord was like a flaming fire on the top of the mount. And Moses was on the Mount forty days 
and forty nights, and God taught him the earlier and the later history of the division of all the days 
5 of the law and of the testimony. And He said: ‘Incline thine heart to every word which I shall 
speak to thee on this mount, and write them in a book in order that their generations may see how 

I have not forsaken them for all the evil which they have wrought in transgressing the covenant 
6 which I establish between Me and thee for their generations this day on Mount Sinai. And thus 
it will come to pass when all these things come upon them, that they will recognise that I am more 
righteous than they in all their judgments and in all their actions, and they will recognise that 
7 I have been truly with them. And do thou write for thyself all these words which I declare unto 
thee this day, for I know their rebellion and their stiff neck, before I bring them into the land 
of which I sware to their fathers, to Abraham and to Isaac and to Jacob, saying: ‘ Unto your seed 
8 will I give a land flowing with milk and honey. And they will eat and be satisfied, and 
they will turn to strange gods, to (gods) which cannot deliver them from aught of their 
9 tribulation: and this witness shall be heard for a witness against them. For they will 
forget all My commandments, (even) all that I command them, and they will walk after the 
Gentiles, and after their uncleanness, and after their shame, and will serve their gods, and these will 
10 prove unto them an offence and a tribulation and an affliction and a snare. And many will perish 


Prologue gives admirable account of contents of the book. At once a history and a chronological system 
dominated by sacred number 7. History extends from creation to legislation on Sinai. Thus it embraces Genesis and 
part of Exodus. All is re-written from standpoint of strictest Judaism. 

throughout all the years of the world. These words imply intention of the author to write history up to time 
of Messianic kingdom. Cf, 1. 26. 

1. third month, on the sixteenth day of the month. Completes imperfect date of Exod. xix.1. (Same day as 
God appears to Jacob on way to Egypt, xliv. 5.) For the rest of the verse cf. Exod. xxiv. 12. 

2-4 a. Exod. xxiv. 15-18. ¢ 

3. out of. Emended in accordance with Exod. xxiv. 26, MD by a change of one letter. 

flaming. Change of one vowel would give ‘ devouring’ as in Exod. xxiv. 17. 

4. God taught him the earlier and the later history. Cf. i. 26; also Megilla 19 6 ‘The Holy One, blessed be 
his name, showed to Moses all the minutiae of the law and all that the Sopherim would renew in later times’; so also 
Shem. Rabb. 40 (Wiinsche, 282), Menachoth 29 4, Wajikra Rabb. 26 (Beer). 

5-10, Ezra ix. 9, 10,11; Exod. xxiii. 33, xxxiil. 1, 3; Deut. xxx. I-20, xxxi. 19, 20, 24-6, 27; 2 Kings xvii. 7-17. 

5. write them, &c. Cf. Exod. xxxiv. 27. 

how I, &c. Cf. Ezra ix. 9. 

transgressing. An emendation, séhétd from ’asfétd of bed. 

6. Deut. xxx. I. T. 

7. write. See i. 27 (note), On verse cf. Deut. xxxi, 275 Exod. xxxiil--3. 0. 

10. Captivity of Israel who had forsaken ‘ my sanctuary ’,&c. Cf. Deut. xxvili. 15-68, and Lev. xxvi. 14-39. 

Il . 


ie) 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 1. 10-25 


and they will be taken captive, and will fall into the hands of the enemy, because they have for- 
saken My ordinances and My commandments, and the festivals of My covenant, and My sabbaths, 
and My holy place which I have hallowed for Myself in their midst, and My tabernacle, and My 
sanctuary, which I have hallowed for Myself in the midst of the land, that I should set my name 
1 upon it, and that it should dwell (there). And they will make to themselves high places and groves 
and graven images, and they will worship, each his own (graven image), so as to go astray, and they 
12 will sacrifice their children to demons, and to all the works of the error of their hearts. And I will 
send witnesses unto them, that I may witness against them, but they will not hear, and will slay the 
witnesses also, and they will persecute those who seek the law, and they will abrogate and change 
13 everything so as to work evil before My eyes. And I will hide My face from them, and I will 
deliver them into the hand of the Gentiles for captivity, and for a prey, and for devouring, and 
I will remove them from the midst of the land, and I will scatter them amongst the Gentiles. 
14 And they will forget all My law and all My commandments and all My judgments, and will go 
15 astray as to new moons, and sabbaths, and festivals, and jubilees, and ordinances. And after this 
they will turn to Me from amongst the Gentiles with all their heart and with all their soul and with 
all their strength, and I will gather them from amongst all the Gentiles, and they will seek me, so 
16 that I shall be found of them, when they seek me with all their heart and with all their soul. And 
I will disclose to them abounding peace with righteousness, and I will tremove them the plant of 
uprightness}, with all My heart and with all My soul, and they shall be for a blessing and not for 
17 a curse, and they shall be the head and not the tail. And I will build My sanctuary in their midst, 
and I will dwell with them, and I will be their God and they shall be My people in truth and 
19 righteousness. And I will not forsake them nor fail them; for I am the Lord their God.’ And 
Moses fell on his face and prayed and said, ‘O Lord my God, do not forsake Thy people and Thy 
inheritance, so that they should wander in the error of their hearts, and do not deliver them into the 
hands of their enemies, the Gentiles, lest they should rule over them and cause them to sin against 
20 Thee. Let thy mercy, O Lord, be lifted up upon Thy people, and create in them an upright spirit, 
and let not the spirit of Beliar rule over them to accuse them before Thee, and to ensnare them 
21 from all the paths of righteousness, so that they may perish from before Thy face. But they are 
Thy people and Thy inheritance, which thou hast delivered with thy great power from the hands 
of the Egyptians: create in them a clean heart and a holy spirit, and let them not be ensnared in 
22 their sins from henceforth until eternity.’ And the Lord said unto Moses: ‘I know their contrari- 
ness and their thoughts and their stiffneckedness, and they will not be obedient till they confess 
23 their own sin and the sin of their fathers. And after this they will turn to Me in all uprightness 
and with all (their) heart and with all (their) soul, and I will circumcise the foreskin of their heart 
and the foreskin of the heart of their seed, and I will create in them a holy spirit, and 
I will cleanse them so that they shall not turn away from Me from that day unto eternity. 
24 And their souls will cleave to Me and to all My commandments, and they will fulfil My 
25 commandments, and I will be their Father and they shall be My children. And they all shall be 


11-13. Idolatry and captivity of Judah. Cf. Ezek. xx. 28, 31; 2 Chron. xxxiii. 3, xxviii. 3; 1 En. xcix. 7. 


12. I will send witnesses . . . but they will not hear. Cf. 2 Chron, xxiv. 19, xxxvi. 15-16; Jer. xxv. 4; Matt. 
xxill. 34; Luke xi. 49. 
but . .. will slay the witnesses. Neh. ix. 26. 


work evil before My eyes. 2 Kings xxi. 15. 
13. Cf xxi. 22; Isai. 15; 2 Kings xxi. 14. 
for a prey = /ahadl/ emended from /ahedl. 
14. Captive Judah forgets service of God. Cf. Deut. iv. 28, xxviii. 36, 64. 
15-17. Repentance of Judah will bring return and rebuilding of the Temple. 15. Deut. iv. 30, 29; Jer. xxix. 13, 14. 
16. tremove them the plant of uprightnesst. The expression ‘Plant of uprightness’ = Israel from the 
outset. Original perhaps is Jer. xxxii. 41. Cf. 1 En. x. 6, xciii. 2, 5, 10. Not improbably ‘in this land’ was lost 
after the verb. We might read pnyyo for oyny*pn) = ‘1 will plant them in this land” Cf. Jer. xxxil. 41. Reversal 
of the judgement in 13 is required here. 
they shall be for a blessing and not fora curse. Zech. viii. 13. 
the head and not the tail. Deut. xxviii. 13; 1 En. ciii. 11. 
17. The second Temple. a4 >‘their’ before God. Cf. Exod. xxv. 8, xxix. 45; Lev. xxvi. 12; Ezek. xiv. 11; 
Vets SNiVan7 > Xk 22. 
18. Cf. Deut. xxxi. 6. 
19. do not forsake ... rule over them. 2 Kings xxi. 14; Deut. ix. 26; Ps. evi. 41. 
20. Ps. li. 10. Beliar, see note on xv. 33. 
21. Deut. ix. 26, 29. a holy spirit. Cf. i. 23 and xv. 14 (note). 
22. Deut. xxxi, 27. confess, &c. Lev. xxvi. 40; Neh. ix. 2. 
23. turn, &c. 2 Chron. vi. 38. circumcise. Deut. x. 16,xxx.6. I will cleanse them... eternity. Implies no 
more exile for Israel. 
24. I will be their Father, &c. From 2 Sam. vii. 14; used in 2 Cor. vi. 18 of all Christians. In 2 Sam. vii. 14 
these words refer to Solomon. God is the Father of the nation in Deut. xxxii. 6; Isa. Ixili, 16; Jer. xxxi.-g; 
I2 


26 


27 
28 


29 


to 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 1. 25—2. > 


called children of the living God, and every angel and every spirit shall know, yea, the 

that these are My children, and that I am their Father in Ge atiess and vckteniene ee 
I love them. And do thou write down for thyself all these words which I declare unto thee on 
this mountain, the first and the last, which shall come to pass in all the divisions of the days in the 
law and in the testimony and in the weeks and the jubilees unto eternity, until I descend and dwell 
with them throughout eternity.. And He said to the angel of the presence: ‘ Write for Moses from 
the beginning of creation till My sanctuary has been built among them for all eternity. And the 
Lord will appear to the eyes of all, and all shall know that I am the God of Israel and the Father of 
all the children of Jacob, and King on Mount Zion for all eternity. And Zion and Jerusalem shall 
be holy.’ And the angel of the presence who went before the camp of Israel took the tables of the 
divisions of the years—from the time of the creation—of the law and of the testimony of the weeks 
of the jubilees, according to the individual years, according to all the number of the jubilees 
[according to the individual years], from the day of the [new] creation t}when} the heavens and the 
earth shall be renewed and all their creation according to the powers of the heaven, and according 
to all the creation of the earth, until the sanctuary of the Lord shall be made in Jerusalem on 
Mount Zion, and all the luminaries be renewed for healing and for peace and for blessing for all the 
elect of Israel, and that thus it may be from that day and unto all the days of the earth. 


The history of the twenty-two distinct acts of creation on the six days,1-16. Institution of the Sab- 


ae 2 its observance by the highest angels, with whom Israelis afterwards to be associated, 17-32. 
(OL Gen. i=ii: 3.) 


And the angel of the presence spake to Moses according to the word of the Lord, saying: 
Write the complete history of the creation, how in six days the Lord God finished all His works 
and all that He created, and kept Sabbath on the seventh day and hallowed it for all ages, and 
appointed it as a sign for all His works. For on the first day He created the heavens which are 
above and the earth and the waters and all the spirits which serve before him—the angels of the 


Cf. also Exod. iv. 22,23; Deut. xiv. 1; Isa. xllii. 6; Judges ix. 4. In Sir. xxiii. 1; Wisd. ii. 16, &c., it is used 
of the righteous jadi, elsewhere of righteous Israel. In Jubilees Israelites are God’s children in virtue of their 
physical descent from Jacob. Cf. Wisd. xviii. 13. Also Sayzngs of the Fathers, iti. 22 (Taylor’s ed.). 

25. children of the living God. Hosea i. to. 

26. Moses receives ‘ Jubilees’ as a secret revelation. Cf. esp. 4 Ezra xiv. 6, also Exod. xxxiv. 27-28; Deut. x. 2-4. 
Conclusion of this verse implies that history of ‘Jubilees’ is to be brought down to author’s own time—that of the 
early Maccabees. Like 1 En. xxv. 3, Ixxvii. 1; Ass. Mos. x; 1 En. xci-civ, he expected God would dwell with man. 
He lived in hourly expectation of the ‘end of the times’. Like author of ‘ Beast Visions’, 1 En. Ixxxvii-xc, he believed 
this would be accomplished by a Messiah, but his Messiah was to spring from Judah, cf. xxxi. 18 n. 

27. Angels only accompany Jahweh in Deut. xxxiii. 2, they mediate indirectly in Ezek. xl. 3. Zechariah and Daniel 
assign even a larger réle to the angels. Test. Dan. vi further develops the idea. In N.T. times the ministry of angels has 
become the universal means of approaching or hearing from God. Expressly affirmed by Philo, De Sommits, i. 22, 
Josephus, Amt. xv. 5.3; Paul (Gal. iii. 19), Stephen (Acts vil. 53), and author of ‘Hebrews’ ii. 2, also Samaritans 
(Gesenius, Carm. Sam. 15), De Sacy, xii. 16. Hostility to Christians caused Rabbis to revert to older view in 
Shabb. 88 4, Shem. Rabb. 28. The angel here writes, not the Pentateuch, but a history up to the Messianic 
kingdom, but Deut. xxviii-xxx may be meant. : 

28. Read this verse after 25. eyes ofall. Cf. Rev. i. 7. 

King on Mount Zion. Cf. Isa. xxiv. 23. 

29. angel of the presence, derived from Isa. lxiii.9. Cf. Test. Judah xxv. ; I En. xl. 2; probably Michael, Israel’s 
guardian angel ; Weber, /iidische Theologie,* 168 ; Dan. x. 13, 21, Kite Use De Lome soe 5 2 eect 0, 

went before, &c. Exod. xiv. 19. 

from the day of the [new] creation > ‘new’, inserted wrongly. 

+whent > 4. Possibly an interpolation, or a mistake of os for és; translate ‘until’. 

Author as Isa. Ixv. 17, Ixvi. 22; Test. Levi xviii, believed in a gradua/ transformation of the world, moral and 
physical. Perhaps borrowed from Mazdeism (cf. Séderblom, La Vie future d’aprés le Mazdéisme, 254). From 
Too B.C. this view was supplanted by the belief in a violent and sudden revolution of things (1 En. xci. 16, xlv. 4; 
Apoc. Bar. xxxii. 6, lvil. 2; 4 Ezra vii. 75; 2 Peter iii. 13; Rev. xxi. 1. The author divides this process of renewal 
into three periods: ist, Deluge, v. 12, 13; 2nd, choice of Israel, i.e. foundation of Hebrew nation, xix. 25, Chin 22" 
3rd, establishment of Messianic kingdom, cf. i. 29, iv. 26, v. 12. This division is wuzque. 

renewed for healing, as Rev. xxii. 2. 


II. Cf. Epiphanius, wept Mérpov kai StaOpav, xxii; Syncellus (ed. Dindorf, 4); Cedrenus (ed. Bekker, 7); Midrash 
Tadshe, vi. 11-16, all based on Jubilees, though the last, like other Jewish writings, postpones creation of angels to 
second day (so Ber. Rabb., others fifth, Philo seventh) in order to show gulf between them and God. For full notes 
see Charles’ Commentary, pp. 10-12. aio 

2. Cf. Job xxxviii. 7; Hermas, Vs. iii. 4; Epiph. //aer. Ixv. 4: Rufinus, Expos. in Symb. 21. 

the angels of the presence, and the angels of sanctification. These two superior classes of angels (i. 19, 
ii. 18, xv. 27, xxxi. 14) alone are superior to righteous Israelites. Cf. Sanh. 93,43 Tanchuma 13; Ber. Rabb. 8. 
Epiph. reads ‘ glory’ for ‘sanctification’. But the Lat. xv. 27 has ‘sanctificationis’. 

The inferior angels are over natural phenomena. Cf. Ps. Ixxvii. 18, civ. 7; 1 En. Ix. 12-21, Ixxv, Ixxx; 2 En. 
xix. 1-4; Rev. xiv. 18, iv. 5, vi. I, vil. 1, &c. 


ss) 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 2. 2-20 


presence, and the angels of sanctification, and the angels [of the spirit of fire and the angels] of the 
spirit of the winds, and the angels of the spirit of the clouds, and of darkness, and of snow and of 
hail and of hoar frost, and the angels of the voices and of the thunder and of the lightning, and the 
angels of the spirits of cold and of heat, and of winter and of spring and of autumn and of summer, 
and of all the spirits of his creatures which are in the heavens and on the earth, (He created) the 
abysses and the darkness, eventide (and night), and the light, dawn and day, which He hath 

3 prepared in the knowledge of his heart. And thereupon we saw His works, and praised Him, and 
lauded before Him on account of all His works; for seven great works did He create on the first day. 

4 And on the second day He created the firmament in the midst of the waters, and the waters were 
divided on that day—half of them went up above and half of them went down below the firmament 
(that was) in the midst over the face of the whole earth. And this was the only work (God) created 

5 on the second day. And on the third day He commanded the waters to pass from off the face of 
6 the whole earth into one place, and the dry land to appear. And the waters did so as He com- 
manded them, and they retired from off the face of the earth into one place outside of this firmament, 

7 and the dry land appeared. And on that day He created for them all the seas according to their 
separate gathering-places, and all the rivers, and the gatherings of the waters in the mountains and 
on all the earth, and all the lakes, and all the dew of the earth, and the seed which is sown, and all 
sprouting things, and fruit-bearing trees, and trees of the wood, and the garden of Eden, in Eden, 

g and all (plants after their kind). These four great works God created on the third day. And on 
the fourth day He created the sun and the moon and the stars, and set them in the firmament of 
the heaven, to give light upon all the earth, and to rule over the day and the night, and divide the 

g light from the darkness. And God appointed the sun to be a great sign on the earth for days and 
ro for sabbaths and for months and for feasts and for years and for sabbaths of years and for jubilees and 
for all seasons of the years. And it divideth the light from the darkness [and] for prosperity, that all 

11 things may prosper which shoot and grow on the earth. These three kinds He made on the fourth 
day. And on the fifth day He created great sea monsters in the depths of the waters, for these were 
the first things of flesh that were created by his hands, the fish and everything that moves in the 
12 waters, and everything that flies, the birds and all their kind. And the sun rose above them to prosper 
(them), and above everything that was on the earth, everything that shoots out of the earth, and all 

13 fruit-bearing trees, and all flesh. These three kinds He created on the fifth day. And on the sixth day 
14 He created all the animals of the earth, and all cattle, and everything that moves on the earth. And 
after all this He created man,a man and a woman created He them, and gave him dominion over all 
that is upon the earth, and in the seas, and over everything that flies, and over. beasts and over cattle, 
and over everything that moves on the earth, and over the whole earth, and over all this He gave 
15 him dominion. And these four kinds He created on the sixth day. And there were altogether 
16 two and twenty kinds. And He finished all his work on the sixth day—all that is in the heavens 
and on the earth, and in the seas and in the abysses, and in the light and in the darkness, and in 
17 everything. And He gave us a great sign, the Sabbath day, that we should work six days, but 
18 keep Sabbath on the seventh day from all work. And all the angels of the presence, and all the 
angels of sanctification, these two great classes—He hath bidden us to keep the Sabbath with Him 
rg in heaven and on earth. And He said utito us: ‘Behold, I will separate unto Myself a people from 
among all the peoples, and these shall keep the Sabbath day, and I will sanctify them unto Myself 
as My people, and will bless them ; as I have sanctified the Sabbath day and do sanctify (it) unto 
20 Myself, even so will I bless them, and they shall be My people and I will be their God. And 
I have chosen the seed of Jacob from amongst all that I have seen, and have written him down as 


[of ... angels] dca. >a, Epiph. 
of snow. So Epiph. aé read ‘of all’ > cd. 
the. Eth. reads ‘all’, kwel/i for el/u = ‘these’ = rds simply. 
and night, added from Epiph. 
4. Cf. Gen. i. 6-7; 2 En. xxvi-xxvii. 
5-14. Cf. Gen. i. 9-28; 2 En. xxx. 1-8. 
5. third day + ‘He made as’ MSS. 
7. in Eden, or ‘for pleasure’: dittography. Eden created on third day as in ‘ Conflict of Adam and Eve, i. 1 
Cf. 2 En. xxx. 1; Ber. rabb. 15. ee 
4 Ezra iii. 6 taught it was ‘ pre-existent’; this became the prevailing view among isti 
J.T. 198; Jerome, Quaest. TD fe Gen, ii. 8. e 8 amone Jove anaes Wehr 
plants after their kind. So Epiph. 
g. Author avoids the moon, because it upsets his calendar, 
16. on ss Ack ee Gen. ii. 2* (Sam., LXX, Syr. against Mass.). 
17-21. The two chief orders of angels like Israel observe the Sabbath : i i i 
ale ene ee apparently the third order, like the Gentiles, 
20. Cf, Isa, xli. 8, xliv. 1,2. Ihave chosen. ‘I will choose’, Epiph. 
I 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 2. 20-33 


My first-born son, and have sanctified him unto Myself for ever and ever; and I will teach them the 
21 Sabbath day, that they may keep Sabbath thereon from all work.’ And thus He created therein a 
sign in accordance with which they should keep Sabbath with us on the seventh day, to eat and to 
drink, and to bless Him who has created all things as He has blessed and sanctified unto Himself 
22 a peculiar people above all peoples, and that they should keep Sabbath together with us. And He 
caused His commands to ascend as a sweet savour acceptable before Him all the days.... 
23 There (were) two and twenty heads of mankind from Adam to Jacob, and two and twenty kinds of 
work were made until the seventh day ; this is blessed and holy ; and the former also is blessed and 
24 holy ; and this one serves with that one for sanctification and blessing. And to this (Jacob and 
his seed) it was granted that they should always be the blessed and holy ones of the first testimony 
25 and law, even as He had sanctified and blessed the Sabbath day on the seventh day. He created 
heaven and earth and everything that He created in six days, and God made the seventh day holy, 
for all His works ; therefore He commanded on its behalf that, whoever does any work thereon 
26 shall die, and that he who defiles it shall surely die. Wherefore do thou command the children of 
Israel to observe this day that they may keep it holy and not do thereon any work, and not to 
24 defile it, as it is holier than all other days. And whoever profanes it shall surely die, and whoever 
does thereon any work shall surely die eternally, that the children of Israel may observe this day 
throughout their generations, and not be rooted out of the land; for it is a holy day and a blessed 
28 day. And every one who observes it and keeps Sabbath thereon from all his work, will be holy and 
_29 blessed throughout all days like unto us. Declare and say to the children of Israel the law of this 
day both that they should keep Sabbath thereon, and that they should not forsake it in the error of 
their hearts ; (and) that it is not lawful to do any work thereon which is unseemly, to do thereon 
their own pleasure, and that they should not prepare thereon anything to be eaten or drunk, tand 
(that it is not lawful) to draw water, or bring in or take out thereon through their gates any burden,} 
30 which they had not prepared for themselves on the sixth day in their dwellings. And they shall 
not bring in nor take out from house to house on that day; for that day is more holy and blessed 
than any jubilee day of the jubilees ; on this we kept Sabbath in the heavens before it was made 
31 known to any flesh to keep Sabbath thereon on the earth. And the Creator of all things blessed 
it, but he did not sanctify all peoples and nations to keep Sabbath thereon, but Israel alone: them 
32 alone he permitted to eat and drink and to keep Sabbath thereon on the earth. And the Creator 
of all things blessed this day which He had created for blessing and holiness and glory above all 
33 days. This law and testimony was given to the children of Israel as a law for ever unto their 
generations. 


My first-born son. Cf. Exod. iv. 22; Ps. Ixxxix. 27; Jer. xxxi. 9. i 
21. a peculiar people. Cf. Deut. vii.6; Exod. xix.5; Amos iii.12. peculiar. So Eth. easily emended. 
22. commands t+ + 

sweet savour. Gen. viii. 21; Exod. xxix. 18; Ezek. xx. 41; 2 Cor. il. 15; Eph. v. 2. 

acceptable before Him. Rom. xii. 1; 1 Tim. ii. 3. 

23. Agreement of all authorities proves a-lacuna here. Restored text=‘as there were twenty-two letters and 
twenty-two sacred books and twenty-two heads of mankind from Adam to Jacob, so there were made twenty-two 
kinds of work. Combine twelve minor prophets, Judges and Ruth, Ezra and Nehemiah, Jeremiah and Lamentations, 
taking Kings, Chronicles, and Samuel as three books, hence twenty-two. 

Jacob and the Sabbath are parallel in their exaltation. 

25. Cf. Exod. xxxi. 14, 15, xxxv. 2; Numb. xv. 32-6. 

27. rooted out. Cf. Deut. xxix. 28. i. ; ; : in 

29. Cf. Isa. lvi. 2, 4; lviii. 13; Neh. xiii. 15-22. Which is unseemly. Like Littmann, I take za ijerkawen 
za’ijastar’i as = IW) Mi Noy, See also on iii. 15. Or we may connect ‘unseemly’ with the following infinitive, 
‘unseemly to do thereon, (even) their own pleasure’, as this is the usual construction after N49, Cf. Esther ii. 95 
Chull. 83 4; Nid. vi. 4. 2. 

oe against Aine oe food deduced from Exod. xvi. 23, xxxv. 3. The order is dislocated here. Either we have 
a dittography of 30 or else the law concerning burdens should precede law about preparing food. Latter law in 
Ber. 24, former in Jer. xvii. 21-7; Neh, xiii. 19; Shabb. vii. 2; esp. John v. Io. 

30. Chief Jewish festivals observed in heaven. Cf. vi. 18. ‘ 

31. the Creator of all things blessed it, but He did not sanctify all peoples . . . to keep Sabbath thereon, 
but Israel alone. The words or rather the thought of them recurs in the Jewish Prayer Book (ed. Singer), p. 124, ‘O 
Lord our God . . . who hast sanctified us .. . and .., hast given us this holy Sabbath; ’ 139, ‘ Thou didst not give 
it unto the nations of other lands,’ &c. ses 

31. it. Restored by a cnenee Ean ue pp ee: rs = gee 

Israel alone privileged and for ever. . Lev. vii. 36, xxiii. 14; Ex. xxvii. 21. ; 

Bz ee had Erouted for blessing and holiness and glory. Cf. Jewish Prayer Book, p. 150. ‘This Sabbath day 

which Thou hast given us for holiness . . . for honour and for glory. 


15 


(Pi 
THE BOOK OF JUBILEES (3) 1217 


Adam names all creatures, 1-3. Creation of Eve and enactment of Levitical laws of purification, 

: aed : : ; 

4-14. Adam and Eve in Paradise: their sin and expulsion, 15-29. Law of covering one’s 
shame enacted, 30-2. Adam and Eve live in Eldé, 32-5. (Cf. Gen. ii. 18-25, iii.) 


31 And on the six days of the second week we brought, according to the word of God, unto 
Adam all the beasts, and all the cattle, and all the birds, and everything that moves on the earth, 
and everything that moves in the water, according to their kinds, and according to their types: the 
beasts on the first day; the cattle on the second day; the birds on the third day; and all that 
which moves on the earth on the fourth day; and that which moves in the water on the fifth day. 

2 And Adam named them all by their respective names, and as he called them, so was their name. 
3 And on these five days Adam saw all these, male and female, according to every kind that was on 
4 the earth, but he was alone and found no helpmeet for him. And the Lord said unto us: ‘It is not 
5 good that the man should be alone: let us make a helpmeet for him.’ And the Lord our God 
caused a deep sleep to fall upon him, and he slept, and He took for the woman one rib from amongst 
6his ribs, and this rib was the origin of the woman from amongst his ribs, and He built 
up the flesh in its stead, and built the woman. And He awaked Adam out of his sleep 
and on awaking he rose on the sixth day, and He brought her to him, and he knew 
her, and said unto her: ‘ This is now bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called 
7 [my] wife ; because she was taken from her husband.’ Therefore shall man and wife be one, and 
therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and cleave unto his wife, and they shall be 
gone flesh. In the first week was Adam created, and the rib—his wife: in the second week He 
showed her unto him: and for this reason the commandment was given to keep in their defilement, 
9 for a male seven days, and for a female twice seven days. And after Adam had completed forty 
days in the land where he had been created. we brought him into the garden of Eden to till and 
keep it, but his wife they brought in on the eightieth day, and after this she entered into the garden 
ro Of Eden. And for this reason the commandment is written on the heavenly tablets in regard to her 
that gives birth : ‘if she bears a male, she shall remain in her uncleanness seven days according to 
the first week of days, and thirty and three days shall she remain in the blood of her purifying, and 
she shall not touch any hallowed thing, nor enter into the sanctuary, until she accomplishes these 
11 days which (are enjoined) in the case of a male child. But in the case of a female child she shall 
remain in her uncleanness two weeks of days, according to the first two weeks, and sixty-six days 
12 in the blood of her purification, and they will be in all eighty days.’ And when she had completed 
these eighty days we brought her into the garden of Eden, for it is holier than all the earth besides, 
13 and every tree that is planted init is holy. Therefore, there was ordained regarding her who bears 
a male or a female child the statute of those days that she should touch no hallowed thing, nor 
14 enter into the sanctuary until these days for the male or female child are accomplished. This is the 
law and testimony which was written down for Israel, in order that they should observe (it) all the 
15 days. And in the first week of the first jubilee, Adam and his wife were in the garden of Eden for 1-7 a. 
seven years tilling and keeping it, and we gave him work and we instructed him to do everything 
16 that is suitable for tillage. And he tilled (the garden), and was naked and knew it not, and was 
not ashamed, and he protected the garden from the birds and beasts and cattle, and gathered its 
fruit, and eat, and put aside the residue for himself and for his wife [and put aside that which was 
17 being kept].. And after the completion of the seven years, which he had completed there, seven 8 a.m. 
years exactly, and in the second month, on the seventeenth day (of the month), the serpent came 
and approached the woman, and the serpent said to the woman, ‘Hath God commanded you, 


III. 1-16. Gen. li. 19-25. 

3- found, Mass., Sam. ; against LXX, Syr., Vulg. of Gen. ii. 20, ‘was found’. 

4. Let us make. So Gen. ii. 18 (LXX, Vulg.). Mass., Sam., Syr., ‘I will make’. 

5,6. Cf. Targ. Jon. on Gen. ii. 21, ‘ thirteenth rib.’ 

6. [my] interpolated from Eth. version, where alone it is found; Mass., Syr., Vulg. >‘her’. 

7. Omits ‘twain’ as Mass., Onk, 

8-14. Adopts ancient or invents new legend to explain origin of law of purification after child-birth in Lev. xii. 2-5 
Cf. Conflict of Adam and Eve,i.74; Anastasius Sinaita; Glycas, Chron. 39%; Syncell. i. 8-9; Midrash Tadshe xv - 
Eppstein, &. £. /. (1890), xxxi..92. For quotations see Charles’ Commentary, 22-4. f 

Io. heavenly tablets. Cf. 1 En. xlvii. 3, Ixxxi. 1, xciii. 2, cill. 2; Test. Levi v; Test. Asher li, vil. In En. and 
Test. the idea wavers between absolute determinism and prediction pure, and simple. 

_ In Jubilees they are at times a record even for contemporary events (xiv. 9, xxx. 20, xxxi. 32), ora heavenly copy of 
levitical laws (iii. 8, 31, iv. 32, v. 13, vi. 17, xv. 25, XVI. 29, XXIV. 33, XXVili. 6, xxxii. 15, &c.). 

15. Adam seven years in paradise. Sanh. 38 4, Die Schatzhohle (trans. Bezold), p. 7, says six hours. 

God instructs him. Cf. Isa. xxviii. 26-9; later assigned to Michael (Vit. Ad. xxii) or angels (Ber. Rabb. 24). 
: suitable. With Littmann I take zajdstar’t as = »}~4. See on ii. 9. But the ord. sense ‘revealed’ may be right 
ere. 

17-22. Gen. ill. 1-7. ee 


16 


HE GOOK OF |UBILEES' 3, 18-4. bs 


18 saying, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?’ And she said to it. ‘Of all rui 
trees of the garden God hath said unto us, Eat; but of the fruit of the tree which is i ee 
the garden God hath said unto us, Ye shall not eat thereof, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.’ 
19 And the serpent said unto the woman, ‘ Ye shall not surely die: for God doth know that on the day 
ye shall eat thereof, your eyes will be opened, and ye will be as gods, and ye will know good and 
20 evil... And the woman saw the tree that it was agreeable and pleasant to the eye, and that its fruit 
21 was good for food, and she took thereof and eat. And when she had first covered her shame with 
figleaves, she gave thereof to Adam and he eat, and his eyes were opened, and he saw that he was 
22 naked. And he took figleaves and sewed (them) together, and made an apron for himself, and 
23, 24 covered his shame. And God cursed the serpent, and was wroth with it for ever.... And He was 
wroth with the woman, because she hearkened to the voice of the serpent, and did eat; and He 
said unto her: ‘I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy pains: in sorrow thou shalt bring forth 
25 Children, and thy return shall be unto thy husband, and he will rule over thee.’ And to Adam also 
he said, ‘ Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree of which 
I commanded thee that thou shouldst not eat thereof, cursed be the ground for thy sake: thorns 
and thistles shall it bring forth to thee, and thou shalt eat thy bread in the sweat of thy face, till 
thou returnest to the earth from whence thou wast taken ; for earth thou art, and unto earth shalt 
26 thou return.” And He made for them coats of skin, and clothed them, and sent them forth from 
27 the Garden of Eden. And on that day on which Adam went forth from the Garden, he offered as 
a sweet savour an offering, frankincense, galbanum, and stacte, and spices in the morning with the 
28 rising of the sun from the day when he covered his shame. And on that day was closed the mouth 
of all beasts, and of cattle, and of birds, and of whatever walks, and of whatever moves, so that they 
could no longer speak: for they had all spoken one with another with one lip and with one tongue. 
29 And He sent out of the Garden of Eden all flesh that was in the Garden of Eden, and all flesh was 
scattered according to its kinds, and according to its types unto the places which had been created 
30 for them. And to Adam alone did He give (the wherewithal) to cover his shame, of all the beasts and 
31 cattle. On this account, it is prescribed on the heavenly tablets as touching all those who know the 
judgment of the law, that they should cover their shame, and should not uncover themselves as the 
32 Gentiles uncover themselves. And on the new moon of the fourth month, Adam and his wife went 8 a.m. 
33 forth from the Garden of Eden, and they dwelt in the land of Elda in the land of their creation. And 
34 Adam called the name of his wife Eve. And they had no son till the first jubilee, and after this he 
35 knew her. Now he tilled the land as he had been instructed in the Garden of Eden. 


Cain and Abel and other children of Adam,1-12. Enos, Kenan, Mahalalel, fared, 13-15. Enoch 
and his history, 16-25. Four sacred places, 26. Methuselah, Lamech, Noah, 27,28. Death of 
Adam and Cain, 29-32. Shem, Ham, and Faphet, 32. (Cf. Gen. iv-v.) 


4, And in the third week in the second jubilee* she gave birth to Cain, and in the fourth” she 64-70 a. 
2 gave birth to Abel, and in the fifth ° she gave birth to her daughter Awan. And in the first (year) of 71-77 a.m. 
the third jubilee,t Cain slew Abel because (God) accepted the sacrifice of Abel, and did not accept 78-84 a.m. 
3 the offering of Cain. And he slew him in the field: and his blood cried from the ground to heaven, 99-105 a.m. 


23. Lacuna: supply from Syncell. i. 14; Targ., Ps.-Jon. on Gen. iii. 14, Midrash Koheleth some statement to the 
effect that the serpent’s feet were cut off. Cf. Joseph. Azz. i. 1. 4. 
24. Follows Gen. iii. 16 (LXX). 
25-6. Gen. iii. 17-19, 21, 24. 
25. thy bread. So LXX. Mass., Sam. > ‘thy’. 
wast taken, éansh@éka corrupt, as often, for sanash@cha. 
27. Adam’s incense-offering antedates Exod. xxx. 34. see : 
day...hecovered his shame. Cf. Exod. xx. 26, xxviii. 42. Beer 41 suggests he was thinking of priests at the 
altar. 
28. A common Jewish belief. Cf. Joseph. Azz. i. 1.4; Conflict of Adam and Eve, i. 18; Philo, Quaest. in Gen. 
i. 32. Our text is quoted by Syncell. i.14; Cedren. 1. 9, 10; Zonaras, i. 23. Original language was said to be Hebrew 
(xii. 25; cf. Jerus. Targ. on Gen. xi.1; Ber. rabb. 18; Jerahmeel, xxxviil. II) ; or Syriac (Die Schatzhohle, Theodoret, 
Ephraem); or Greek (Eutychius; 2 En. xxx. 13; Or. Sibyll. iii, 24-6); or Aramaic, since Adam wrote Ps. 
exxxix (Sanh. 384; but Shabb. 124 says angels do not understand Aramaic). Loe: 
31. Good indication of date, Author protests against following Greeks in stripping for the games. Cf. 1 Macc. 
i. 13, 14; 2 Macc. iv. 12-14; Joseph, Azz, xii. 5. I. 
32. ’Elda, corrupt for midi, ‘land of nativity,’ as Onk. and Ps.-Jon. in Gen. iii.23. So ‘creation’ is a rendering of 
Elda. 
34. No marriage in Eden. Cf. Dze Schatzhohle, p. 7. 
IV. 1. No two early authorities agree in the names of Adam’s daughters. a aie : . 
Syncell. i, 14 dates Cain’s birth in 70 A. M., Abel’s in 77, ‘ Asouam’s (= AwaAn’s) in 85, and puts Abel's sacrifice 
at 22 years of age, i.e. 99 A.M. 
2-3. Cf. Gen. iv. 4, 5, 8, Io. e 


1105.2 17 


THE:BOOK OF JUBILEES 4, 4-20 


4 complaining because he had slain him. And the Lord reproved Cain because of Abel, because he 
had slain him, and he made him a fugitive on the earth because of the blood of his brother, and he 
5 cursed him upon the earth. And on this account it is written on the heavenly tables, ‘Cursed is 
he who smites his neighbour treacherously, and let all who have seen and heard say, So be it; and 
6 the man who has seen and not declared (it), let him be accursed as the other. And for this reason 
we announce when we come before the Lord our God all the sin which is committed in heaven and 
7 on earth, and in light and in darkness, and everywhere. And Adam and his wife mourned for 99-1247 | 
Abel four weeks of years, and in the fourth year of the fifth week they became joyful, and Adam 130 a.m. | 
knew his wife again, and she bare him a son, and he called his name Seth; for he said ‘GOD has 
8 raised up a second seed unto us on the earth instead of Abel; for Cain slew him.’ And in the sixth . 
g week he begat his daughter Azfir4. And Cain took Awan his sister to be his wife and she bare 134-40 a. 
him Enoch at the close of the fourth jubilee. And in the first year of the first week of the fifth 190-196a.m 
jubilee, houses were built on the earth, and Cain built a city, and called its name after the name of 197 A.M. 
10, 11 his son Enoch. And Adam knew Eve his wife and she bare yet nine sons. And in the fifth week 225-31 a. 
of the fifth jubilee Seth took Azira his sister to be his wife, and in the fourth (year of the sixth 235 A.M. 
12, 13 week) she bare him Enos. He began to call on the name of the Lord on the earth. And in the 
seventh jubilee in the third week Enos took N6am his sister to be his wife, and she bare him a son 309-15 Am 
‘4 in the third year of the fifth week, and he called his name Kenan. And at the close of the eighth 325, 386- 
jubilee Kenan took Mialéléth his sister to be his wife, and she bare him a son in the ninth jubilee, 392 4.™. 
15 in the first week in the third year of this week, and he called his name Mahalalel. And in the 395 4M. 
second week of the tenth jubilee Mahalalel took unto him to wife Dinah, the daughter of Baraki’él 449-55 A.N 
the daughter of his father’s brother, and she bare him a son in the third week in the sixth year, and 461 a.m. || 
he called his name Jared ; for in his days the angels of the Lord descended on the earth, those who 
are named the Watchers, that they should instruct the children of men, and that they should do 
16 judgment and uprightness on the earth. And in the eleventh jubilee Jared took to himself a wife, 512-18 4. 
and her name was Baraka, the daughter of RAsdjal, a daughter of his father’s brother, in the fourth 
week of this jubilee, and she bare him a son in the fifth week, in the fourth year of the jubilee, and 522 A.M. 
17 he called his name Enoch, And he was the first among men that are born on earth who learnt 
writing and knowledge and wisdom and who wrote down the signs of heaven according to the order 
of their months in a book, that men might know the seasons of the years according to the order of 
18 their separate months. And he was the first to write a testimony, and he testified to the sons of 
men among the generations of the earth, and recounted the weeks of the jubilees, and made known 
to them the days of the years, and set in order the months and recounted the Sabbaths of the years 
19 as we made (them), known to him. And what was and what will be he saw in a vision of his sleep, 
as it will happen to the children of men throughout their generations until the day of judgment; he 
saw and understood everything, and wrote his testimony, and placed the testimony on earth for all \| 
20 the children of men and for their generations. And in the twelfth jubilee, in the seventh week 582-88 a.m 










3. complaining. Cf. Gen. iv. 10; 1 En, xxii. 5, 6. 

4. Eth. zuf, a bad transliteration of Hebrew )2, ‘fugitive,’ Gen. iv. 12. 

6. Cf. Intr. to 2 Enoch xxxiv, Charles’ edition. 

7-8. Usually the mother names the child in Genesis, father in ‘Jubilees’, as Sam. in Gen. iv. 25. Exceptions are 
Gen, iv. 26, v. 29, xxv. 25, 26, Exod. ii. 22. 

9. Enoch. Cf. Gen. iv. 17; Syncell. i. 16; Jashar, 96. ' 


Io. nine sons, quoted by Epiph. Maer. xxxix. 6. Jashar speaks of three ; Syncell. i. 18 and Vit. Ad. of thirty-three. 

II. ( ) supplied acc. to Syncell. i. 17. 

12. Gen. iv.26. Originally as here bmyn was taken ina good sense. Cf. Joseph. Azz. i. 3.1, LXX, Syr., but Jerome, 
and later Rabbis, e.g. Ber. Rabb. 23, Jashar ii. 1090, ‘Chronicles of Jerahmeel’ xxiv. 9, xxvi. 20, Shabb, 118 4, and 
Onk. take as implying ceasing from prayer or beginning idolatry. 

15. Read ‘father’s brother’ for ‘father’s sister’ with Greek MS. ¢ on Gen. v. 1 5 and Syriac Fragment. 

Jared . . . descended, play on words in Hebrew. : 

angels of the Lord descended on the earth. Gen. vi. 1-4; Is. xxiv. 21. True interpretation here as in 
1 Enoch vi. 2 (Greek), Test. of XII Patr., Philo, Jude, 2 Peter, and Epiphanius. Subsequently to Christians, ‘sons of 
God’ become ‘children of Seth;’ first in Julius Africanus, emphatically in Chrysostom, Homilies, Augustine, De Civ, 
Dei, xv, Jerome, Comm. in Ps. cxxxii, Eutychius, Syncellus, Dée Schatzhohle, Conflict of Adam and Eve, esp. bk. iii, iv, 
Zonaras, Glycas. Later Jewish authors (Onkelos, Symmachus, Ps.-Jon., Ber. rabb., Jashar, &c.) made them into 
‘mighty men’, ‘judges’, &c. By this means Enoch’s greatness was transferred to Seth by Christians, just as to 
Moses, Ezra, Elijah, by Jews. 

Watchers, as in Dan. iv. 13, 17, 23; 1 En. i. 5, XxX. 1; 2 En. vii, xviii. 

17-23. Shows the parts of Enoch books which were known to our author. Cf. 1 En, vi-xvi, xxiii-xxxvi, Ixxii-xc. 

17. For ‘Enoch the scribe’ see 1 En. xii. 3, 4. Contrast 1 En. Ixix. 8. 

18. Enoch does not deal with ‘ weeks of jubilees’, &c. See Jub. vii. 37, xxi. 10 (note): 


19. This vision is that in 1 En. Ixxxiii-xc. Name of his wife and nature of his dream are the same in both, also 
ascetic tone (vision seen before marriage). 
18 





THE BOOK. OF. JUBILEES:' 4. 20-33 


thereof, he took to himself a wife, and her name was Edni, the daughter of Danél, the daughter of 
his father’s brother, and in the sixth year in this week she bare him a son and he called his name 
21 Methuselah. And he was moreover with the angels of God these six jubilees of years, and they 
showed him everything which is on earth and in the heavens, the rule of the sun,and he wrote down 
22 everything. And he testified to the Watchers, who had sinned with the daughters of men; for 
these had begun to unite themselves, so as to be defiled, with the daughters of men, and Enoch 
23 testified against (them) all. And he was taken from amongst the children of men, and we conducted 
him into the Garden of Eden in majesty and honour, and behold there he writes down the con- 
24 demnation and judgment of the world, and all the wickedness of the children of men. And on 
account of it (God) brought the waters of the flood upon all the land of Eden; for there he was set 
as a sign and that he should testify against all the children of men, that he should recount all the 
25 deeds of the generations until the day of condemnation. And he burnt the incense of the sanctuary, 
26 (even) sweet spices acceptable before the Lord on the Mount. For the Lord has four places on the 
earth, the Garden of Eden, and the Mount of the East, and this mountain on which thou art this 
day, Mount Sinai, and Mount Zion (which) will be sanctified in the new creation for a sanctification 
of the earth ; through it will the earth be sanctified from all (its) guilt and its uncleanness through- 
27 out the generations of the world. And. in the fourteenth jubilee Methuselah took unto himself 
a wife, Edna the daughter of ’Azrial, the daughter of his father’s brother, in the third week, in the 


587 AM. 


652 A.M. 


28 first year of this week, and he begat a son and called his name Lamech. And in the fifteenth 7o1-7 a.m. 


jubilee in the third week Lamech took to himself a wife, and her name was Béténds the daughter of 
Baraki’il, the daughter of his father’s brother, and in this week she bare him a son and he called his 
name Noah, saying, ‘ This one will comfort me for my trouble and all my work, and for the ground 
29 which the Lord hath cursed.’ And at the close of the nineteenth jubilee, in the seventh week in 
the sixth year thereof, Adam died, and all his sons buried him in the land of his creation, and he 
30 was the first to be buried in the earth. And he lacked seventy years of one thousand years; for 
one thousand years are as one day in the testimony of the heavens and therefore was it written 
concerning the tree of knowledge: ‘On the day that ye eat thereof ye shall die.” For this reason he 
31 did not complete the years of this day ; for he died during it. At the close of this jubilee Cain was 
killed after him in the same year ; for his house fell upon him and he died in the midst of his house, 
and he was killed by its stones ; for with a stone he had killed Abel, and by a stone was he killed in 
32 righteous judgment. For this reason it was ordained on the heavenly tablets : ‘ With the instru- 
ment with which a man kills his neighbour with the same shall he be killed ; after the manner that 
33 he wounded him, in like manner shall they deal with him.’ And in the twenty-fifth jubilee Noah 
took to himself a wife, and her name was ‘Emzard, the daughter of Raké’él, the daughter of his 
father’s brother, in the first year in the fifth week: and in the third year thereof she bare him 
Shem, in the fifth year thereof she bare him Ham, and in the first year in the sixth week she bare 
him Japheth. 


21, 22. Refer to 1 En. xii—xvi, xxili-xxxvi. 

23. Points to tradition like that at base of 1 En. Ixx. Enoch is heavenly scribe here as in 2 En, xxiii, 1-3. 
Galsor Ln. xi. 3; 2 En. xl. 035 Mii. 25 Ixiv. 5. 

Garden of Eden, as in 1 En, Ixx. 1-3; 2 En. lxvii. 2, 

24. Cf. 2 En. xxxiv. 3; Test. Naph. 4. 

25. guatr corrupt for guctaré, ‘ sweet spices.’ Cf, Exod. xxx. 7. se 

26. Four abodes of God on earth. ‘Mountain of the East’, uncertain; either Mount Ephraim (Rapoport, ZDMG, 
xi. 730-33, implying Samaritan authorship) or Lubar on Ararat (Ronsch, pp. 505-6) or mount above Eden where 
Sethites live (in Die Schatzhihle, Conflict of Adam and Eve, &c.); or ‘throne of God’ ini En. xviii. 6, xxiii, I, Xxxul. I. 

27. father’s brother. Emended as in iv. 15. : ’ 

28. Cf. Gen. v.29. ? Noah born in 707 as Sam. Chron. The explanation of Noah’s name is much elaborated in 
Jashar 134; Ber. Rabb. 25. 

29, Cf, iii.'32, % } ; ‘ 

30. one thousand years ... one day. 2 Pet. iii. 8; Ep. Barn. xv; 2 En, xxxiii; Justin, Déad. c. Try ph. \xxxi, 
and Lactant. /zstitutzon. vii. 14. 

On the day, &c. Cf. Gen. ii. 17. } ; ; ; 

31-2. Two legends exist of Cain’s death. This is the earlier, quoted in Syncell. 1. 19; Cedren. i. 16. Law of exact 
retribution enforced by Cain’s fate; cf. Exod. xxi. 24; Lev. xxiv. 19. Beer says this law was unknown to traditional 
Judaism in cases of murder; but cf. 2 Macc. v. 10, xv. 32. It reaches the ideal in Gal. vi. 7; Col. 1i1. 25 and Gospel 
parables of ‘Dives and Lazarus’ and ‘ Unforgiving Debtor’. The later legend makes Lamech slay Cain. 

33. Shem really oldest in Gen. x. 21: so Vulg., Sanh. 69 6. 


19 C2 


930 A.M. 


1205 A.M. 


1207 A.M. 
1209 A.M. 
1212 A.M. 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 5, 22 


The angels of God marry the daughters of men, 1. Corruption of all creation, 2-3. Punishment of 
the fallen angels and their children, 4-9 a. Final judgment announced, 9 b-16. Day of A tone- 
ment, 17-18. The deluge foretold, Noah builds the ark, the deluge, t9-32. (Cf. Gen. vi-viii. 


19.) 


51 And it came to pass when the children of men began to multiply on the face of the earth 
and daughters were born unto them, that the angels of God saw them on a certain year of this 
jubilee, that they were beautiful to look upon; and they took themselves wives of all whom they 

2 chose, and they bare unto them sons and they were giants. And lawlessness increased on the 
earth and all flesh corrupted its way, alike men and cattle and beasts and birds and everything that 
walks on the earth—all of them corrupted their ways and their orders, and they began to devour 
each other, and lawlessness increased on the earth and every imagination of the thoughts of all men 

3 (was) thus evil continually. And God looked upon the earth, and behold it was corrupt, and all 
flesh had corrupted its orders, and all that were upon the earth had wrought all manner of evil 

4 before His eyes. And He said that He would destroy man and all flesh upon the face of the earth 

5, 6 which He had created. But Noah found grace before the eyes of the Lord. And against the 
angels whom He had sent upon the earth, He was exceedingly wroth, and He gave commandment 
to root them out of all their dominion, and He bade us to bind them in the depths of the earth, and 

7 behold they are bound in the midst of them, and are (kept) separate. And against their sons went 
forth a command from before His face that they should be smitten with the sword, and be removed 

8 from under heaven. And He said ‘ My spirit shall not always abide on man; for they also are flesh 

9 and their days shall be one hundred and twenty years’. And He sent His sword into their midst 
that each should slay his neighbour, and they began to slay each other till they all fell by the sword 

to and were destroyed from the earth. And their fathers were witnesses (of their destruction), and 
after this they were bound in the depths of the earth for ever, until the day of the great condemna- 
tion, when judgment is executed on all those who have corrupted their ways and their works before 
tr the Lord. And He j}destroyed} all from their places, and there twas} not left one of them whom 
12 He judged not according to all their wickedness. And he ¢made} for all his works a new and 
righteous nature, so that they should not sin in their whole nature for ever, but should be all 
13 righteous each in his kind alway. And the judgment of all is ordained and written on the heavenly 
tablets in righteousness——even (the judgment of) all who depart from the path which is ordained for 
them to walk in; and if they walk not therein, judgment is written down for every creature and 
14 for every kind. And there is nothing in heaven or on earth, or in light or in darkness, or in Sheol 
or in the depth, or in the place of darkness (which is not judged); and all their judgments are 
15 ordained and written and engraved. In regard to all He will judge, the great according to his 
16 greatness, and the small according to his smallness, and each according to his way. And He is not 
one who will regard the person (of any), nor is He one who will receive gifts, if He says that He will 
execute judgment on each: if one gave everything that is on the earth, He will not regard the 
‘7 gifts or the person (of any), nor accept anything at his hands, for He is a righteous judge. [And 
of the children of Israel it has been written and ordained: If they turn to him in righteousness, 
18 He will forgive all their transgressions and pardon all their sins. It is written and ordained that 
19 He will show mercy to all who turn from all their guilt once each year.]| And as for all those who 
corrupted their ways and their thoughts before the flood, no man’s person was accepted save that of 
Noah alone ; for his person was accepted in behalf of his sons, whom (God) saved from the waters 
of the flood on his account ; for his heart was righteous in all his ways, according as it was com- 
20 manded regarding him, and he had not departed from aught that was ordained for him. And the 
Lord said that he would destroy everything which was upon the earth, both men and cattle, and 
21 beasts, and fowls of the air, and that which moveth on the earth. And He commanded Noah to 
22 make him an ark, that he might save himself from the waters of the flood. And Noah made the 


ark in all respects as He commanded him, in the twenty-seventh jubilee of years, in the fifth week 1307 re | 


V. Parallel to Gen. vi-viii. 19. Cf, 1 En. vi. 1, 2, vii. 5, x. 12, Ixxxix. Be 
3. wrought all manner of evil. See Ethiopic text. 
4. that He would, &c. So MSS. dc. 
11-12. Corruption of tense probable in Hebrew ; the ‘new creation’ is still in the future. 
16. Cf. Deut. x. 17; 2 Chron, xix. ve 
17-18, Interpolated, or transposed from xxxiv. 18-19, 
18. The Day of Atonement blots out all sins for the truly penitent (contrary to Lev. xvi. 21 ; Yoma viii, 9) 
19. Cf. Gen. xviii. 23-32. : 
22. Read ‘twenty-seventh’ for ‘ twenty-second’. 
20 


| 
: 
: 


tae BOOK OF JU BILEES 5.236; 10 


23 in the fifth year (on the new moon of the first month). And he entered in the sixth (year) thereof, 1308 a.m. 
in the second month, on the new moon of the second month, till the sixteenth; and he entered, and 
a brought to him, into the ark, and the Lord closed it from without on the seventeenth 

24 And the Lord opened seven flood-gates of heaven, 

And the mouths of the fountains of the great deep, seven mouths in number. 
25 And the flood-gates began to pour down water from the heaven forty days and forty nights, 
And the fountains of the deep also sent up waters, until the whole world was full of water. 
26 And the waters increased upon the earth: 
Fifteen cubits did the waters rise above all the high mountains, 
And the ark was lift up above the earth, 
And it moved upon the face of the waters. 
27 And the water prevailed on the face of the earth five months—one hundred and fifty days. 
28, 29 And the ark went and rested on the top of Libr, one of the mountains of Ararat. And (on the 
new moon) in the fourth month the fountains of the great deep were closed and the flood-gates of 
heaven were restrained ; and on the new moon of the seventh month all the mouths of the abysses 

30 of the earth were opened, and the water began to descend into the deep below. And on the new 
moon of the tenth month the tops of the mountains were seen, and on the new moon of the first 1309 a.m. 

31 month the earth became visible. And the waters disappeared from above the earth in the fifth 
week in the seventh year thereof, and on the seventeenth day in the second month the earth was dry. 

32 And on the twenty-seventh thereof he opened the ark, and sent forth from it beasts, and cattle, and 
birds, and every moving thing. 


Sacrifice of Noah, 1-3 (cf. Gen. viii. 20-2). God's covenant with Noah, eating of blood forbidden, 
4-10 (cf. Gen. ix. 1-17). Moses bidden to renew this law against the eating of blood, 11-14. 
Bow set in the clouds for a sign, 15-16. Feast of weeks instituted, history of its observance, 17-22. 
Feasts of the new moons, 23-8. Division of the year into 364 days, 29-38. 


6: And on the new moon of the third month he went forth from the ark, and built an altar on 
2 that mountain. And he made atonement for the earth, and took a kid and made atonement by its 
blood for all the guilt of the earth; for everything that had been on it had been destroyed, save 

3 those that were in the ark with Noah. And he placed the fat thereof on the altar, and he took an 
ox, and a goat, and a sheep and kids, and salt, and a turtle-dove, and the young of a dove, and 
placed a burnt sacrifice on the altar, and poured thereon an offering mingled with oil, and sprinkled 
wine and strewed frankincense over everything, and caused a goodly savour to arise, acceptable before 
4the Lord. And the Lord smelt the goodly savour, and He made a covenant with him that there 
should not be any more a flood to destroy the earth ; that all the days of the earth seed-time and 
harvest should never cease; cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night should not 

5 change their order, nor cease for ever. ‘And you, increase ye and multiply upon the earth, and 
become many upon it, and be a blessing upon it. The fear of you and the dread of you I will 

6 inspire in everything that is on earth and in the sea. And behold I have given unto you all beasts, 
and all winged things, and everything that moves on the earth, and the fish in the waters, and all 

7 things for food ; as the green herbs, I have given you all things to eat. But flesh, with the life 
thereof, with the blood, ye shall not eat ; for the life of all flesh is in the blood, lest your blood of 
your lives be required. At the hand of every man, at the hand of every (beast) will I require the 

8 blood of man. Whoso sheddeth man’s blood by man shall his blood be shed; for in the image of 

9, 10 God made He man. And you, increase ye, and multiply on the earth.’ And Noah and his sons 


28. Laibar, in Armenia (Sayce); the Babylonian Noah rested on Mount Nizir, in the Lulubi of the Assyrian 
inscriptions. 

29. Gen. viii. 2. Cf. 1 En, Ixxxix. 7. 

30. Gen. viil. 5, 13- : wp jh 

31. The earth became dry exactly one year after Noah entered the ark. In Gen. vill. 14 this is on the twenty- 
seventh, not the seventeenth day. Lagarde’s LXX MS. z on Gen, vill. 14 quotes part of 31 and 32; also the date in 
Vis Is 


VI. 1. Cf. xiv. 1, xliv. 1 (events on same date). Ber. Rabb. 34 placed Noah’s altar at Jerusalem. 

2. Cf. Lev. xviii. 26; Num. xxxv. 33, but they give no exact parallels. 

3. Gen. viii. 20, expanded by Lev. ii. 2, 5; Exod. xxix. 4o. 

acceptable, jéshamer for text jéshamer. 

4-7. God’s covenant with Noah, as Gen. viii, ix. 

5. be a blessing for ‘ multiply’ in Gen. ix. 7. 

upon. Text md@ekala corrupt for lé‘eléhd. ; ; , 

10-14. Noah’s covenant is completed and confirmed by the Mosaic one in same month. Cf. Exod. xix, I. 
21 


THE: BOOK OF ‘JUBIUEES 6114 


swore that they would not eat any blood that was in any flesh, and he made a covenant before the 
11 Lord God for ever throughout all the generations of the earth in this month. On this account He 
spake to thee that thou shouldst make a covenant with the children of Israel in this month upon the 
mountain with an oath, and that thou shouldst sprinkle blood upon them because of all the words 
12 of the covenant, which the Lord made with them forever. And this testimony is written concerning 
you that you should observe it continually, so that you should not eat on any day any blood of beasts 
or birds or cattle during all the days of the earth, and the man who eats the blood of beast or of 
cattle or of birds during all the days of the earth, he and his seed shall be rooted out of the land. 
13 And do thou command the children of Israel to eat no blood, so that their names and their seed 
14 may be before the Lord our God continually. And for this law there is no limit of days, for it is 
for ever. They shall observe it throughout their generations, so that they may continue suppli- 
cating on your behalf with blood before the altar; every day and at the time of morning and 
evening they shall seek forgiveness on your behalf perpetually before the Lord that they may keep 
15 it and not be rooted out. And He gave to Noah and his sons a sign that there should not again 
16 be a flood on the earth. He set His bow in the cloud for a sign of the eternal covenant that there 
17 Should not again be a flood on the earth to destroy it all the days of the earth. For this reason it 
is ordained and written on the heavenly tablets, that they should celebrate the feast of weeks in this 
18 month once a year, to renew the covenant every year. And this whole festival was celebrated in 
heaven from the day of creation till the days of N oah—twenty-six jubilees and five weeks of years : 
and Noah and his sons observed it for seven jubilees and one week of years, till the day of Noah’s 
death, and from the day of Noah’s death his sons did away with (it) until the days of Abraham, and 
19 they eat blood. But Abraham observed it, and Isaac and Jacob and his children observed it up to 
thy days, and in thy days the children of Israel forgot it until ye celebrated it anew on this mountain. 
zo And do thou command the children of Israel to observe this festival in all their generations for a 
21 Commandment unto them: one day in the year in this month they shall celebrate the festival. For 
it is the feast of weeks and the feast: of first fruits: this feast is twofold and of a double nature : 
22 according to what is written and engraven concerning it, celebrate it. For I have written in the 
book of the first law, in that which I have written for thee, that thou shouldst celebrate it in its 
Season, one day in the year, and I explained to thee its sacrifices that the children of Israel should 
remember and should celebrate it throughout their generations in this month, one day in every year. 
23 And on the new moon of the first month, and on the new moon of the fourth month, and on the 
new moon of the seventh month, and on the new moon of the tenth month are the days of remem- 
brance, and the days of the seasons in the four divisions of the year. These are written and ordained 
24 as a testimony for ever. And Noah ordained them for himself as feasts for the generations for ever, 
25 So that they have become thereby a memorial unto him. And on the new moon of the first month 
he was bidden to make for himself an ark, and on that (day) the earth became dry and he opened 
26 (the ark) and saw the earth. And on the new moon of the fourth month the mouths of the depths 
of the abyss beneath were closed. And on the new moon of the seventh month all the mouths of 
27 the abysses of the earth were opened, and the waters began to descend into them. And on the new 
28 moon of the tenth month the tops of the mountains were seen, and Noah was glad. And on this 
account he ordained them for himself as feasts for a memorial for ever, and thus are they ordained. 
29 And they placed them on the heavenly tablets, each had thirteen weeks ; from one to another 
(passed) their memorial, from the first to the second, and from the second to the third, and from the 
30 third to the fourth. And all the days of the commandment will be two and fifty weeks of days, and 
(these will make) the entire year complete. Thus it is engraven and ordained on the heavenly 
31 tablets. And there is no neglecting (this commandment) for a single year or from year to year. 


11, 14. Proper use of blood in daily sacrifice. Cf. Num. xxviii. 3-825. 
17-18. the feast of weeks is connected with Noah’s covenant here only. Later it is ascribed to Moses. The 
name ‘ Pentecost’ (2 Macc. xii. 32; Tobit ii. 1 ; 1 Cor. xvi. 8) is not yet in use. 
21. Cf. Num. xxviii. 26, 3 
celebrate, ¢é/aré, emended from gebré, ‘its celebration.’ 
22. one day = first day (Eppstein), i.e. of the week. Pentecost was to be on a Sunday every year. Cf. xlix. 7, 8. 
23. The four great days of the year have a religious significance here, but an astronomical one in 1 En. lxxv. ees 
Ixxxil. I1 (intercalary days). Cf. Ezek, xlvi. 6; Rosh ha-Shanah, i. 1. They are associated here with patriarchal 
events. Cf. ili. 32, v. 29, vi. 26, xvi. I, xxviii, 24, xlv. 1, xii. 16, xiii, 8, xxviii. 14, &c.- 
26-7. Gen. viii. 2,5; 1 En. Ixxxix, Wes 
_ 29-30. Solar year of 364 days (cf. iv. 17, V. 27, xii. 16) = 12 months of 30 days and 4 intercalary days. Eppstein, on 
vi. 32 (Revue des Etudes Juives xxii. 10-1 3), Suggests that Jubilees uses two calendars—the second being a parallel 
ecclesiastical year, a multiple of 7; i.e. 1 3 months of 28 days. Cf. vi. 22, 28. On the great difficulties connected 
with the calendar of our author and of pre-Christian Judaism see my Commentary 77 Joc. 


22 


13°9= 
10659 A.M 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 6. 32—7. 11 


32 And command thou the children of Israel that they observe the years according to this reckoning— 
three hundred and sixty-four days, and (these) will constitute a complete year, and they will not 
disturb its time from its days and from its feasts; for everything will fall out in them according to 

33 their testimony, and they will not leave out any day nor disturb any feasts. But if they do neglect 
and do not observe them according to His commandment, then they will disturb all their seasons, 
and the years will be dislodged from this (order), [and they will disturb the seasons and the years 

34 will be dislodged | and they will neglect their ordinances. And all the children of Israel will forget 
and will not find the path of the years, and will forget the new moons, and seasons, and sabbaths, 

35 and they will go wrong as to all the order of the years. For I know and from henceforth will I 
declare it unto thee, and it is not of my own devising; for the book (lies) written before me, and 
on the heavenly tablets the division of days is ordained, lest they forget the feasts of the covenant 

36 and walk according to the feasts of the Gentiles after their error and after their ignorance. For 
there will be those who will assuredly make observations of the moon—how (it) disturbs the 

37 seasons and comes in from year to year ten days too soon. For this reason the years will come 
upon them when they will disturb (the order), and make an abominable (day) the day of testimony, 
and an unclean day a feast day, and they will confound all the days, the holy with the unclean, and 
the unclean day with the holy ; for they will go wrong as to the months and sabbaths and feasts and 

38 jubilees. For this reason I command and testify to thee that thou mayst testify to them ; for after 
thy death thy children will disturb (them), so that they will not make the year three hundred and 
sixty-four days only, and for this reason they will go wrong as to the new moons and seasons and 
sabbaths and festivals, and they will eat all kinds of blood with all kinds of flesh. 


Noah plants a vineyard and offers a sacrifice, 1-5. Becomes drunk and exposes his person, 6-9.. The 
cursing of Canaan and blessing of Shem and Fapheth, 10-14% (cf. Gen. ix. 20-8). Woah’s sons 
and grandsons and their cities,13-19. Noah teaches his sons regarding the causes of the deluge 
and admonishes them to avoid the eating of blood and murder, to keep the law regarding fruit 
trees and let the land lie fallow every seventh year, as Enoch had directed, 20-39. 


7: And in the seventh week in the first year thereof, in this jubilee, Noah planted vines on 
the mountain on which the ark had rested, named Libar, one of the Ararat Mountains, and they 
produced fruit in the fourth year, and he guarded their fruit, and gathered it in this year in the 

2 seventh month. -And he made wine therefrom and put it into a vessel, and kept it until the fifth 
3 year, until the first day, on the new moon of the first month. And he celebrated with joy the day 
of this feast, and he made a burnt sacrifice unto the Lord, one young ox and one ram, and seven 
sheep, each a year old, and a kid of the goats, that he might make atonement thereby for himself 
4and his sons. And he prepared the kid first, and placed some of its blood on the flesh that was on 
the altar which he had made, and all the fat he laid on the altar where he made the burnt sacrifice, 

3 and the ox and the ram and the sheep, and he laid all their flesh upon the altar. And he placed 
all their offerings mingled with oil upon it, and afterwards he sprinkled wine on the fire which he 
had previously made on the altar, and he placed incense on the altar and caused a sweet savour to 

6 ascend acceptable before the Lord his God. And he rejoiced and drank of this wine, he and his 
, children with joy. And it was evening, and he went into his tent, and being drunken he lay down 
8 and slept, and was uncovered in his tent as he slept. And Ham saw Noah his father naked, and 
9 went forth and told his two brethren withcut. And Shem took his garment and arose, he and 
Japheth, and they placed the garment on their shoulders and went backward and covered the shame 
ro of their father, and their faces were backward. And Noah awoke from his sleep and knew all that 
his younger son had done unto him, and he cursed his son and said: ‘Cursed be Canaan; an 
11 enslaved servant shall he be unto his brethren.’ And he blessed Shem, and said: ‘ Blessed be the 


32. The impossible number 364 as in t En. Ixxiv. to, lxxv. 2; 2 En. xlviii, is probably due to dogmatic considera- 
tions; to make the festivals fall on the same day of the week from year to year. Contrast 2 En. xiv. 1 (‘ 3654 days’). 

Bacon, Hebraica, viii. 79-88, 124-39 (1891-2), shows that the same causes operated on the authors of the Deluge 
story in P. The flood lasted one year in the Chaldaean account—this was a lunar year of 354 days but P makes it last 
one year and ten days ; i.e. a year of 364 days. 

34. Cf. 1 En. Ixxxii. 4-6. : ; 

35. not of my own devising. Cf. Num, xvi. 8; Apoc. Bar, xiv. II. 2 : 

36. Cf. ii. 9, iv. 21. Contrast 1 En. Ixxiv. 12; Sam. Chronicle (Neubauer, Journal Asiatique (1869), xiv, no. lv. 
AZt, SeG:)r 


VII. 3. Cf. ritual of Num, xxix. 2, 5. 

5. acceptable. Emended as in vi. 3. 

6-12. Gen. ix. 21-7 (LXX). ; pare: 
g. Text restored by emending gatsimi into gabi’ omit. 


a3 


1317 A.M. 


1320 A.M. 
1321 A.M. 


THE. BOOK OF JUBILEES %ia2-33 


12 Lord God of Shem, and Canaan shall be his servant. God shall enlarge Japheth, and God shall 
13 dwell in the dwelling of Shem, and Canaan shall be his servant.’ And Ham knew that his father 
had cursed his younger son, and he was displeased that he had cursed his son, and he parted from 
14 his father, he and his sons with him, Cush and Mizraim and Put and Canaan. And he built for 
15 himself a city and called its name after the name of his wife N@élatama’tk. And Japheth saw it, 
and became envious of his brother, and he too built for himself a city, and he called its name after 


16 the name of his wife “Adatanésés. And Shem dwelt with his father Noah, and he built a city close 


to his father on the mountain, and he too called its name after the name of his wife Sédéqetélébab. 
17 And behold these three cities are near Mount Liibar ; Sédégétélébab fronting the mountain on its 
18 east; and Na’éltama’tk on the south; ’Adatan’ésés towards the west. And these are the sons of 
Shem: Elam, and Asshur, and Arpachshad—this son) was born two years after the flood—and 
19 Lud, and Aram. The sons of Japheth: Gomer/and Magog and Madai and Javan, Tubal and 
20 Meshech and Tiras: these are the sons of NoahV/ And in the twenty-eighth jubilee Noah began to 
enjoin upon his sons’ sons the ordinances and commandments, and all the judgments that he knew, 
and he exhorted his sons to observe righteousness, and to cover the shame of their flesh, and to 
bless their Creator, and honour father and mother, and love their neighbour, and guard their souls 
21 from fornication and. uncleanness and all iniquity. For owing to these three things came the flood 
upon the earth, namely, owing to-the fornication wherein the Watchers against the law of their 
ordinances went a whoring after the daughters of men, and took themselves wives of all which they 
22 chose: and they made the beginning of uncleanness. And they begat sons the Naphidim, and 
{they were all unlike}, and they devoured one another: and the Giants slew the Naphil, and the 
23 Naphil slew the Eljd, and the Elj6 mankind, and one man another. And every one sold himself 
?4 to work iniquity and to shed much blood, and the earth was filled with iniquity. And after this 
they sinned against the beasts and birds, and all that moves and walks on the earth: and much 
blood was shed on the earth, and every imagination and desire of men imagined vanity and evil 
25 continually. And the Lord destroyed everything from off the face of the earth ; because of the 
wickedness of their deeds, and because of the blood which they had shed in the midst of the earth 
26 He destroyed everything. ‘And we were left, I and you, my sons, and everything that entered 
with us into the ark, and behold I see your works before me that ye do not walk in righteousness ; 
for in the path of destruction ye have begun to walk, and ye are parting one from another, and are 
envious one of another, and (so it comes) that ye are not in harmony, my sons, each with his brother. 
27 For I see, and behold the demons have begun (their) seductions against you and against your children, 
and now I fear on your behalf, that after my death ye will shed the blood of men upon the earth, 
28 and that ye, too, will be destroyed from the face of the earth. For whoso sheddeth man’s blood, 
and whoso eateth the blood of any flesh, shall all be destroyed from the earth. 


29 And there shall not be left any man that eateth blood, 
Or that sheddeth the blood of man on the earth, 
Nor shall there be left to him any seed or descendants living under heaven ; 


For into Sheol shall they go, 
And into the place of condemnation shall they descend, 
And into the darkness of the deep shall they all be removed by a violent death. 


There shall be no blood seen upon you of all the blood there shall be all the days in which ye 


who eats with blood, but guard yourselves that none may eat blood before you: cover the blood, 
32 for thus have I been commanded to testify to you and your children, together with all flesh. And 
suffer not the soul to be eaten with the flesh, that your blood, which is your life, may not be required 
33 at the hand of any flesh that sheds (it) on the earth. For the earth will not be clean from the blood 


Toe Gen Os 
16. Shem is the good son. 
18. Unintelligible text restored by a few slight changes. 
20-39. Fragment of lost ‘Book of Noah’. Cf. Epiph. Ancorat. cxii. 
-Our author has left unchanged the Ist persons of the verbs in verses 26-39. 
21. These three things. Almost the three cardinal sins. Cf. Gen. vi. 2; 1 En, vii, 1; Ber. Rabb. 31. 
22, Three classes of giants. Cf. 1 En. vii. I (Greek), Ixxxvi. 4, Ixxxviii, 2. 
were unlike, perhaps better ‘ plundered’ or ‘ strove’ (by slight emendations). 
23. 1 Kings xxi. 20; 1 En. ix, I-9, vii. 5, Ixxxvii. 1. 
24. they sinned against. Cf. 1 En. vii, 5, by means of which the text is emended. 
29. Used by 1 En. ciii. 7-8, 


24 


NR ett es 


1324- 
1372 AM. 


Tr BOOK OF JUBILEES 7." 34—8. i1 


which has been shed upon it; for (only) through the blood of him that shed it wi 

34 purified throughout all its generations. And now, my children, hearken: Sea dee 
righteousness that ye may be planted in righteousness over the face of the whole earth, and your 

35 glory lifted up before my God, who saved me from the waters of the flood. And behold, ye will go 
and build for yourselves cities, and plant in them all the plants that are upon the earth, and moreover 

36 all fruit-bearing trees. _ For three years the fruit of everything that is eaten will not be gathered: 
and in the fourth year its fruit will be accounted holy [and they will offer the first-fruits], acceptable 
before the Most High God, who created heaven and earth and all things. Let them offer in 
abundance the first of the wine and oil (as) first-fruits on the altar of the Lord, who receives it, and 


37 what is left let the servants of the house of the Lord eat before the altar which receives (it). And 
in the fifth year 


make ye the release so that ye release it in righteousness and uprightness, and ye shall be righteous, 
38 and all that you plant shall prosper. For thus did Enoch, the father of your father command 
Methuselah, his son, and Methuselah his son Lamech, and Lamech commanded me all the things 
39 which his fathers commanded him. And I also will give you commandment, my sons, as Enoch 
commanded his son in the first jubilees: whilst still living, the seventh in his generation, he com- 
manded and testified to his son and to his son’s sons until the day of his death.’ 


Re 5 : : Can : : 

Kdindm discovers an inscription relating to the sun and stars,i-4. His sons,5-8. Noah’s sons and 
Noah divide the earth, 10-11. Shem’s inheritance, 12-21: Ham's, 22-4: Fapheth’s, 25-30. 
(Gi) Gen. x.) 


81 _In the twenty-ninth jubilee, in the first week, in the beginning thereof Arpachshad took to 
himself a wife and her name was Rasi’éa, the daughter of Stsan, the daughter of Elam, and she 

2 bare him a son in the third year in this week, and he called his name Kainam. And the son grew, 
and his father taught him writing, and he went to seek for himself a place where he might seize for 

3 himself a city. And he found a writing which former (generations) had carved on the rock, and he 
read what was thereon, and he transcribed it and sinned owing to it; for it contained the teaching 
of the Watchers in accordance with which they used to observe the omens of the sun and moon and 

4 stars in all the signs of heaven. And he wrote it down and said nothing regarding it ; for he was 
5 afraid to speak to Noah about it lest he should be angry with him on account of it. And in the 
thirtieth jubilee, in the second week, in the first year thereof, he took to himself a wife,and her name 
was Mélka, the daughter of Madai, the son of Japheth, and in the fourth year he begat a son, and 

6 called his name Shelah; for he said: ‘Truly I have been sent. [And in the fourth year he was 
born], and Shelah grew up and took to himself a wife, and her name was Md’ak, the daughter of 
Késéd, his father’s brother, in the one and thirtieth jubilee, in the fifth week, in the first year 

4 thereof. And she bare hima son in the fifth year thereof, and he called his name Eber: and he 
took unto himself a wife, and her name was ’Aztrad, the daughter of Nébréd, in the thirty-second 

8 jubilee, in the seventh week, in the third year thereof. And in the sixth year thereof, she bare him 
a son, and he called his name Peleg; for in the days when he was born the children of Noah began 

9 to divide the earth amongst themselves: for this reason he called his name Peleg. And they 
10 divided (it) secretly amongst themselves, and_ told it to Noah. And it came to pass in the 
beginning of the thirty-third jubilee that they divided the earth into three parts, for Shem and Ham 
and Japheth, according to the inheritance of each, in the first year in the first week, when one of us, 

11 who had been sent, was with them. And he called his sons, and they drew nigh to him, they and 
their children, and he divided the earth into the lots, which his three sons were to take in possession, 
and they reached forth their hands, and took the writing out of the bosom of Noah, their father. 


34. who saved me, &c. Probably read by 2 Peter ii. 5. 
may be planted. Emended by Dillmann by a change of one vowel. 

36. Beer says this was the view of Ibn Ezra, Caraites, and Samaritans, concerning the fruit of the fourth year. The 
law in Lev. xix. 23-4 seems rather exacting. Our translation agrees with it in reading ‘will be accounted holy’ 
(oc; ‘will be gathered’ a2), but this interpretation is contrary to the ordinary view of Josephus, Azz. iv. 8. 19, &c. 

37. Lacuna here. Laws about fruit should be continued. 

39. the seventh. Cf. 1 En. lx. 8, xcili. 3; Jude 14. See on xxi. 1o for the attribution of halachoth to Enoch. 


VIII. 5. Madai emended with Syr. Frag. and Lagarde’s Greek MS. 7: peAxa Ovyatnp pada. Text here corrupt. 
Play on words Shelah, ‘sent’. Cf. ‘Peleg’ in 8. 

9-10. The secret division of the earth is followed by an authoritative compact. The object here is to vindicate the 
Hebrew invasion of Palestine, as the rightful inheritance of sons of Shem. Cf. similar accounts in Epiph. Azcorat. 
cxii; Adv. Haer. ll. ii. 544; Chron. Paschale i. 53; Jerahmeel xxxi. 2; Syncell. i. 82; Cedren. i. 23. 

25 


1373 AM. 


1375 A.-M. 


1429 A.M. 
1432 A.M. 


1499 A.M. 
1503 A.M. 


1564 A.M. 
1567 A.M. 


1569 A.M. 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 8. 12-29 


12 And there came forth on the writing as Shem’s lot the middle of the earth which he should take as 
an inheritance for himself and for his sons for the generations of eternity, from the middle of the 
mountain range of Rafa, from the mouth of the water from the river Tina, and his portion goes 
towards the west through the midst of this river, and it extends till it reaches the water of the 
abysses, out of which this river goes forth and pours its waters into the sea M&at, and this river 
flows into the great sea. And all that is towards the north is Japheth’s, and all that is towards the 

13 south belongs to Shem. And it extends till it reaches Karas6: this is in the bosom of the tongue 

14 which looks towards the south. And his portion extends along the great sea, and it extends in a 
straight line till it reaches the west of the tongue which looks towards the south; for this sea is 

15 named the tongue of the Egyptian Sea. And it turns from here towards the south towards the 
mouth of the great sea on the shore of (its) waters, and it extends to the west to Afra, and it 
extends till it reaches the waters of the river Gihon, and to the south of the waters of Gihon, to the 

16 banks of this river. And it extends towards the east, till it reaches the Garden of Eden, to the 
south thereof, [to the south] and from the east of the whole land of Eden and of the whole east, it 
turns to the feast} and proceeds till it reaches the east of the mountain named Rafa, and it descends 

17 to the bank of the mouth of the river Tind. This portion came forth by lot for Shem and his sons, 

18 that they should possess it for ever unto his generations for evermore. And Noah rejoiced that this 
portion came forth for Shem and for his sons, and he remembered all that he had spoken with his 
mouth in prophecy ; for he had said: 

‘Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, 
And may the Lord dwell in the dwelling of Shem.’ 

19 And he knew that the Garden of Eden is the holy of holies, and the dwelling of the Lord, and Mount 
Sinai the centre of the desert, and Mount Zion—the centre of the navel of the earth: these three 

20 were created as holy places facing each other. And he blessed the God of gods, who had put the 

21 word of the Lord into his mouth, and the Lord for evermore. And he knew that a blessed portion 
and a blessing had come to Shem and his sons unto the generations for ever—the whole land of 
Eden and the whole land of the Red Sea, and the whole land of the east, and India,and on the Red 
Sea and the mountains thereof, and all the land of Bashan, and all the land of Lebanon and the 
islands of Kafttr, and all the mountains of Sanir and "Amana, and the mountains of Asshur in the 
north, and all the land of Elam, Asshur, and Babél, and Sisan and Ma‘édai, and all the mountains 
of Ararat, and all the region beyond the sea, which is beyond the mountains of Asshur towards the 

22 north, a blessed and spacious land, and all that is in it is very good. And for Ham came forth the 
second portion, beyond the Gihon towards the south to the right of the Garden, and it extends 
towards the south and it extends to all the mountains of fire, and it extends towards the west to the 
sea of “Atél and it extends towards the west till it reaches the sea of Ma’Gk—that (sea) into which 

23 teverything which is not destroyed descends}. And it goes forth towards the north to the limits of 
Gadir, and it goes forth to the coast of the waters of the sea to the waters of the great sea till it 
draws near to the river Gihon, and goes along the river Gihon till it reaches the right of the Garden 

240f Eden. And this is the land which came forth for Ham as the portion which he was to occupy 

25 for ever for himself and his sons unto their generations for ever. And for Japheth came forth the 
third portion beyond the river Tina to the north of the outflow of its waters, and it extends north- 

26 easterly to the whole region of Gog and to all the country east thereof. And it extends northerly 
to the north, and it extends to the mountains of Qélt towards the north, and towards the sea of 

27 Maik, and it goes forth to the east of Gadir as far as the region of the waters of the sea. And it 
extends until it approaches the west of Fara and it returns towards ’"Aférag, and it extends easterly 

28 to the waters of the sea of Mé@’at. And it extends to the region of the river Tina in a north-easterly 
direction until it approaches the boundary of its waters towards the mountain Rafa, and it turns 

29 round towards the north. This is the land which came forth for Japheth and his sons as the portion 
of his inheritance which he should possess for himself and his sons, for their generations for ever ; 


12. Palestine, middle of the earth, as Ezek, xxxviii. 12; 1 En. xxvi. 1 ; Sanh. 37 a. 
Rafa = Ural Mountains. Tina = Tanais or Don, Mé’at = Maeotis or Sea of Azov. 

13. Karas6 = Chersonese (Dillmann), or Rhinocorura on Egyptian border, perhaps more likely. 

15. Afra = Africa in early limited sense. Gihon = the Nile, as Jer. ii. 18, Shihor; Sir. xxiv. 27. 

16. Read ‘north’ for ‘ south’, 

18-19. The three ‘Abodes of God’ are in Shem’s portion. Cf. iv. 26. 

21. Kaftir or Kamattiri, either Crete or Cyprus or Cilicia or Cappadocia (Amos ix. 7, LXX) or Coptos 
the upper Thebaid. Sanir or Senir (Deut. iii. 9; Ezek. xxvii. 5) is Hermon. ‘Amana is Antilibanus or Mt. 
MA‘édai is Media. | 

22-24. Ham’s portion: vague limits in Asia. *Atél = Atlantic? Ma’aik = Oceanus. GAdir = Cadiz. 

25-29. Japheth’s portion. Gog = Scythians (Josephus), Qélt = Celts. "Aférag? = Phrygia. 

26 


a city in 
Amanus. 


-THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 8. 30—10. 3 


3° five great islands, and a great land i it i 
2 g nd in the north. But it is cold, and the 1 i ! 
the land of Shem is neither hot nor cold, but it is of blended cold aid ‘tek one ee es 


Subdivision of ae is portions amongst the grandchildren of Noah, Amongst Ham's children, \: 
Lents 2-6: Fapheth's, 7-13. Oath taken by Noah's sons, 14-15. 


Pees iced amongst his sons, and the first portion came forth for Cush towards the 

: a8 : Ne e oe of him for Mizraim, and to the west of him for Put, and to the west of him 

nee : eek t ereof | on the sea for Canaan. And Shem also divided amongst his sons, and 

oa te aa a forth for Elam and his sons, to the east of the river Tigris till it approaches 

os ae : he ole land of India, and on the Red Sea on its coast, and the waters of Dédan, and 

Sana =a ains 3 tee and ‘Ea, and all the land of Sfsdn and all that is on the side of Pharnak 

ram <7 oe an ai e river Tina. And for Asshur came forth the second portion, all the land of 

anges aoe ; oe and Shinar and to the border of India, and it ascends and skirts the river. And 

the E aa te forth the third portion, all the land of the region of the Chaldees to the east of 

e ee rates, bordering on the Red Sea, and all the waters of the desert close to the tongue of the 

= i ich looks towards Egypt, all the land of Lebanon and Sanir and ’Amana to the border of the 

5 ae rates, “And for Aram there came forth the fourth portion, all the land of Mesopotamia 

aire the Tigris and the Euphrates to the north of the Chaldees to the border of the mountains 

6 Be sshur and the land of “Ardara. And there came forth for Lud the fifth portion, the mountains 

of Asshur and all appertaining to them till it reaches the Great Sea, and till it reaches the east of 

7, 8 Asshur his brother. And Japheth also divided the land of his inheritance amongst his sons. And 

the first portion came forth for Gomer to the east from the north side to the river Tina; and in the 

north there came forth for Magog all the inner portions of the north until it reaches to the sea of 

9 Mé’at. And for Madai came forth as his portion that he should possess from the west of his two 

ro brothers to the islands, and to the coasts of the islands. And for Javan came forth the fourth 

rz portion every island and the islands which are towards the border of Lud. And for Tubal there 

came forth the fifth portion in the midst of the tongue which approaches towards the border of the 

portion of Lud to the second tongue, to the region beyond the second tongue unto the third tongue. 

12 And for Meshech came forth the sixth portion, all the region beyond the third tongue till it 

13 approaches the east of Gadir. And for Tiras there came forth the seventh portion, four great 

islands in the midst of the sea, which reach to the portion of Ham [and the islands of Kamaturi 

14 came out by lot for the sons of Arpachshad as his inheritance]. And thus the sons of Noah divided 

unto their sons in the presence of Noah their father, and he bound them all by an oath, imprecating 

_ 15 4 Curse on every one that sought to seize the portion which had not fallen (to him) by his lot. And 

they all said, ‘So be it; so be it” for themselves and their sons for ever throughout their generations 

till the day of judgment, on which the Lord God shall judge them with a sword and with fire, for 

all the unclean wickedness of their errors, wherewith they have filled the earth with transgression 
and uncleanness and fornication and sin. 


9 x 


Evil spirits lead astray the sons of Noah, 1-2. Noah's prayer, 3-6. Mastémé allowed to retain one- 
tenth of his subject spirits, 7-11. Noah taught the use of herbs by the angels for resisting the 
demons, 12-14. Noah dies, 15-17. Building of Babel and the confusion of tongues, 18-27. 
Canaan seizes on Palestine, 29-34. Madat receives Media, 35-6. 


10: And in the third week of this jubilee the unclean demons began to lead astray {the children off 
2 the sons of Noah, and to make to err and destroy them. And the sons of Noah came to Noah 
their father, and they told: him concerning the demons which were leading astray and blinding and 

3 slaying his sons’ sons. And he prayed before the Lord his God, and said: 


29. five islands, as 1 En. Ixxvii. 8. 
30. Epiphanius makes this heat of his country Canaan’s reason for seizing Palestine. 


IX. 1. Cf. Gen. x. 6. Cush= Ethiopia. Mizraim = Egypt. Put = Libya. 

2. Elam, from Red Sea to Pontus, includes India. 

3. skirts. Text corrupt, but easily emended. 

9. Madai’s lot embraces Britain (Epiph., Syncell., Jerahmeel). 

10, Javan = Ionia, here all islands of Aegean. 

12. ‘Three tongues.’ Probably Italy, Greece, Thrace. 

13. Tiras = Aegean sea-coast, or Thracians (Josephus). [ ] interpolated from ix. 4. 


X, Another fragment of ‘Apocalypse of Noah’, part of Hebrew original in Jellinek, Bet ha-Midrasch, iv. 155. 
i. unclean demons: cf. 1 En. xv-xvi; souls of children of disobedient ‘ watchers’. 
27 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 10, 3-22 


‘God of the spirits of all flesh, who hast shown mercy unto me, 
And hast saved me and my sons from the waters of the flood, ti 
And hast not caused me to perish as Thou didst the sons of perdition ; 


For Thy grace has been great towards me, 
And great has been Thy mercy to my soul; 


Let Thy grace be lift up upon my sons, 
And let not wicked spirits rule over them 
Lest they should destroy them from the earth. 


4 But do Thou bless me and my sons, that we may increase and multiply and replenish the earth. 
5 And Thou knowest how Thy Watchers, the fathers of these spirits, acted in my day: and as for 
these spirits which are living, imprison them and hold them fast in the place of condemnation, and 
let them not bring destruction on the sons of thy servant, my God; for these are malignant, and 

6 created in order to destroy. And let them not rule over the spirits of the living ; for Thou alone 
canst exercise dominion over them. And let them not have power over the sons of the righteous 

7, 8 from henceforth and for evermore.’ And the Lord our God bade us to bind all. And the chief of 
the spirits, Mastéma, came and said: ‘Lord, Creator, let some of them remain before me, and let 
them hearken to my voice, and do all that I shall say unto them; for if some of them are not left 
to me, I shall not be able to execute the power of my will on the sons of men; for these are for 
corruption and leading astray before my judgment, for great is the wickedness of the sons of men.’ 

9 And He said: ‘Let the tenth part of them remain before him, and let nine parts descend into the 
10 place of condemnation.’ And one of us He commanded that we should teach Noah all their 
11 medicines ; for He knew that they would not walk in uprightness, nor strive in righteousness. And 
we did according to all His words: all the malignant evil ones we bound in the place of condemna- 
12 tion, and a tenth part of them we left that they might be subject before Satan on the earth. And 
we explained to Noah all the medicines of their diseases, together with their seductions, how he 
13 might heal them with herbs of the earth. And Noah wrote down all things in a book as we 
instructed him concerning every kind of medicine. Thus the evil spirits were precluded from 
14 (hurting) the sons of Noah. And he gave all that he had written to Shem, his eldest son; for he 
15 loved him exceedingly above all his sons. And Noah slept with his fathers, and was buried on 
16 Mount Laibar in the land of Ararat. Nine hundred and fifty years he completed in his life, nineteen 
17 jubilees and two weeks and five years. And in his life on earth he excelled the children of men 
save Enoch because of the righteousness, wherein he was perfect. For Enoch’s office was ordained 
for a testimony to the generations of the world, so that he should recount all the deeds of generation 
18 unto generation, till the day of judgment. And in the three and thirtieth jubilee, in the first year 
in the second week, Peleg took to himself a wife, whose name was LémnA the daughter of Sina’ar, 
and she bare him a son in the fourth year of this week, and he called his name Reu; for he said: 
‘Behold the children of men have become evil through the wicked purpose of building for themselves 

19 a city and a tower in the land of Shinar.” For they departed from the land of Ararat eastward to 
Shinar ; for in his days they built the city and the tower, saying, ‘Go to, let us ascend thereby into 
20 heaven,’ And they began to build, and in the fourth week they made brick with fire, and the bricks 
served them for stone, and the clay with which they cemented them together was asphalt which 
21 comes out of the sea, and out of the fountains of water in the land of Shinar. And they built it: 
forty and three years were they building it ; its breadth was 203 bricks, and the height (of a brick) 
was the third of one; its height amounted to 5433 cubits and 2 palms, and (the extent of one wall 
22 was) thirteen stades (and of the other thirty stades). And the Lord our God said unto us: ‘ Behold 
they are one people, and (this) they begin to do, and now nothing will be withholden from them. 
Go to, let us go down and confound their language, that they may not understand one another’s 
speech, and they may be dispersed into cities and nations, and one purpose will no longer abide with 


3. God of the spirits of all flesh. Cf Num. xvi. 22, xxvii. 16. sons of perdition: 2 Thess. Tas 
. Sacey sie them: hudnnend lémi emended from kuennanéhémn. 
» Mast€ma (Hos. ix. 7, 8) = ‘enmity’ = Mastiphat (-m) (Syncell. Cedren.), Mansemat (Acts of Philip, ed. Ti 

E 2a oa a demons, as in I Enoch, are accusers, seducers, and destroyers. : Tn xv.ig2. Ses 18, le Sees 
oe Pan ie tape here he falls from this hope to talk of spells, charms, &c. Shem, as priest, receives these 

9. The tenth here is a modification of 1 En. xv-xvi (‘all’), 

18. Reu ... evil. A play on words in the Hebrew, 

19. Cf. Gen. x1. 2; Epiph. Haer. i. 1. 5. 

20, 21. Text without emendations unintelligible. 

a eet M Eutychius 51, Glycas 240, N icephorus i. 175, &e. For the emendations see my text, pp. 36-7. 

28 


1659 A.M. 


1645- 
1688 a.m. 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 10. 23—11. 9 


23 them till the day of judgment. And the Lord descended, and we descended wi i 

: 1 a : with him t th 

24 city and the tower which the children of men had built. And he confounded their tatiana sna 
they no longer understood one another’s speech, and they ceased then to build the city and the 


_2g tower. For this reason the whole land of Shinar is called Babel, because the Lord did there 


34 


~ 


confound all the language of the children of men, and from thence they were dispersed into their 
26 cities, each according to his language and his nation. And the Lord sent a mighty wind against 
the tower and overthrew it upon the earth, and behold it was between Asshur and Babylon in the 
27 land of Shinar, and they called its name ‘Overthrow’. In the fourth week in the first year in the 
beginning thereof in the four and thirtieth jubilee, were they dispersed from the land of Shinar. 
28 And Ham and his sons went into the land which he was to occupy, which he acquired as his portion 
29 in the land of the south. And Canaan saw the land of Lebanon to the river of Egypt, that it was 
very good, and he went not into the land of his inheritance to the west (that is to) the sea, and he 
dwelt in the land of Lebanon, eastward and westward from the border of Jordan and from the border 
30 of the sea. And Ham, his father, and Cush and Mizraim, his brothers said unto him: ‘Thou hast 
settled in a land which is not thine, and which did not fall to us by lot: do not do so; for if thou 
dost do so, thou and thy sons will fall in the land and (be) accursed through sedition ; for by sedition 
31 ye have settled, and by sedition will thy children fall, and thou shalt be rooted out for ever. Dwell 
32 not in the dwelling of Shem; for to Shem and to his sons did it come by their lot. Cursed art 
thou, and cursed shalt thou be beyond all the sons of Noah, by the curse by which we bound our- 
33 selves by an oath in the presence of the holy judge, and in the presence of Noah our father.’ But 
he did not hearken unto them, and dwelt in the land of Lebanon from Hamath to the entering of 
35 Egypt, he and his sons until this day. And for this reason that land is named Canaan. And 
Japheth and his sons went towards the sea and dwelt in the land of their portion, and Madai saw 
the land of the sea and it did not please him, and he begged a (portion) from Elam and Asshur and 
Arpachshad, his wife’s brother, and he dwelt in the land of Media, near to his wife’s brother until 
36 this day. And he called his dwelling-place, and the dwelling-place of his sons, Media, after the 
name of their father Madai. 


Reu and Serug, 1 (cf. Gen. xi. 20, 21). Rise of war and bloodshed and eating of blood and 
idolatry, 2-7. Nachor and Terah, 8-14 (cf. Gen. xi. 22-30). Abram's knowledge of God and 
wonderful deeds, 15-24. 


11: And in the thirty-fifth jubilee, in the third week, in the first year thereof, Reu took to himself 


a wife, and her name was ’Ora, the daughter of ’Ur, the son of Késéd, and she bare him a son, and 
> he called his name Sér6h, in the seventh year of this week in this jubilee. And the sons of Noah 
began to war on each other, to take captive and to slay each other, and to shed the blood of men 
on the earth, and to eat blood, and to build strong cities, and walls, and towers, and individuals 
(began) to exalt themselves above the nation, and to found the beginnings of kingdoms, and to go 
to war people against people, and nation against nation, and city against city, and all (began) to do 
evil, and to acquire arms, and to teach their sons war, and they began to capture cities, and to sell 
3 male and female slaves. And ’Ur, the son of Késéd, built the city of ’Ara of the Chaldees, and 
4 called its name after his own name and the name of his father. And they made for themselves 
molten images, and they worshipped each the idol, the molten image which they had made for 
themselves, and they began to make graven images and unclean simulacra, and malignant spirits 
5 assisted and seduced (them) into committing transgression and uncleanness. And the prince 
Mastéma exerted himself to do all this, and he sent forth other spirits, those which were put under 
his hand, to do all manner of wrong and sin, and all manner of transgression, to corrupt and destroy, 
6 and to shed blood upon the earth. For this reason he called the name of Sérdh, Serug, for every one 
7 turned to do all manner of sin and transgression. And he grew up, and dwelt in Ur of the Chaldees, 
near to the father of his wife’s mother, and he worshipped idols, and he took to himself a wife in the 
thirty-sixth jubilee, in the fifth week, in the first year thereof,and her name was Mélka, the daughter 
8 of Kabér, the daughter of his father’s brother. And she bare him Nahor, in the first year of this 
week, and he grew and dwelt in Ur of the Chaldees, and his father taught him the researches of the 
9 Chaldees to divine and augur, according to the signs of heaven. And in the thirty-seventh jubilee. 


25. Gen. xi. 9. ; : ; 
26. This story occurs also in Orac. Sibyl. iii. 98-103 ; Joseph. Ant. i. 4. 3, &c.; Syncell. 1. 775 Cedren. i. 22. 
29, This story comes only here and in dependent authorities ; e.g. Clem. Aecogn. 1. 30. 


XI. 1. Séréh. Heb. 1D, ‘turn aside’. boa. Ms : 
2-6. Cf, Book of Adam and Eve iii. 24 for corruption of mankind. 


29 


1688 A.M. 


1681 A.M. 


1687 A.M. 


1744 A.M. 


1800 A.M. 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES ‘11. 10—192. : 


in the sixth week, in the first year thereof, he took to himself a wife, and her name was ‘Tjaska, the 
10 daughter of Néstag of the Chaldees. And she bare him Terah in the seventh year of this week, 1806 A.M. 
11 And the prince Mastéma sent ravens and birds to devour the seed which was sown in the land, in 
order to destroy the land, and rob the children of men of their labours. Before they could plough 
12 in the seed, the ravens picked (it) from the surface of the ground. And for this reason he called 
his name Terah because the ravens and the birds reduced them to destitution and devoured their 
13 seed. And the years began to be barren, owing to the birds, and they devoured all the fruit of the 
trees from the trees: it was only with great effort that they could save a little of all the fruit of the 
14 earth in their days. And in this thirty-ninth jubilee, in the second week in the first year, Terah 1870 a.m. 
took to himself a wife,and her name was’Edna, the daughter of Abram, the daughter of his father’s 
15 Sister. And in the seventh year of this week she bare him a son, and he called his name Abram, 1876 a.™. 
by the name of the father of his mother; for he had died before his daughter had conceived a son. 
16 ‘snd the child began to understand the errors of the earth that all went astray after graven images 
and after uncleanness, and his father taught him writing, and he was two weeks of years old, and he 1890 a.m. 
17 Separated himself from his father, that he might not worship idols with him. And he began to pray 
to the Creator of all things that He might save him from the errors of the children of men, and that 
18 his portion should not fall into error after uncleanness and vileness. And the seed time came for 
the sowing of seed upon the land, and they all went forth together to protect their seed against the 
rg ravens,and Abram went forth with those that went, and the child was a lad of fourteen years. And 
a Cloud of ravens came to devour the seed, and Abram ran to meet them before they settled on the 
ground, and cried to them before they settled on the ground to devour the seed, and said, ‘ Descend 
20 Not: return to the place whence ye came,’ and they proceeded to turn back. And he caused the 
clouds of ravens to turn back that day seventy times, and of all the ravens throughout all the land 
21 where Abram was there settled there not so much as one. And all who were with him throughout 
all the land saw him cry out, and all the ravens turn back, and his name became great in all the 
22 land of the Chaldees. And there came to him this year all those that wished to sow, and he went 
with them until the time of sowing ceased: and they sowed their land, and that year they brought 
23 enough grain home and eat and were satisfied. And in the first year of the fifth week Abram taught 1891 a.m. 
those who made implements for oxen, the artificers in wood, and they made a vessel above the 
ground, facing the frame of the plough, in order to put the seed thereon, and the seed fell down 
therefrom upon the share of the plough, and was hidden in the earth, and they no longer feared the 
24tavens. And after this manner they made (vessels) above the ground on all the frames of the 
ploughs, and they sowed and tilled all the land, according as Abram commanded them, and they 
no longer feared the birds. 


Abram seeks to turn Terah Srom idolatry, 1-8. Marries Sarai, 9. Haran and Nachor, g-I1. 
Abram burns the idols: death of Haran, 12-14 (cf. Gen. xi. 28). Zerah and his Samily go to 
Hlaran,15. Abram observes the stars and prays, 16-21. Ts bidden to £0 to Canaan and blessed, 


22-4. Power of speaking Hebrew given to him, 25-7. Leaves Haran Sor Canaan, 28-31. 
(Cf. Gen. xi. 31-xii. 3.) ; 


12: And it came to pass in the sixth week, in the seventh year thereof, that Abram said to Terah his 1904 a.m. 
2 father, saying, ‘Father!’ And he said, ‘ Behold, here am I, my son’? And he said, 


‘What help and profit have we from those idols which thou dost worship, 
And before which thou dost bow thyself? 


For there is no spirit in them, 


For they are dumb forms, and a misleading of the heart. 
Worship them not: 


oo 


10, Gen, xi. 25. 


11-20. Legends of Abram’s boyhood, quoted by Jerome, Zfzs¢. Ixxviii, ad fabiolam, mansione 24. 


12. reduced .. . to destitution j. e. YIN, ‘lay waste’—a play on Terah nn). 
16-17. Cf. Beer, Leben Abrahams 102-4; F sone) A225 pt ! 
20. caused. The causal form is needed. 


XI. 1-14. The extravagant legend of Abram in fj i is, i 
I ¢ ; ery furnace, common in the later Rabbis, is a arently unkno 
to our author; Haran’s fate in 14 Is a relic of this idea based on Gen, xv. 7; Exod. xx. 2 C i ae aia Se 


- Cabs ee E * 38, makes Terah inventor of image-worship. For help and profit cf. 1 Sam. xii. 21. 


30 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 12, 4-21 


4 Worship the God of heaven, 
Who causes the rain and the dew to descend on the earth 
And does everything upon the earth, 


And has created everything by His word, 
And all life is from before His face. 


5 Why do ye worship things that have no spirit in them ? 
For they are the work of (men’s) hands, 


And on your shoulders do ye bear them, 
And ye have no help from them, 


But they are a great cause of shame to those who make them, 
And a misleading of the heart to those who worship them : 
Worship them not.’ 


6 And his father said unto him, ‘I also know it, my son, but what shall I do with a people who have 
z made me to serve before them? And if I tell them the truth, they will slay me; for their soul 
g cleaves to them to worship them and honour them. Keep silent, my son, lest they slay thee.’ And 
9 these words he spake to his two brothers, and they were angry with him and he kept silent. And 
in the fortieth jubilee, in the second week, in the seventh year thereof, Abram took to himself a wife, 1925 a.m. 
ro and her name was Sarai, the daughter of his father, and she became his wife. And Haran, his 
brother, took to himself a wife in the third year of the third week, and she bare him a son in the 1928 a.m. 
rz seventh year of this week, and he called his name Lot. And Nahor, his brother, took to himself 1932 a.m. 
12a wife. “And in the sixtieth year of the life of Abram, that is, in the fourth week, in the fourth year 1936 a.m. 
thereof, Abram arose by night, and burned the house of the idols, and he burned all that was in the 
13 house, and no man knew it. And they arose in the night and sought to save their gods from the 
14 midst of the fire. And Haran hasted to save them, but the fire flamed over him, and he was burnt 
in the fire, and he died in Ur of the Chaldees before Terah his father, and they buried him in Ur of 
15 the Chaldees. And Terah went forth from Ur of the Chaldees, he and his sons, to go into the land 
of Lebanon and into the land of Canaan, and he dwelt in the land of Haran, and Abram dwelt with 
16 Terah his father in Haran two weeks of years. And in the sixth week, in the fifth year thereof, 1951 a.m. 
Abram sat up throughout the night on the new moon of the seventh month to observe the stars 
from the evening to the morning, in order to see what would be the character of the year with regard 
17 to the rains, and he was alone as he sat and observed. And a word came into his heart and he said : 
‘ All the signs of the stars, and the signs of the moon and of the sun are all in the hand of the Lord. 
Why do I search (them) out? 


18 If He desires, He causes it to rain, morning and evening ; 
And if He desires, He withholds it, 
And all things are in his hand.’ 


19 And he prayed that night and said, 
‘My God, God Most High, Thou alone art my God, 
And Thee and Thy dominion have I chosen. 
And Thou hast created all things, 
And all things that are are the work of thy hands. 


20 ~Deliver me from the hands of evil spirits who have dominion over the thoughts of men’s hearts, 
And let them not lead me astray from Thee, my God. 


And stablish Thou me and my seed for ever 
That we go not astray from henceforth and for evermore.’ 


21 And he said, ‘ Shall I return unto Ur of the Chaldees who seek my face that I may return to them, 
or am I to remain here in this place? The right path before Thee prosper it in the hands of Thy 
servant that he may fulfil (it) and that I may not walk in the deceitfulness of my heart, O my God. 


4. Cf. Jer. xiv. 22; Matt. v. 45; Acts xiv. 17. By x 

5. Jer. x. 3,9; Am. v. 26; Isa. xlvi. 7; Ass. Mos. viii. 4; Ep. Jer. 4, 200 i 

9. Follows Gen. xx. 12. Abram’s action is contrary to law of Lev. xvill. 9, xx. 17; _evasions of later writers 
unknown apparently to our author ; e.g. Josephus i. 6. 5, 7. 1 turns Sarah into Abrahams niece. 

16-18. Abram is rebuked for star-gazing. Cf. Philo, De Migr. Abrah, xxxii; Ber. rabb. 44 and later authors. 

21. he; MSS. read ‘1’. 


31 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES- 12) 22--18 10 


22 And he made an end of speaking and praying, and behold the word of the Lord was sent to him 
through me, saying: ‘Get thee up from thy country, and from thy kindred and from the house of 
thy father unto a land*which I will show thee, and I shall make thee a great and numerous nation. 

23 And I will bless thee 

And I will make thy name great, 

And thou shalt be blessed in the earth, 

And in Thee shall all families of the earth be blessed, 
And I will bless them that bless thee, 

And curse them that curse thee. 

24 And I will be a God to thee and thy son, and to thy son’s son, and to all thy seed: fear not, from 

25 henceforth and unto all generations of the earth Iam thy God.” And the Lord God said: ‘ Open 
his mouth and his ears, that he may hear and speak with his mouth, with the language which has 
been revealed’ ; for it had ceased from the mouths of all the children of men from the day of the 

26 overthrow (of Babel). And I opened his mouth, and his ears and his lips, and I began to speak 

27 with him in Hebrew in the tongue of the creation. And he took the books of his fathers, and these 
Were written in Hebrew, and he transcribed them, and he began from henceforth to study them, and 
I made known to him that which he could not (understand), and he studied them during the six 

28 rainy months. And it came to pass in the seventh year of the sixth week that he spoke to his 
father and informed him, that he would leave Haran to go into the land of Canaan to see it and 

2y return to him. And Terah his father said unto him; ‘Go in peace: 

May the eternal God make thy path straight, 

And the Lord [(be) with thee, and] protect thee from all evil, 

And grant unto thee grace, mercy and favour before those who see thee, 
And may none of the children of men have power over thee to harm thee ; 
Go in peace. 

3° And if thou seest a land pleasant to thy eyes to dwell in, then arise and take me to thee and take 

31 Lot with thee, the son of Haran thy brother as thine own son: the Lord be with thee. And Nahor 
thy brother leave with me till thou returnest in peace, and we go with thee all together.’ 


Abram journeys from Haran to Shechem in Canaan, thence to Hebron and thence to Legypt, I-14a. 
Returns to Canaan where Lot separates Jrom him, and receives the promise of Canaan and 
Journeys to Hebron, 146-21. Chedorlaomer’s attack on Sodom and Gomorrah: Lot taken captive, 
ie Law of tithes enacted, 75-9. (Cf. Gen. xii. 4-10, 15-17, 19-20 ; xiii. 11-18; xiv. 8-14; 
21-4. j 


13: And Abram journeyed from Haran, and he took Sarai, his wife, and Lot, his brother Haran’s 
son, to the land of Canaan, and he came into tAsshur}, and proceeded to Shechem, and dwelt near 
2a lofty oak. And he saw, and, behold, the land was very pleasant from the entering of Hamath to 
3 the lofty oak. And the Lord said to him: ‘To thee and to thy seed will I give this land” And 
4 he built an altar there, and he offered thereon a burnt sacrifice to the Lord, who had appeared to 
5 him. And he removed from thence unto the mountain ... Bethel on the west and Ai on the 
6 east, and pitched his tent there. And he saw and behold, the land was very wide and good, and 
everything grew thereon—vines and figs and pomegranates, oaks and ilexes, and terebinths and oil 
trees, and cedars and cypresses and date trees, and all trees of the field, and there was water on the 

7 mountains. And he blessed the Lord who had led him out of Ur of the Chaldees, and had brought 
8 him to this land. And it came to pass in the first year, in the seventh week, on the new moon of 
the first month, that he built an altar on this mountain, and called on the name of the Lord: ‘ Thou 

9 the eternal God, art my God.’ And he offered on the altar a burnt sacrifice unto the Lord that He 
T° should be with him and not forsake him all the days of his life. And he removed from thence and 
went towards the south, and he came to Hebron, and Hebron was built at that time, and he dwelt 
there two years, and he went (thence) into the land of the south, to Bealoth, and there was a famine 


25-26. Abram at 75 taught the sacred language (Hebrew), quoted by S neell, i. 185; Cl i 
27. Six rainy months = winter; as Talmud (Taan. 34, Erb. 56 a x imc SE 


& ee blessing protects Abram from the reproach of leaving his aged father, (Singer, Judiléen, 170; Ber. 


XIII. 2. the lofty oak. SoLXX., Gen. xii. 6 (Mass. = ‘ oak of Moreh’). 
3-I0. Gen. xii. 7-10. 

6. date trees: Jilands for bébanés (a). 

10, Bealoth = Josh. xv. 24. 


32 


1953 A.M. 


1954 A.M. 


275 


Pri BOOK OF. -) UBILEES 18..11—T#."4 


1rin the land. And Abram went into Egypt in the third year of the week, and he dwelt in Egypt 
12 five years before his wife was torn away from him. Now Tanais in Egypt was at that time built— 
13 seven years after Hebron. And it came to pass when Pharaoh seized Sardi, the wife of Abram 
that the Lord plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai, Abram’s wife. 
14 And Abram was very glorious by reason of possessions in sheep, and cattle, and asses, and horses, 
and camels, and menservants, and maidservants, and in silver and gold exceedingly. And Lot also, 
15 his brother’s son, was wealthy. And Pharaoh gave back Sarai, the wife of Abram, and he sent 
him out of the land of Egypt, and he journeyed to the place where he had pitched his tent at the 
beginning, to the place of the altar, with Ai on the east, and Bethel on the west, and he blessed the 
16 Lord his God who had brought him back in peace. And it came to pass in the forty-first jubilee, 
in the third year of the first week, that he returned to this place and offered thereon a burnt sacrifice, 
and called on the name of the Lord, and said: ‘Thou, the most high God, art my God for ever 
17 and ever. And in the fourth year of this week Lot parted from him, and Lot dwelt in Sodom, and 
18 the men of Sodom were sinners exceedingly. And it grieved him in his heart that his brother’s 
19 son had parted from him; for he had no children. In that year when Lot was taken captive, the 
Lord said unto Abram, after that Lot had parted from him, in the fourth year of this week: ‘ Lift 
up thine eyes from the place where thou art dwelling, northward and southward, and westward and 
20 eastward. For ail the land which thou seest I will give to thee and to thy seed for ever, and I 
will make thy seed as the sand of the sea: though a man may number the dust of the earth, yet 
at thy seed shail not be numbered. Arise, walk (through the land) in the length of it and the breadth 
of it, and see it all; for to thy seed will I give it’ And Abram went to Hebron, and dwelt there. 
22 And in this year came Chedorlaomer, king of Elam, and Amraphel, king of Shinar, and Arioch, 
king of Séllasar, and Térgal, king of nations, and slew the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Sodom 
23 fled, and many fell through wounds in the vale of Siddim, by the Salt Sea. And they took captive 
Sodom and Adam and Zeboim, and they took captive Lot also, the son of Abram’s brother, and 
24 all his possessions, and they went to Dan. And one who had escaped came and told Abram that 
25 his brother’s son had been taken captive and (Abram) armed his household servants. ; s : 
: 8 : ; c A : for Abram, and for his seed, a tenth of the first fruits to 
the Lord, and the Lord ordained it as an ordinance for ever that they should give it to the priests 
26 who served before Him, that they should possess it for ever. And to this law there is no limit of 
days; for He hath ordained it for the generations for ever that they should give to the Lord the 
tenth of everything, of the seed and of the wine and of the oil and of the cattle and of the sheep. 
28 And He gave (it) unto His priests to eat and to drink with joy before Him. And the king of 
Sodom came to him and bowed himself before him, and said: ‘Our Lord Abram, give unto us the 
29 souls which thou hast rescued, but let the booty be thine.” And Abram said unto him: “Tahitearp 
my hands to the Most High God, that from a thread to a shoe-latchet I shall not take aught that 
is thine lest thou shouldst say, I. have made Abram rich; save only what the young men have 
eaten, and the portion of the men who went with me—Aner, Eschol, and Mamre. These shall take 


their portion.’ 


Abram receives the promise of a son and of innumerable descendants, 1-7. Offers a sacrifice and ts 
told of his seed being in Egypt, 8-17. God’s covenant with Abram, 18-20. Hagar bears 
Ishmael, 21-4. (Cf. Gen. xv.; xvi. 1-4, II.) 


14 , After these things, in the fourth year of this week, on the new moon of the third month, the 


word of the Lord came to Abram in a dream, saying: ‘Fear not, Abram; I am thy defender, and 
2 thy reward will be exceeding great.’ And he said: ‘ Lord, Lord, what wilt thou give me, seeing I 
go hence childless, and the son of Maséq, the son of my handmaid, is the Dammasek Eliezer : he 
3 will be my heir, and to me thou hast given no seed.’ And he said unto him: * This (man) will not 
4 be thy heir, but one that will come out of thine own bowels; he will be thine heir.’ And He 


12. Tanais = Zoan (Num. xiii. 22). ’ ; 
13-15. Gen. xii. 15-20; but 18 and Abraham’s deception are cut out. 
17. Gen. xiii. II. 

19-21. Gen. xiii. 14-18. 

22. Names as LXX. 


: f Siddim: an easy emendation. ‘ ; 
a SA eens told of the ae and the meeting with Melchizedek. Our author would naturally be interested 


in the first man who bore the title assumed by his heroes, the Maccabees. 
26. He finds precedent in Gen. xiv. 20 for law of universal tithing. 
28-9. Gen. xiv. 21-4. 


XIV. 1-16. Gen. xv. I-16. 


1105,2 


1963 A.M. 


1964 A.M. 


THE ‘BOOK OF JUBILEES 14. 4—15. 2 


brought him forth abroad, and said unto him :. ‘ Look toward heaven and number the stars, if thou 
5 art able to number them.’ And he looked toward heaven, and beheld the stars. And He said 
6 unto him: ‘So shall thy seed be.’ And he believed in the Lord, and it was counted to him for 
7 righteousness. And He said unto him: ‘I am the Lord that brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, 
to give thee the land of the Canaanites to possess it for ever; and I will be God unto thee and to 
8 thy seed after thee.’ And he said: ‘ Lord, Lord, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit (it)? 
9 And He said unto him: ‘Take Me an heifer of three years, and a goat of three years, and a sheep 
1o of three years, and a turtle-dove, and a pigeon.’ And he took all these in the middle of the month; 
11 and he dwelt at the oak of Mamre, which is near Hebron. And he built there an altar, and 
sacrificed all these ; and he poured their blood upon the altar, and divided them in the midst, and 
12 laid them over against each other; but the birds divided he not. And birds came down upon the 
13 pieces, and Abram drove them away, and did not suffer the birds to touch them. And it came to 
pass, when the sun had set, that an ecstasy fell upon Abram, and lo! an horror of great darkness 
fell upon him, and it was said unto Abram: ‘ Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in 
a land (that is) not theirs, and they shall bring them into bondage, and afflict them four hundred 
14 years. And the nation also to whom they will be in bondage will I judge, and after that they shall 
15 come forth thence with much substance. And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace, and be buried 
16 in a good old age. But in the fourth generation they shall return hither; for the iniquity of the 
17 Amorites is not yet full... And he awoke from his sleep, and he arose, and the sun had set; and 
there was a flame, and behold! a furnace was smoking, and a flame of fire passed between the 
18 pieces. And on that day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying: ‘ To thy seed will I give 
this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates, the Kenites, the Keniz- 
zites, the Kadmonites, the Perizzites, and the Rephaim, the Phakorites, and the Hivites, and the 
19 Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites. And the day passed, 
and Abram offered the pieces, and the birds, and their fruit offerings, and their drink offerings, and 
20 the fire devoured them. And on that day we made a covenant with Abram, according as we had 
covenanted with Noah in this month ; and Abram renewed the festival and ordinance for himself 
21 for ever. And Abram rejoiced, and made all these things known to Sarai his wife ; and he believed 
22 that he would have seed, but she did not bear. And Sarai advised her husband Abram, and said 
unto him : ‘Go in unto Hagar, my Egyptian maid: it may be that I shall build up seed unto thee 
23 by her.” And Abram hearkened unto the voice of Sarai his wife, and said unto her, ‘ Do (so).’ 
And Sarai took Hagar, her maid, the Egyptian, and gave her to Abram, her husband, to be his 
24 wife. And he went in unto her, and she conceived and bare him a son, and he called his name 
Ishmael, in the fifth year of this week ; and this was the eighty-sixth year in the life of Abram. 


Abram celebrates the feast of first fruits, 1-2: his name changed and circumcision instituted, 3-14. 
Si arais name changed and Isaak promised, 15-21. Abraham, Ishmael, and all his household 
circumcised, 22-4. Circumcision an eternal ordination, 25,26. Israel shares this honour with 
the highest angels who were created circumcised, 27-9. Israel subject to God alone: other 
nations to angels, 30-2. Future faithlessness of Israel, 33-4. (Cf. Gen. xvii.) 


15: And in the fifth year of the tfourth} week of this jubilee, in the third month, in the middle of the 


2 month, Abram celebrated the feast of the first-fruits of the grain harvest. And he offered new 
offerings on the altar, the first-fruits of the produce, unto the Lord, an heifer and a goat and a sheep 


12,17, 19. Text = raévra corrupt for rundévra = the Pieces: or corrupt for xradévra = OAD as in Mass. = ‘carcases’. 
12. ae a away as Mass. Aquila. 

_13. four hundred years: Gen. xv. 13; contradicts (2) Exod. xii. 40 (430 years); () Period calculated from Exod 
vi. 18, 20 and vii. 7 (ages of Kohath, Amram, and Moses at Exodus). Author like "Philo and Josephus (Azz. ii. 9. 13 
Bell. v. 9. 4) avoids later attempts to reconcile them, e.g. Ber. Rabb. 39. See Beer, Leben Abr. 118-20. 

16. Cf. Gen. xxi. 5. A generation was one hundred years. 
18. Hivites: Gen. xv. 20, Sam. LXX. 

20, that day = Sivan 15; day of Noah’s covenant. 

21-4. Gen. xvi. 1-4, II. 


pe s tFourtht (acd). breads ‘seventh’, It should be ‘third’, here and in xvi. 15, as Dillmann recognized. 
In the third month, in the middle of the month From a compari i 
: c ¢ t . parison of xv. I and xliv. see notes also 
1. I, vl. 17-18, xiv. 20) it follows that the feast of weeks was celebrated on the fifteenth of ee month Gian. 
ae ae eons deviates from that of the Pharisees about the beginning of the Christian era, and as there were 
SA : eens Bes as cee 
en “ nee aoe in Judaism about, before, and after that period, we must here inquire briefly into the origin and 
First of all it is clear that they all arose from the various meanings a i ili 
rt : ttached to the word ‘Sabbath’ in Lev. ; 
15,16. In these verses it is ordained that the feast of weeks should fall on the fiftieth day after the offerincon the 


34 


1965 A.M. 


1979 A.M. 


3 
4 
iS 


6 


9 


5 fo) 
If 


12 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 15, 2-12 


on the altar as a burnt sacrifice unto the Lord; their fruit offerin ir dri i 
: ; gs and their drink 

yee upon the altar with frankincense. And the Lord appeared to brain cand: ican a 
am God Almighty; approve thyself before me and be thou perfect. And I will make My 


covenant between Me and thee, and I will multiply thee exceedingly.’ A i 
and God talked with him, and said: ane ee 


‘Behold my ordinance is with thee, 
And thou shalt be the father of many nations. 


Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, 
But thy name from henceforth, even for ever, shall be Abraham. 
For the father of many nations have I made thee. 


And I will make thee very great, 
And I will make thee into nations, 
And kings shall come forth from thee. 


And I shall establish My covenant between Me and thee, and thy seed after thee, throughout their 
generations, for an eternal covenant, so that I may be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. 
¢And I will give to thee and to thy seed after thee) the land where thou hast been a sojourner, 
the land of Canaan, that thou mayst possess it for ever, and I will be their God.’ And the Lord 
said unto Abraham: ‘And as for thee, do thou keep my covenant, thou and thy seed after thee ; 
and circumcise ye every male among you, and circumcise your foreskins, and it shall be a token of 
an eternal covenant between Me and you. And the child on the eighth day ye shall circumcise, 


Paschal wave-sheaf. Now this sheaf was waved ‘on the morrow after the Sabbath’ (Lev. xxiii. 11, 15, wn non»). 
In what sense, then, are we to take the word ‘Sabbath’? Two ways are possible :—(1) It may be taken to mean 
merely a feast day. (2) It may be taken in its strict sense as the weekly Sabbath. 

First, the word ‘ Sabbath’ is taken in the general sense of a feast-day. Now the first day of unleavened bread 
(Lev. xxill. 7) was such a day; but the seventh (Lev. xxiii. 8) was no less so. Hence two different computations arise 
from this interpretation of the word, (i) the first of which interprets the first day of unleavened bread as the Sabbath, 
and (ii) the second which interprets it of the seventh day. (i) The first interpretation, which took the Sabbath to be 
the first day of unleavened bread (Nisan 15), naturally understood the phrase ‘the morrow after the Sabbath’ to 
designate Nisan 16, without regard to the day of the week. This was the interpretation of the Pharisees in our Lord’s 
time. This view is first attested in the LXX, where the phrase in question is rendered by rj émavpoy ris mpartns 
(here 7) mporn = NAwN), exactly as in Ps.-Jon. on Lev. xxiii. 15, NNOP NIV NOY WNID; in the Targum of Onkelos 
(S13 NID" N31) where ‘the Sabbath’ is simply rendered the ‘ feast day’: in Josephus, Avz. ili. 10. 5, ri dé devtépa 
trav adipeov hepa: in Philo, de Septenar. 20, where the day for waving the sheaf is said to be the second day of 
unleavened bread : ‘Eopr) d€ éorw } pera thy mpdrny edOds jyépa. The Mishna, also (Chag. ii. 4; Menach. x. 1-3), 
maintains this interpretation against conflicting expositions. 

Since on this view the sheaf-waving took place on Nisan 16, the feast of weeks, fifty days later, was usually celebrated 
on Sivan 6, without regard in either case to the day of the week. 

(ii) But others took the Sabbath to mean the seventh day of unleavened bread, which was also a day of rest. As 
the Sabbath in this case was Nisan 21, the morrow after the Sabbath was Nisan 22. This is actually the course pur- 
sued by the (a) Falashas or Abyssinian Jews. They reckon the fifty days from Nisan 22 and thus the feast of weeks 
falls on Sivan 12 as they use alternate months of thirty and twenty-nine days (see d’Abbadie in Univ. /sr, Juillet 
1851, p. 482). (4) Again this view is attested by the Syriac version of Lev. xxlii. II, 15, as existing before 100 A. D, 
Thus it renders the Hebrew phrase Juiw? lsoa. SK> = ‘after the second (feast) day’, that is Nisan 21. (c) But the 
usage is as early as the second century B.C.; for it appears in our text. At the beginning of this note we found that 
the feast of weeks took place on the Sivan 15. If we count back fifty days (reckoning the second month at twenty- 
eight days), we arrive at Nisan 22 when the wave-sheaf was offered. Thus Jubilees also interpreted the phrase ‘the 
morrow after the Sabbath’ as meaning the day after the seventh day of unleavened bread, which was a special day of 
rest. 

(2) But on the fact that the simple term ‘Sabbath’ stands elsewhere only as the weekly Sabbath are based other 
early uses among the Jews as well as certain modern speculations. Thus the Baithusians (Menachoth 65 a) took ‘the 
morrow after the Sabbath’ to be the day after the weekly Sabbath which occurred during the feast of unleavened bread. 
Frankel (Zinfluss d. Pal. Exeg., 1851, pp. 136-7) holds that the ry émavpiov tis mpatns of the LXX is directed against 
this view. The Karaite Jews (Trigland, Diatribe de Secta Karaeorum, 1703; Furst, Geschichte des Kariderthums, 1865) 
and likewise the Samaritans follow the strict interpretation of the term Sabbath in this connexion. Very many modern 
scholars hold strongly to some form of this theory, as Hitzig (Ostern u. Pfingsten, 1837 and Ostern u. Pfingsten tim 
zweiten Dekalog, 1838), who maintained that in the Hebrew calendar Nisan 14 and 21 were always Sabbaths and that 
‘the morrow after the Sabbath’ was Nisan 22. Knobel (on Lev. xxiii. 11) agreed with Hitzig, save that he identified the 
day of the sheaf-waving with Nisan 15. Saalschiitz (Das Jos. Recht? 1853, p. 420), First (Hebr. u. Chald.Worterbuch, 
1863, under word Naw), Wellhausen (Jahr. f. deutsch. Theol. xxii), Dillmann (on Lev. xxiii. 11), von Orelli (Herzog’s 
Real-Encyc.? xi. 264) accept in one form or another the Sadducean interpretation. In addition to the above literature, 
see the Articles on Pentecost (Pfmgséfest) in Hastings’ Bible Dictionary ; Herzog’s Real-Encyc.2 and Schenkel’s 
Bibel-Lexicon. 

I-27. Gen. xvii. I-27. 
2. Not as Lev. xxiii. 18-20. 
Io. Words restored from Gen. xvii. 8 were lost through hmt. 


35 Be 


18 


THE ‘BOOK OF JUBILEES Ibn 13-26 


every male throughout your generations, him that is born in the house, or whom ye have bought 
13 with money from any stranger, whom ye have acquired who is not of thy seed. He that is born in 
thy house shall surely be circumcised, and those whom thou hast bought with money shall be circum- 
‘4 cised,and My covenant shall be in your flesh for an eternal ordinance. And the uncircumcised male 
who is not circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin on the eighth day, that soul shall be cut off from 
15 his people, for he has broken My covenant.’ And God said unto Abraham: ‘ As for Sarai thy wife, 
16 her name shall no more be called Sarai, but Sarah shall be her name. And I will bless her, and give 
thee a son by her, and I will bless him, and he shall become a nation, and kings of nations shall 
7 proceed from him.’ And Abraham fell on his face, and rejoiced, and said in his heart: ‘Shall a son 
be born to him that is a hundred years old, and shall Sarah, who is ninety years old, bring forth?’ 
t9 And Abraham said unto God: ‘O that Ishmael might live before thee!’ And God said: ‘ Yea, 
and Sarah also shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name Isaac, and I will establish My 
20 covenant with him, an everlasting covenant, and for his seed after him. And as for Ishmael also 
have I heard thee, and behold I will bless him, and make him great, and multiply him exceedingly, 
21 and he shall beget twelve princes, and I will make him a great nation. But My covenant will 
221 establish with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear to thee, in these days, in the next year. And He left 
23 off speaking with him, and God went up from Abraham. And Abraham did according as God had 
said unto him, and he took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his house, and whom he had 
24 bought with his money, every male in his house, and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin. And 
on the selfsame day was Abraham circumcised, and all the men of his house, <and those born in the 
house), and all those, whom he had bought with money from the children of the stranger, were 
25 circumcised with him. This law is for all the generations for ever, and there is no circumcision of 
the days, and no omission of one day out of the eight days; for it is an eternal ordinance, ordained 
26 and written on the heavenly tablets. And every one that is born, the flesh of whose foreskin is not 
circumcised on the eighth day, belongs not to the children of the covenant which the Lord made 
with Abraham, but to the children of destruction ; nor is there, moreover, any sign on him that he 
is the Lord’s, but (he is destined) to be destroyed and slain from the earth, and to be rooted out of 


14. on the eighth day. These words, which are not found in the Mass., Syr., and Vulg., are, however, attested by 
the Sam. and LXX, Also in Origen’s Commentary zz Ep. ad Rom. ii. 13 (Lommatzsch, vi. 123-4) : Incircumcisus 
masculus, qui non fuerit circumcisus in carne praeputii sui die octavo, exterminabitur anima illa: and in Ambrose, 
Epist. 72, who remarks on Aquila’s statement that this clause is wanting in the Hebrew. See on ver. 26. 

As the Sabbath is the first, so circumcision is the second cardinal command of Judaism. In opposition to the laxity 
introduced by Greek culture the command in Gen. xv. 14 is enunciated afresh and the requirement added that it should 
be performed on the eighth day of the child’s life. Owing to Greek influences, even before the reign of Antiochus IV, 
many Jews of noble birth had undergone surgical operations in order to appear like Greeks when undressed (1 Macc. 
i. 15 ; Assumpt. Mos. viii. 3 ; Joseph. Ams. xii. 5. 1). Subsequently Antiochus had taken the severest measures to 
prohibit circumcision (1 Macc. i. 48, 60, ii. 46). To withstand the Hellenizing attitude towards circumcision our author 
emphasizes what was apparently the current view of his time, i. e., that circumcisicn should be performed on the eighth 
day—the current view ; for the words enjoining it were in both Jewish and Samaritan copies of fhe Hebrew text of 
Gen, xvii. 14 (see above). This strict view was subsequently relaxed. Thus, according to Shabb. xix. 5: ‘ A child could 
be circumcised on the 8th, 9th, 1oth, 11th, or 12th day, neither earlier nor later. How so? Usually it is circumcised 
on the 8th day. Should it be born on the evening, it is circumcised on the gth : should it be born on Friday evening it 
is circumcised on the roth: should the Sunday be a festival, on the 11th: should the Sunday and Monday be New 
Year’s days, on the 12th. If the child is ill, it is not circumcised till well’ But the Samaritans have held fast to the 
severer regulation to the present day. In letters of the Samaritans communicated by de Sacy to T. Scaliger (Eichhorn’s 
Kepertor, xiii. 261) it is said: ‘ We circumcise the male on the eighth day and do not defer circumcision a single day 


(JAS OY NN? x) - - . but the Jews defer it one day or more.’ That the severer form of the halachah prevailed 
among the Jews themselves as late as the second century A.D. might be inferred from Justin Martyr (Dial c. Tryph. 
27): © Did God wish those to sin who are circumcised or do circumcise on the Sabbaths ? for He commands that on 
the eighth day— even though it happen to be a Sabbath—those who are born should always be circumcised (ry jyuépa 
Tn OyOdn EK mavros TEpiTéuverOat Tors yevunbévras polws Kav 7 Tiuépa Tav caBBdroy ;). Could not He have the infants cir- 
cumcised one day before or one day after the Sabbath, if He knew that it was a sinful act on the Sabbath?’ This custom 
is also regarded as obligatory by the Falashas or Abyssinian Jews. Cf. Abbadie, Undv. Isr. Avr. p- 481, 1851 (quoted 
by Singer, p. 289 note). We might observe here that our book knows nothing of the later traditions that the patriarchs 
such as Adam, Seth, Enoch, Noah, Shem, Terah, Jacob and six others were born circumcised (Midrash Tillin 104 
Soteh to 4, quoted by Hershon, Treasures of T. almud, 238,240,241). Ber. rabba 43 affirms this of Melchizedek. For 
other references see Singer, p. 301 note. 
___ We might observe here that our book knows nothing of the barbarous mode of circumcision ordered by the Talmud- 
ists and Bar Cochba in order to make it impossible to obliterate the signs of it by any such surgical operation as is 
referred to above. This mode was known as the AY, ‘or the laying bare’. This mutilation after the removal of the 
foreskin is still practised. See Hershon, Genesis, Pp. 304. 

17. rejoiced. Nestle has pointed out that Jub. here as Targ. Onk..on Gen. xvii. 17 read "7, while Tare. Jon. has 
mani. Hence he explains John viii. 56. a ; 

24. and those .. . house: restored with Lat. 

26. on: MSS. and Lat. wrongly ‘till’. 


36 


Poe bOOK OP JUBILEES 15. 27— 16. 13 
27 the earth, for he has broken the covenant of the Lord our God. For all the angels of the presence 
and all the angels of sanctification have been so created from the day of their creation, and before 
the angels of the presence and the angels of sanctification He hath sanctified Israel, that they should 
28 be with Him and with His holy angels. And do thou command the children of Israel and jet them 
observe the sign of this covenant for their generations as an eternal ordinance, and they will not be 
29 rooted out of the land. For the command is ordained for a covenant, that they should observe it 
30 for ever among all the children of Israel. For Ishmael and his sons and his brothers and Esau, the 
Lord did not cause to approach Him, and he chose them not because they are the children of 
31 Abraham, because He knew them, but He chose Israel to be His people. And He sanctified it, and 
gathered it from amongst all the children of men; for there are many nations and many peoples, 
and all are His, and over all hath He placed spirits in authority to lead them astray from Him. 
32 But over Israel He did not appoint any angel or spirit, for He alone is their ruler, and He will 
preserve them and require them at the hand of His angels and His spirits, and at the hand of all 
His powers in order that He may preserve them and bless them, and that they may be His and He 
33 may be theirs from henceforth for ever. And now I announce unto thee that the children of Israel 
will not keep true to this ordinance, and they will not circumcise their sons according to all this law ; 
for in the flesh of their circumcision they will omit this circumcision of their sons, and all of them, 
34 sons of Beliar, will leave their sons uncircumcised as they were born. And there will be great wrath 
from the Lord against the children of Israel, because they have forsaken His covenant and turned 
aside from His word, and provoked and blasphemed, inasmuch as they do not observe the ordinance 
of this law; for they have treated their members like the Gentiles, so that they may be removed 
and rooted out of the land. And there will no more be pardon or forgiveness unto them [so that 
there should be forgiveness and pardon] for all the sin of this eternal error. 


Angels appear to Abraham in Hebron and Isaac again promised, 1-4. Destruction of Sodom and 
Lot's deliverance, 5-9. Abraham at Beersheba: birth of and circumcision of Isaac, whose seed 
was to be the portion of God, 10-19. Institution of the feast of Tabernacles, 20-31. (Cf. Gen. 
SUAtgehOs EAC xix 2480, 99-7 5 xx. 14, 0} XX. 1-4.) 


16: And on the new moon of the fourth month we appeared unto Abraham, at the oak of Mamre, and 
we talked with him, and we announced to him that a son would be given to him by Sarah his wife. 

2 And Sarah laughed, for she heard that we had spoken these words with Abraham, and we admonished 
3 her, and she became afraid, and denied that she had laughed on account of the words. And we 
told her the name of her son, as his name is ordained and written in the heavenly tablets (i. e.) Isaac, 

4, 5 And (that) when we returned to her at a set time, she would have conceived a son. And in this 
month the Lord executed his judgments on Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Zeboim, and all the region 
of the Jordan, and He burned them with fire and brimstone, and destroyed them until this day, even 
as [lo] I have declared unto thee all their works, that they are wicked and sinners exceedingly, and 
that they defile themselves and commit fornication in their flesh, and work uncleanness on the earth. 

6 And, in like manner, God will execute judgment on the places where they have done according to 
7 the uncleanness of the Sodomites, like unto the judgment of Sodom. But Lot we saved ; for God 
8 remembered Abraham, and sent him out from the midst of the overthrow. And he and his daughters 
committed sin upon the earth, such as had not been on the earth since the days of Adam till his 

9 time; for the man lay with his daughters. And, behold, it was commanded and engraven con- 
cerning ali his seed, on the heavenly tablets, to remove them and root them out, and to execute judg- 
ment upon them like the judgment of Sodom, and to leave no seed of the man on earth on the day 
ro ofcondemnation. And in this month Abraham moved from Hebron, and departed and dwelt between 
11 Kadesh and Shur in the mountains of Gerar. And in the middle of the fifth month he moved from 
12 thence, and dwelt at the Well of the Oath. And in the middle of the sixth month the Lord visited 
13 Sarah and did unto her as He had spoken and she conceived. And she bare a son in the third 


Oe es Lh Ch Biren 17 5Den. x 13,20, 913 1 Ens bexting; cfvalso 1 Cor 
z OE a iia Ch a xxiv. 21, 22; 1 En. xc. 22. Ultimate result treated as immediate purpose of God's 
aes <a eas Rene ee eae ae ay cia century B.c. Sons of Beliar cf. Test. Dan. 5; I Sam. 
3 me Our prophet has here become a mere writer of annals. 

XVI. Cf. Gen. xviii, xix. The story of the angels’ visit is curtailed (perhaps their eating shocked him) and Abram’s 


mly conduct to Abimelech is passed over. : ; 
ete xxi. 1-4. Isaac born on Sivan 15, but according to Rosh ha-Shanah 104 on the Passover Feast, 


and according to Midrash Tanchuma on Nisan. 


a7, 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 16/4323 


month, and in the middle of the month, at the time of which the Lord had spoken to Abraham, on 
14 the festival of the first fruits of the harvest, Isaac was born. And Abraham circumcised his son on 
the eighth day: he was the first that was circumcised according to the covenant which is ordained 
15 for ever. And in the sixth year of the tfourth? week we came to Abraham, to the Well of the Oath, 
and we appeared unto him [as we had told Sarah that we should return to her, and she would have 
16 conceived a son. And we returned in the seventh month, and found Sarah with child before us] and 
we blessed him, and we announced to him all the things which had been decreed concerning him, 
that he should not die till he should beget six sons more, and should see (them) before he died ; but 
17 (that) in Isaac should his name and seed be called: And (that) all the seed of his sons should be 
Gentiles, and be reckoned with the Gentiles ; but from the sons of Isaac one should become a holy 
18 seed, and should not be reckoned among the Gentiles. For he should become the portion of the 
Most High, and all his seed had fallen into the possession of God, that it should be unto the Lord 
a people for (His) possession above all nations and that it should become a kingdom and priests and 
19 a holy nation. And we went our way, and we announced to Sarah all that we had told him, and 
20 they both rejoiced with exceeding great joy. And he built there an altar to the Lord who had 
delivered him, and who was making him rejoice in the Jand of his sojourning, and he celebrated 
a festival of joy in this month seven days, near the altar which he had built at the Well of the Oath. 
21 And he built booths for himself and for his servants on this festival, and he was the first to celebrate 
22 the feast of tabernacles on the earth. And during these seven days he brought each day to the 
altar a burnt offering to the Lord, two oxen, two rams, seven sheep, one he-goat, for a sin offering, 
23 that he might atone thereby for himself and for his seed. And,asa thank-offering, seven rams, seven 
kids, seven sheep, and seven he-goats, and their fruit offerings and their drink offerings; and he 
burnt all the fat thereof on the altar, a chosen offering unto the Lord for a sweet smelling savour. 
24 And morning and evening he burnt fragrant substances, frankincense and galbanum, and stackte, 
and nard, and myrrh, and spice, and costum; all these seven he offered, crushed, mixed together in 
25 equal parts (and) pure. And he celebrated this feast during seven days, rejoicing with all his heart 
and with all his soul, he and all those who were in his house, and there was no stranger with him, 
26 nor any that was uncircumcised. And he blessed his Creator who had created him in his generation, 
for He had created him according to His good pleasure ; for He knew and perceived that from him 
would arise the plant of righteousness for the eternal generations, and from him a holy seed, so that it 
27 should become like Him who had made all things. And he blessed and rejoiced, and he called the 
28 name of this festival the festival of the Lord, a joy acceptable to the Most High God. And we 
blessed him for ever, and all his seed after him throughout all the generations of the earth, because © 
29 he celebrated this festival in its season, according to the testimony of the heavenly tablets. For this 
reason it is ordained on the heavenly tablets concerning Israel, that they shall celebrate the feast of 
tabernacles seven days with joy, in the seventh month, acceptable before the Lord—a statute for 
30 ever throughout their generations every year. And to this there is no limit of days ; for it is ordained 


15. tfourtht. Read ‘third’. [ ] a gloss. 

16, him = Lat., Eth. = ‘her’; six sons more: cf. Gen. xxv. 2. 

17. Cf. Sanh. 59 0. 

18. Read éevét (‘possession’) for dersét (‘ magnificence ’) (abc); cf. Exod. xix. 6; Deut. vii. 6; d has vest (‘ inheri- 
tance ’); cf. Deut. iv. 20. Latin, populum Sanctifjicatum. 

a kingdom and priests (cf. xxxiii. 20) = Baowdela Kal iepeis, whereas the Latin has vegnum sacerdotale = 
Baovdeia ieparixn = DIN nooo. The phrase is from Exod. xix. 6, of which the Latin gives the correct rendering and 
not the Ethiopic version. Yet the latter seems to represent the Hebrew original of our text, as we shall see presently. 
First of all we observe that it is incorrectly translated in the LXX and it is reproduced in two forms in the N.T. 
closely akin to those above. The LXX translates it incorrectly by Bacideoy iepdrevpa (a hierarchy consisting of kings), 
and this rendering is adopted in 1 Pet. ii.9. In Rev. v. 10 we have BaowAciay kai iepeis exactly as in our Ethiopic text 
and in i. 6 BaouXeiay iepeis. Thus our Ethiopic text and Rev. i. 6, v. 10 agree in giving practically the same rendering 
of b73 nsdn in Exod. xix. 6, and in inserting either the copula or a pause between the two Hebrew words. This 
is an ancient Jewish way of treating this phrase. Thus we find it given in Onkelos as 0°73 yadn (as in Rev. i. 6); in 
Ps.-Jon. "WOW PIT xdobs yVOpP rob ( = kings with crowns and ministering priests); in the Jem Larne: mob 
O°3N33 ; and the Syr. version bose Jlan Ns 3 exactly as in our Ethiopic text and in Rev. v. 10. Thus we conclude 
that the Ethiopic text represents the Hebrew original and that the Latin veguum sacerdotale is borrowed by the Latin 
translator of Jubilees from the Vulgate. 

19. rejoiced: cf. xv. 17. ; 
_ 20-31. Contrast Num. xxix. 12-40. This peculiar account of the Feast of ‘ Tabernacles’ is quoted by Cedrenus, 
a. 50- 

24. Uses Exod. xxx. 34; cf. Sir. xxiv. 15. These seven spices are as Jer. Joma iv. 5; Kerithoth 6a6; Nowack 
Hebr. Archiologie, ii. 248. j Je 

26. plant of righteousness, cf. 1 En. x. 16, Ixxxiy. 6, XCili, 2, 5; 10, 

29, 30. Cf. Lev. xxiii, 40-1. 

38 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 16. 30—18. 2 


for ever regarding Israel that they should celebrate it and dwell i 

: ell in booths, and set wreaths upon 

31 their heads, and take leafy boughs, and willows from the brook. And Abraham took prandhes! of 
palm trees, and the fruit of goodly trees, and every day going round the altar with the branches 
seven times [a day] in the morning, he praised and gave thanks to his God for all things in joy, 


Expulsion of Hagar and Ishmael, I-14. Mastimé proposes that God should require Abraham to 
aes nee in order to test his love and obedience: Abraham’s ten trials, 15-18. (Cf. Gen. 
XX1. 0-21. 


17: And in the first year of the ffftht week Isaac was weaned in this jubilee, and Abraham made 1982 a.m. 
2 a great banquet in the third month, on the day his son Isaac was weaned. And Ishmael, the son of 
Hagar, the Egyptian, was before the face of Abraham, his father, in his place, and Abraham rejoiced 
3 and blessed God because he had seen his sons and had not died childless. And he remembered the 
words which He had spoken to him on the day on which Lot had parted from him, and he rejoiced 
because the Lord had given him seed upon the earth to inherit the earth, and he blessed with all his 
4 mouth the Creator of all things. And Sarah saw Ishmael playing and dancing,t} and Abraham 
rejoicing with great joy, and she became jealous of Ishmael and said to Abraham, ‘ Cast out this 
5 bondwoman and her son; for the son of this bondwoman will not be heir with my son, Isaac.’ And 
the thing was grievous in Abraham’s sight, because of his maidservant and because of his son, 
6 that he should drive them from him. And God said to Abraham ‘ Let it not be grievous in thy 
sight, because of the child and because of the bondwoman ; in all that Sarah hath said unto thee, 
4 hearken to her words and do (them) ; for in Isaac shall thy name and seed be called. But as for 
8 the son of this bondwoman I will make him a great nation, because he is of thy seed.’ And Abraham 
rose up early in the morning, and took bread and a bottle of water, and placed them on the shoulders 
9 of Hagar and the child, and sent her away. And she departed and wandered in the wilderness of 
Beersheba, and the water in the bottle was spent, and the child thirsted, and was not able to go on, 
to and fell down. And his mother took him and cast him under an olive tree, and went and sat her 
down over against him, at the distance of a bow-shot ; for she said,‘ Let me not see the death of my 
r1 child,’ and as she sat she wept. And an angel of God, one of the holy ones, said unto her, ‘Why 
weepest thou, Hagar? Arise take the child, and hold him in thine hand ; for God hath heard thy 
12 voice, and hath seen the child.” And she opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water, and she 
went and filled her bottle with water, and she gave her child to drink, and she arose and went towards 
13 the wilderness of Paran. And the child grew and became an archer, and God was with him, and his 
14 mother took him a wife from among the daughters of Egypt. And she bare him a son, and he called 
15 his name Nebaioth; for she said, ‘ The Lord was nigh to me when I called upon him.’ And it came 2003 a.m. 
to pass in the seventh week, in the first year thereof, in the first month in this jubilee, on the twelfth 
of this month, there were voices in heaven regarding Abraham, that he was faithful in all that He 
16 told him, and that he loved the Lord, and that in every affliction he was faithful. And the prince 
Mastéma came and said before God, ‘ Behold, Abraham loves Isaac his son, and he delights in him 
above all things else; bid him offer him as a burnt-offering on the altar, and Thou wilt see if he will 
do this command, and Thou wilt know if he is faithful in everything wherein Thou dost try him. 
17 And the Lord knew that Abraham was faithful in all his afflictions; for He had tried him through 
his country and with famine, and had tried him with the wealth of kings, and had tried him again 
through his wife, when she was torn (from him), and with circumcision; and had tried him through 
18 Ishmael and Hagar, his maid-servant, when he sent them away. And in everything wherein He 
had tried him, he was found faithful, and his soul was not impatient, and he was not slow to act; 
for he was faithful and a lover of the Lord. 


Sacrifice of Isaac: Mastémé put to shame, 1-13. Abraham again blessed: returns to Beersheba 
F419. (Cf. Gen. xxil. 1=1F9:) 
18 1,2 And God said to him, ‘ Abraham, Abraham’; and he said, Behold, (here) am I.’ And he said, 


30. Wreaths only here in connexion with this Feast; but cf. Wisd. ii. 7: Joseph. Avs. xix. 9. I ; and Gittin 7 a; 
Sota 49 2, a practice at weddings. 

31. branches. MSS. and Lat. ‘heart ie aby was taken as a2, 

XVI 1-13. .Cf. Gen. xxi. 8-21. 

1. tfiftht. Read ‘fourth’. 

4. and dancing (wa-yezafen) : ? corrupt for ‘with Isaac’ (ba-yeshaq) (LXX, Vulg.). 

7. a great nation: as Sam., Syr., LXX, Vulg. ; Ps.-Jon. ‘a nation of robbers’. Mass., Onk. > ‘great’. 

11. An angel takes the place of God here: as Mastéma does in 16. In both cases, duetoreverence. _ 

17. Abraham’s ten trials. The number nearly always the same ; the contents different. Here concludes with Sarah’s 
burial, xix. 3-8 ; usually with sacrifice of Isaac. See my Comm., 121, 122. 


XVIII. 1-17. Gen. xxil. 1-19. 
39 


THE’ BOOK OF JUBILEES 18. 2—19. 2 


‘Take thy beloved son whom thou lovest, (even) Isaac, and go unto the high country, and offer eae 
3 on one of the mountains which I will point out unto thee.’ And he rose early in the morning an 
saddled his ass, and took his two young men with him, and Isaac his son, and clave the wood of the 
4 burnt offering, and he went to the place on the third day, and he saw the place afar off. And he 
came to a well of water, and he said to his young men, ‘ Abide ye here with the ass, and I and the 
5 lad shall go (yonder), and when we have worshipped we shall come again to you.’ And he took the 
wood of the burnt-offering and laid it on Isaac his son, and he took in his hand the fire and the 
6 knife, and they went both of them together to that place. And Isaac said to his father, ‘ Father ; 
and he said, ‘ Here am I, my son.’ And he said unto him, ‘ Behold the fire, and the knife, and the 
7 wood ; but where is the sheep for the burnt-offering, father?’ And he said, ‘ God will provide for 
himself a sheep for a burnt-offering, my son.’ And he drew near to the place of the mount of 
g God. And he built an altar, and he placed the wood on the altar, and bound Isaac his son, and 
placed him on the wood which was upon the altar, and stretched forth his hand to take the knife 
g to slay Isaac his son. And I stood before him, and before the prince Mastéma, and the Lord said, 
‘Bid him not to lay his hand on the lad, nor to do anything to him, for I have shown that he fears 
1o the Lord.’ And I called to him from heaven, and said unto him: ‘ Abraham, Abraham ;’ and he 
11 was terrified and said : ‘ Behold, (here) am I” And I said unto him: ‘ Lay not thy hand upon the 
lad, neither do thou anything to him; for now.I have shown that thou fearest the Lord, and hast 
12 not withheld thy son, thy first-born son, from me.’ And the prince Mast€ma was put to shame; 
and Abraham lifted up his eyes and looked, and, behold a ram caught... by his horns, and Abraham 
13 went and took the ram and offered it for a burnt-offering in the stead of his son. And Abraham 
called that place‘ The Lord hath seen ’, so that it is said (in the mount) the Lord hath seen: that is 
14 Mount Sion. And the Lord called Abraham by his name a second time from heaven, as he caused 
15 us to appear to speak to him in the name of the Lord. And he said: ‘ By Myself have I sworn, 
saith the Lord, 


Because thou hast done this thing, 
And hast not withheld thy son, thy beloved son, from Me, 
That in blessing I will bless thee, 


And in multiplying I will multiply thy seed 
As the stars of heaven, 
And as the sand which is on the seashore. 


And thy seed shall inherit the cities of its enemies, 
16 And in thy seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed ; 


Because thou hast obeyed My voice, 
And I have shown to all that thou art faithful unto Me in all that I have said unto thee: 
Go in peace.’ 


17 And Abraham went to his young men, and they arose and went together to Beersheba, and Abraham 

18 dwelt by the Well of the Oath. And he celebrated this festival every year, seven days with joy, 
and he called it the festival of the Lord according to the seven days during which he went and 

1g returned in peace. And accordingly has it been ordained and written on the heavenly tablets regarding 
Israel and its seed that they should observe this festival seven days with the joy of festival. 


Return of Abraham to Hebron. Death and burial of Sarah, 1-9. Marriage of Isaac and second 
marriage of Abraham. Birth of Esau and ¥acob, 10-14. Abraham commends Facob to Rebecca 
and blesses him, 15-31. (Cf. Gen. xxiii. 1-4, Ei-10 > XxiV.41 5 xxved_o, 25-7; exile oe) 


19 And in the first year of the first week in the forty-second jubilee, Abraham returned and dwelt 


2 opposite Hebron, that is Kirjath Arba, two weeks of years. And in the first year of the {third} week 


2. thy beloved son. Asin LXX. 

11. [have shown = Lat. version mantfestavi. The Eth. could also be rendered ‘I have known’, as Mass. and 
Sam. of Gen, xxii. 12 ‘YT, but ‘shown’ is supported by both Lat. and Eth. in ver. 16. Cf. also Syr. of Gen. Zc. 

13. in the mount : added from Latin = Gen. xxii, 14 (Mass.-LXX), 

15. thy beloved son (a d@) = roo ayarntov gov = J", Lat. has, however, zo unigenito = rod povoyevods cov = 
71M. For similar divergences perhaps due to a dittography in the Hebrew cf. LXX (A) of Judges xi. 34: adrn povo- 
yevns aire dyamnrn, and LXX and Vulg. of Gen. xxii, 2, 12,16. But here cd have ‘ thy first-born son ’ (ver. 11), and add 
(like Lat. gem dilexist7) ‘whom thou hast loved ’, which addition may go back to Gen. xxii, 2, or to 77" (the variant 
or dittograph of TM) in Gen. xxii. 16, 

cities. So Onk., Sam. Vers., LXX in Gen. xxii. 17, where Mass. and Sam. have ‘gate’. 
16. Go in peace: 1 Sam. i. 17. ‘ 


XIX. 2. Read ‘second’ for ‘third’, This chapter uses much of Gen. XXlii, xxv, 


40 ; a 
af \ / 
a 4, 


2010 A.M. 


G 
e 
e 
io 


19) 
N\ 


tre BUOKrYOr’ |UBILEES 19) 3234 


3 of this jubilee the days of the life of Sarah were accomplished, and she died in Hebron. And 
Abraham went to mourn over her and bury her, and we tried him [to see] if his spirit were patient 
and he were not indignant in the words of his mouth ; and he was found patient in this, and was not 

4 disturbed. For in patience of spirit he conversed with the children of Heth, to the intent that they 

5 should give him a place in which to bury his dead. And the Lord gave him grace before all who 
saw him, and he besought in gentleness the sons of Heth, and they gave him the land of the double 

6 cave over against Mamre, that is Hebron, for four hundred pieces of silver. And they besought him 
saying, We shall give it to thee for nothing; but he would not take it from their hands for nothing, 
for he gave the price of the place, the money in full, and he bowed down before them twice, and after 

7 this he buried his dead in the double cave. And all the days of the life of Sarah were one hundred 
and twenty-seven years, that is, two jubilees and four weeks and one year: these are the days of the 

8 years of the life of Sarah. This is the tenth trial wherewith Abraham was tried, and he was found 

g faithful, patient in spirit. And he said not a single word regarding the rumour in the land how that 
God had said that He would give it to him and to his seed after him, and he begged a place there to 
bury his dead; for he was found faithful, and was recorded on the heavenly tablets as the friend of 

1o God. And in the fourth year thereof he took a wife for his son Isaac and her name was Rebecca 
[the daughter of Bethuel, the son of Nahor, the brother of Abraham] the sister of Laban and daughter 
of Bethuel; and Bethuel was the son of Mélca, who was the wife of Nahor, the brother of Abraham. 

11 And Abraham took to himself a third wife, and her name was Keturah, from among the daughters 
of his household servants, for Hagar had died before Sarah. And she bare him six sons, Zimram, 

12 and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah, in the two weeks of years. And in 

13 the sixth week, in the second year thereof, Rebecca bare to Isaac two sons, Jacob and Esau, and 
Jacob was a smooth and upright man, and Esau was fierce, a man of the field, and hairy, and Jacob 

14 dwelt in tents. And the youths grew, and Jacob learned to write; but Esau did not learn, for he 

15 was a man of the field and a hunter, and he learnt war, and all his deeds were fierce. And Abraham 

16 loved Jacob, but Isaac loved Esau. And Abraham saw the deeds of Esau, and he knew that in 
Jacob should his name and seed be called ; and he called Rebecca and gave commandment regarding 

17 Jacob, for he knew that she (too) loved Jacob much more than Esau. And he said unto her: 

My daughter, watch over my son Jacob, 

For he shall be in my stead on the earth, 

And for a blessing in the midst of the children of men, 
And for the glory of the whole seed of Shem. 

18 For I know that the Lord will choose him to be a people for possession unto Himself, above all 

19 peoples that are upon the face of the earth. And behold, Isaac my son loves Esau more than Jacob, 
but I see that thou truly lovest Jacob. 


20 Add still further to thy kindness to him, 
And let thine eyes be upon him in love ; 
For he shall be a blessing unto us on the earth from henceforth unto all generations of the earth. 


21 Let thy hands be strong 
And let thy heart rejoice in thy son Jacob ; 
For I have loved him far beyond all my sons. 


He shal! be blessed for ever, 
And his seed shall fill the whole earth. 


22 Ifa mancan number the sand of the earth, 
His seed also shall be numbered. 


23 And all the blessings wherewith the Lord hath blessed me and my seed shall belong to Jacob and 
24 his seed alway. And in his seed shall my name be blessed, and the name of my fathers, Shem, and 


5. double-cave: as LXX. 
four hundred : as Latin; Eth. gives 4o. = ¢ = 
g. friend of God: cf. xxx. 20 and xxiv. 15; Isa. xli. 8; 2 Chr. xx. 7; Dan. m1. 35 (LXX) ; James ii. 23; Clem. 
Rom. x. 1, xvii. 2; Targ.-Jer. on Gen. xviii. 17 and Philo, De Sobrietate 11. 
10. daughter . . . Bethuel, emended with help of Latin. ; : 
11. daughters: Lat.; Eth. has ‘sons’. Author explains why Abraham did not take Hagar back. Later view 
identified Hagar and Keturah. Cf. Jerome, Quaest. Hebr. in Gen. xxv. 1; Beer, Leben Abrahams, 83-1098. f 
16. According to later Jewish tradition Abraham did not live to see Esau’s sin ; Ps.-Jon. on Gen. xxv. 9; Ber. 
rabba 63. ; # 
18. possession... See xvi. 18; . Deut. vii. 6. 
peoples restored from Latin. 


41 


2020 A.M. 


2046 A.M. 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 19. 24—20. 8 


25 Noah, and Enoch, and Mahalalel, and Enos, and Seth, and Adam. And these shall serve 
To lay the foundations of the heaven, 
And to strengthen the earth, 
And to renew all the luminaries which are in the firmament. 
26 And he called Jacob before the eyes of Rebecca his mother, and kissed him, and blessed him, and 
27 said: ‘ Jacob, my beloved son, whom my soul loveth, may God bless thee from above the firmament, 
and may He give thee all the blessings wherewith He blessed Adam, and Enoch, and Noah, and 
Shem}; and all the things of which He told me, and all the things which He promised to give me, 
may he cause to cleave to thee and to thy seed for ever, according to the days of heaven above the 
28 earth. And the spirits of Mastéma shall not rule over thee or over thy seed to turn thee from the 
29 Lord, who is thy God from henceforth for ever. And may the Lord God be a father to thee and 
3° thou the first-born son, and to the people alway. Go in peace, my son.’ And they both went forth 
31 together from Abraham. And Rebecca loved Jacob, with all her heart and with all her soul, very 
much more than Esau; but Isaac loved Esau much more than Jacob. 


Abraham admonishes his sons and his sons’ sons to work righteousness, observe circumcision, and 
refrain from impurity and tdolatry, 1-10. Dismisses them with gifts, 11. Dwelling-places of 
the Ishmaelites and of the sons of Keturah, 12-13. (Cf. Gen. xxv. 5-6.) 


20:1. And in the forty-second jubilee, in the first year of the tseventh} week, Abraham called Ishmael, 2052 
2 and his twelve sons, and Isaac and his two sons, and the six sons of Keturah, and their sons. And he (? 2045) 
commanded them that they should observe the way of the Lord ; that they should work righteous- a.m. 
ness, and love each his neighbour, and act on this manner amongst all men; that they should each 
3 so walk with regard to them as to do judgment and righteousness on the earth. That they should 
circumcise their sons, according to the covenant which He had made with them, and not deviate to the 
right hand or the left of all the paths which the Lord had commanded us; and that we should keep 
ourselves from all fornication and uncleanness, [and renounce from amongst us all fornication and 
4uncleanness]. And if any woman or maid commit fornication amongst you, burn her with fire, 
and let them not commit fornication with her after their eyes and their heart ; and let them not take 
to themselves wives from the daughters of Canaan ; for the seed of Canaan will be rooted out of 
5the land. And he told them of the judgment of the giants, and the judgment of the Sodomites, 
how they had been judged on account of their wickedness, and had died on account of their forni- 
cation, and uncleanness, and mutual corruption through fornication. 


6 ‘And guard yourselves from all fornication and uncleanness, 
And from all pollution of sin, 


Lest ye make our name a curse, 
And your whole life a hissing, 


And all your sons to be destroyed by the sword, 
And ye become accursed like Sodom, 
And all your remnant as the sons of Gomorrah. 


7 ILimplore you, my sons, love the God of heaven, 
And cleave ye to all His commandments. 


And walk not after their idols, and after their uncleannesses, 
8 And make not for yourselves molten or graven gods; 


For they are vanity, 
And there is no spirit in them; 


For they are work of (men’s) hands, 
And all who trust in them, trust in nothing. 


24. List of ‘righteous patriarchs’, Why is Methuselah omitted and Adam and Mahalalel i ? ini 
about Adam varied. Erubin 18 4 held him a saint. Sanh, 38 4 an atheist ! Me ae 

2heaCtedlsan li, 16. 

28. Cf. xv. 31-2. 

XX. 1. Read ‘sixth’ for ‘ seventh ’, 

twelve sons: Gen. xxv. 13-15. 

2. sab’é (‘ war’) emended to saé’é (‘men “)s 

4. Cf. xli. 25. This punishment was restricted to priests’ daughters in Lev. xx. 10; Deut. xxii. 33: Ezek. xvi 

6. make our name a curse, and your whole life a hissing: based on Isa. Ixv. 15° Jer ae var bee cat 

i eee a g: based on Isa. pan 53 Jer. xxix. 18; 1 En, v. 6. 


42 


ATE peOKT OP JUBILEES 20,' 9>—21. 8 


9 Serve them not, nor worship them, 
But serve ye the most high God, and worship Him continually : 


And hope for His countenance always, 
And work uprightness and righteousness before Him, 


That He may have pleasure in you and grant you His mercy, 
And send rain upon you morning and evening, 


And bless all your works which ye have wrought upon the earth, 
And bless thy bread and thy water, 


And bless the fruit of thy womb and the fruit of thy land, 
And the herds of thy cattle, and the flocks of thy sheep. 


to ©6And ye will be for a blessing on the earth, 
And all nations of the earth will desire you, 


And bless your sons in my name, 
That they may be blessed as I am.’ 


11 And he gave to Ishmael and to his sons, and to the sons of Keturah, gifts, and sent them away 
12 from Isaac his son, and he gave everything to Isaac his son. And Ishmael and his sons, and the 
sons of Keturah and their sons, went together and dwelt from Paran to the entering in of Babylon in 


13 all the land which is towards the East facing the desert. And these mingled with each other, and 
their name was called Arabs, and Ishmaelites. 


Abraham’s last words to Isaac regarding idolatry, the eating of blood, the offering of various sacrifices 
and the use of salt,1-11. Also regarding the woods to be used in sacrifice and the duty of wash- 
ing before sacrifice and of covering blood etc., 12-25. 


Q1, And in the sixth year of the tseventh} week of this jubilee Abraham called Isaac his son, and Zoos 
commanded him: saying, ‘I am become old, and know not the day of my death, and am full of my ( 2050) 
2 days. And behold, I am one hundred and seventy-five years old, and throughout all the days of my 4M 
life I have remembered the Lord, and sought with all my heart to do His will, and to walk uprightly 
3 in all His ways. My soul has hated idols, (and I have despised those that served them, and I have 
4 given my heart and spirit) that I might observe to do the will of Him who created me. For He is 
the living God, and He is holy and faithful, and He is righteous beyond all, and there is with Him 
no accepting of (men’s) persons and no accepting of gifts ; for God is righteous, and executeth judg- 
5 ment on all those who transgress His commandments and despise His covenant. And do thou, my 
son, observe His commandments and His ordinances and His judgments, and walk not after the 
6 abominations and after the graven images and after the molten images. And eat no blood at all of 
7 animals or cattle, or of any bird which flies in the heaven. And if thou dost slay a victim as a 
acceptable peace offering, slay ye it, and pour out its blood upon the altar, and all the fat of t ‘ 
offering offer on the altar with fine flour and the meat offering mingled with oil, with its drin 
offering—offer them all together on the altar of burnt offering ; it is a sweet savour before the Lord. 
8 And thou wilt offer the fat of the sacrifice of thank offerings on the fire which is upon the altar, and 
the fat which is on the belly, and all the fat on the inwards and the two kidneys, and all the fat that 


9. have pleasure in. Read diligat for dirigat in Latin. The blessings are those of Deut. vii. 13, xxvili. 8, Exod. 
XX1i1. 25. a 

to. Cf. Gen. xii. 2. 

13. Latin ‘ clave to the Arabs, and (they are) Ishmaelites, to this day’. 


i i i i . Levi. ix, where, however, they 
<XI. These dying commands of Abraham about the ritual of sacrifice occur also in Test x ; 
es ae pate ihe youth of Isaac. Both accounts come from a common source, as has been made clear ee the 5 ae 
discovery of the Aramaic and Greek Fragments relating to Levi. aa ae with, oe ale eee kag ee oe 
icati ii icitly i i the sacrific r 21, 26, 
of fornication (Frag., verses 16, 17 = T. Levi ix. 9, not explicitly in Jub.), ablutions a GaN ee 
_4 = T. L. ix. 11, Jub. xxi. 16), words to be used in sacrifice (23-4 = T. L. ix. 12, Jub. xxi. 1 ) and g 
eee Cae eo ies Ay a xxi. 11). There is a reference back to Abraham in T. Levi. 1x. 12 and Frag. 22, 
> 2 
50, 57- : nee 
1. For ‘seventh’ read ‘sixth’, 1.€.2050 A.M. A 
Iam...death. Isaac’s words to Esau in Gen. xxvil. 2. 
3. ( ) added from the Latin ; lost in Eth. through hmt. 
4. Deut. x. 17. 
6. Lev. vii. 26. ; eae 
wei Sam. x SX. 155 Lev. ul. 7-10... e 
: and the meat offering. Omitted in Latin. Cf. also Lev. il. 4. 


43 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES:21. 3-27. 


9 is upon them, and upon the loins and liver thou shalt remove, together with the kidneys. And offer 
all these for a sweet savour acceptable before the Lord, with its meat-offering and with its drink- 
10 offering, for a sweet savour, the bread of the offering unto the Lord. And eat its meat on that day 
and on the second day, and let not the sun on the second day go down upon it till it is eaten, and 
let nothing be left over for the third day; for it is not acceptable [for it is not approved] and let it 
no longer be eaten, and all who eat thereof will bring sin upon themselves ; for thus I have found 
it written in the books of my forefathers, and in the words of Enoch, and in the words of Noah. 
11 And on all thy oblations thou shalt strew salt,and let not the salt of the covenant be lacking in all 
12 thy oblations before the Lord. And as regards the wood of the sacrifices, beware lest thou bring 
(other) wood for the altar in addition to these: cypress, bay, almond, fir, pine, cedar, savin, fig, olive, 
13 myrrh, laurel, aspalathus. And of these kinds of wood lay upon the altar under the sacrifice, such 
as have been tested as to their appearance, and do not lay (thereon) any split or dark wood, (but) 
hard and clean, without fault, a sound and new growth; and do not lay (thereon) old wood, [for its 
14 fragrance is gone] for there is no longer fragrance in it as before. Besides these kinds of wood there 
is none other that thou shalt place (on the altar), for the fragrance is dispersed, and the smell of its 
15 fragrance goes not up to heaven. Observe this commandment and do it, my son, that thou mayst 
16 be upright in all thy deeds. And at all times be clean in thy body, and wash thyself with water 
before thou approachest to offer on the altar, and wash thy hands and thy feet before thou drawest 
17 near to the altar ; and when thou art done sacrificing, wash again thy hands and thy feet. And let 
no blood appear upon you nor upon your clothes; be on thy guard, my son, against blood, be on thy 
18 guard exceedingly ; cover it with dust. And do not eat any blood, for it is the soul; eat no blood 
19 whatever. And take no gifts for the blood of man, lest it be shed with impunity, without judgment ; 
for it is the blood that is shed that causes the earth to sin, and the earth cannot be cleansed from the 
20 blood of man save by the blood of him who shed it. And take no present or gift for the blood of 
man: blood for blood, that thou mayest be accepted before the Lord, the Most High God; for He 
is the defence of the good: and that thou mayest be preserved from all evil, and that He may save 
thee from every kind of death. 


21 I see, my son, 
That all the works of the children of men are sin and wickedness, 
And all their deeds are uncleanness and an abomination and a pollution, 
And there is no righteousness with them. 


22 Beware, lest thou shouldest walk in their ways 
And tread in their paths, 
And sin a sin unto death before the Most High God. 


Else He will [hide His face from thee, 

And] give.thee back into the hands of thy transgression, 

And root thee out of the land, and thy seed likewise from under heaven, 
A\nd thy name and thy seed shall perish from the whole earth. 


23 2 urn away from all their deeds and all their uncleanness, 

And observe the ordinance of the Most High God, 

And do His will and be upright in all things. 

And He will bless thee in all thy deeds, 

And will raise up from thee a plant of righteousness through all the earth, throughout all genera- 
tions of the earth, 

And my name and thy name shall not be forgotten under heaven for ever. 


24 


ay 


8. shalt remove: emended with Latin, 2¢0/é/ for teblil. 

g. the bread, &c. Lev. iii. 11. 

10. [ ] dittography. the books of my forefathers, handed by Shem to Abraham according to Pirke R. Eliezer viii, 

II. salt of the covenant. Cf. Lev. ii. 13. MSS. read ‘covenant of salt’. 

12. Explains Exod. xxv. 5, 10. Cf. Greek Fragment 23-4 for a full discussion of this list of trees in my edition of 
the Test. XII Patr., pp. 248-9. 

13. Stricter than any known halachah; Tamid. ii. 3 allows all but vine and olive. 

14. goes not up: negative inserted (Littmann), 

16. Exod. xxx. 19-21. 

17, 18. Lev. xvii. 13, 14; Deut. xii. 23. 

19. Cf. Num. xxxv. 33. 

the earth: emended by Dillmann from ‘its blood’. 

20. thou mayest be accepted: MSS. vary. See Eth. Text. 

21-4. Written originally in Hebrew verse. 

22. sin unto death: Num. xviii. 22; 1 Johny. 16. Cf. xxvi. 34. 
[ ] omitted as it spoils the parallelism. 


44 


THEY BOGK.OF JUBILEES 21. 25—22. 1 


25 Go, my son, in peace. 
May the Most High God, my God and thy God, strengthen thee to do His will, 
And may He bless all thy seed and the residue of thy seed for the generations for ever, with all 
righteous blessings, ; 
That thou mayest be a blessing on all the earth.’ 


26 And he went out from him rejoicing. 


Isaac, Ishmael, and Facob celebrate the feast of first fruits at Beersheba with Abraham,1-5. Prayer 
of Abraham, 6-9. Abraham's last words to and blessings of Facob, 10-30. 


22: _ And it came to pass in the }firstt week in the {forty-fourth} jubilee, in the tsecond} year, that 
is, the year in which Abraham died, that Isaac and Ishmael came from the Well of the Oath to 
celebrate the feast of weeks— that is, the feast of the first fruits of the harvest—to Abraham, their 

2 father, and Abraham rejoiced because his two sons had come. For Isaac had many possessions in 
3 Beersheba, and Isaac was wont to go and see his possessions and to return to his father. And in 
those days Ishmael came to see his father, and they both came together, and Isaac offered a sacrifice 
4 for a burnt offering, and presented it on the altar of his father which he had made in Hebron. And 
he offered a thank offering and made a feast of joy before Ishmael, his brother: and Rebecca made 
new cakes from the new grain, and gave them to Jacob, her son, to take them to Abraham, his father, 
from the first fruits of the land, that he might eat and bless the Creator of all things before he died. 
5 And Isaac, too, sent by the hand of Jacob to Abraham a best thank offering, that he might eat and 
6 drink. And he eat and drank, and blessed the Most High God, 
Who hath created heaven and earth, 
Who hath made all the fat things of the earth, 
And given them to the children of men 
That they might eat and drink and bless their Creator. 
7 ‘And now I give thanks unto Thee, my God, because thou hast caused me to see this day: behold, 
I am one hundred three score and fifteen years, an old man and full of days, and all my days have 
8 been unto me peace. The sword of the adversary has not overcome me in all that Thou hast given 
g me and my children all the days of my life until this day. My God, may Thy mercy and Thy peace 
be upon Thy servant, and upon the seed of his sons, that they may be to Thee a chosen nation and 
an inheritance from amongst all the nations of the earth from henceforth unto all the days of the 
ro generations of the earth, unto all the ages.’ And he called Jacob and said: ‘My son Jacob, may 
the God of all bless thee and strengthen thee to do righteousness, and His will before Him,and may 
He choose thee and thy seed that ye may become a people for His inheritance according to His will 
II seb And do thou, my son, Jacob, draw near and kiss me.’ And he drew near and kissed him, 
and he said: 


‘Blessed be my son Jacob 
And all the sons of God Most High, unto all the ages: 


May God give unto thee a seed of righteousness ; 
And some of thy sons may He sanctify in the midst of the whole earth ; 


May nations serve thee, 
And all the nations bow themselves before thy seed. 


12 Be strong in the presence of men, 
And exercise authority over all the seed of Seth. | 


Then thy ways and the ways of thy sons will be justified, 
So that they shall become a holy nation. 


13 May the Most High God give thee all the blessings 
Wherewith He has blessed me 


XXII. 1. All dates wrong. Read ‘sixth week, forty-second jubilee, seventh year’, i.e. 2051 A.M. 

3. ‘both’ = Lat. w¢rigue easily emended from Eth. Chi scscient. 

4. Creator of all things: Sir. xxiv. 8 ; 2 Macc. i. 24, Vil. 23. 

6-9. Abraham’s thanksgiving and prayer. 

8. sword of the adversary: Jer. vi. 25; Ps. ix. 7 (LXX). 

11. may nations, &c. Cf. Gen. xxvii. 29. ! 

12. seed of Seth: mankind. But in Num. xxiv. 17, ‘children of Sheth’ = ‘children of confusion’. 


45 


14 


15 


16 


17 


18 


uy) 


20 


21 


THE BOOK: OF JUBILEES 22) ag-22 


And wherewith He blessed Noah and Adam; . : 
May they rest on the sacred head of thy seed from generation to generation for ever. 


And may He cleanse thee from all unrighteousness and impurity, : ; 
That thou mayest be forgiven all the transgressions; which thou hast committed ignorantly. 


And may He strengthen thee, 
And bless thee. 
And mayest thou inherit the whole earth, 


And may He renew His covenant with thee, 

That thou mayest be to Him a nation for His inheritance for all the ages, 

And that He may be to thee and to thy seed a God in truth and righteousness throughout all the 
days of the earth. ; 


And do thou, my son Jacob, remember my words, 
And observe the commandments of Abraham, thy father : 


Separate thyself from the nations, 
And eat not with them: 


And do not according to their works, 
And become not their associate ; 


For their works are unclean, 
And all their ways are a pollution and an abomination and uncleanness. 


They offer their sacrifices to the dead 
And they worship evil spirits, 


And they eat over the graves, 
And all their works are vanity and nothingness. 


They have no heart to understand 
And their eyes do not see what their works are, 


And how they err in saying to a piece of wood: ‘Thou art my God,’ 
And to a stone: ‘ Thou art my Lord and thou art my deliverer.’ 
[And they have no heart.] 


And as for thee, my son Jacob, 

May the Most High God help thee 

And the God of heaven bless thee 

And remove thee from their uncleanness and from all their error. 


Be thou ware, my son Jacob, of taking a wife from any seed of the daughters of Canaan; 
For all his seed is to be rooted out of the earth. 


For, owing to the transgression of Ham, Canaan erred, 
And all his seed shall be destroyed from off the earth and all the residue thereof, 
And none springing from him shall be saved on the day of judgment. 


And as for all the worshippers of idols and the profane 
(0) There shall be no hope for them in the land of the living ; 
(¢) And there shall be no remembrance of them on the earth ; 


13. rest on the sacred head. Cf. Gen. xlix. 26 (Syr.), It implies "}2 for 7). 

14. unrighteousness : emended with Latin where Eth. reads < defilement ’. 

16. Jewish exclusiveness here traced to Abraham; needed in second century B.C. A Jew could not eat with a 
Gentile, because of (1) Law of ‘unclean meats *; cf. Deut. xii. 23; Lev. xi. 4, 7, 10-12, 13-20. (2) Idol sacrifices ; 


Ss es x. 20-9. See also Dan. i. 8-10; 1 Macc. i. 47, 62; 2 Macc. vi. 18-21. Cf. Mark ii. 16 for the Pharisaic 
attitude, 


16. a pollution. An outstanding feature of Antiochus’ persecution ; 1 Macc.i. 46, 48, 63, iv. 43-8, iii. 51; 2 Macc. 
V. 27, Xiv. 3, Vi. 2, 19, 25. 
17. Sacrifices to the dead: cf. Deut. xxvi. 14; Ps. cvi. 28: Sir. vii. 22: Tobit, iv. 17. They are attacked in Si 
SOO 18; Wisd. xiv. 15) 31K 03 O77 Stbyl. viii. 382-4 ; Sp: Jer. 31, 32. ag : Z Oh vgoeae 
evil spirits : idols, as Deut. xxxii. 17; Lev. xvii. 7; Ps. cvi. 373 t En. xix. t= 1 Mace. % 43; Baruch, iv. 7. 


eat over the graves: cf. Schwally, Das Leben nach dem Ti ode, 21-4. [ 
UoChy Jeriit. 27. 


[] Dittography spoils parallelism. 
20. Gen. xxviii. 1; Test. Lev. ix; Jub. xxv. 5, xxviii. 10, xxx. Tie 
21. the day ofjudgment. Cf. xxiii. II, XXXvi. 10. 


22. the profane or ‘the adversaries’. Both are easy emendations from the reading of a dd. 


46 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 22. 22—28. 9 


(c) For they shall descend into Sheol, 
(z) And into the place of condemnation shall they go, 


As the children of Sodom were taken away from the earth 
So will all those who worship idols be taken away. 


23 Fear not, my son Jacob, 
And be not dismayed, O son of Abraham : 


May the Most High God preserve thee from destruction, 
And from all the paths of error may he deliver thee. 


24 This house have I built for myself that I might put my name upon it in the earth: [it is given to 
thee and to thy seed for ever], and it will be named the house of Abraham ; it is given to thee and 
to thy seed for ever; for thou wilt build my house and establish my name before God for ever: thy 
seed and thy name will stand throughout all generations of the earth.’ 

25,26 And he ceased commanding him and blessing him. And the two lay together on one bed, and 
Jacob slept in the bosom of Abraham, his father’s father and he kissed him seven times, and his 

27 affection and his heart rejoiced over him. And he blessed him with all his heart and said: “Lhe 
Most High God, the God of all, and Creator of all, who brought me forth from Ur of the Chaldees, 
that he might give me this land to inherit it for ever,and that I might establish a holy seed—blessed 

28 be the Most High for ever.’ And he blessed Jacob and said: ‘My son, over whom with all my heart 
and my affection I rejoice, may Thy grace and Thy mercy be lift up upon him and upon his seed 

29 alway. And do not forsake him, nor set him at nought from henceforth unto the days of eternity, 
and may Thine eyes be opened upon him and upon his seed, that Thou mayst preserve him, and 

30 bless him, and mayest sanctify him as a nation for Thine inheritance ; And bless him with all Thy 
blessings from henceforth unto all the days of eternity,and renew Thy covenant and Thy grace with 
him and with his seed according to all Thy good pleasure unto all the generations of the earth.’ 


Abraham's death and burial, 1-8 (cf. Gen. xxv. 7-10). Decreasing years and increasing corruption 
of mankind: Messianic woes: universal strife: the faithful vise up in arms to bring back the 
faithless: Israel invaded by sinners of the Gentiles, 11-25. Renewed study of the law and 
renewal of mankind: Messianic kingdom: blessed immortality of the righteous, 26-31. 


231 - And he placed two fingers of Jacob on his eyes, and he blessed the God of gods, and he covered 
his face and stretched out his feet and slept the sleep of eternity, and was gathered to his fathers. 
> And notwithstanding all this Jacob was lying in his bosom, and knew not that Abraham, his father’s 
3 father, was dead. And Jacob awoke from his sleep, and behold Abraham was cold as ice, and he 
4 said: ‘ Father, father’; but there was none that spake, and he knew that he was dead. And he 
arose from his bosom and ran and told Rebecca, his mother ; and Rebecca went to Isaac in the 
night, and told him; and they went together, and Jacob with them, and a lamp was in his hand, and 
when they had gone in they found Abraham lying dead. And Isaac fell on the face of his father, 
6 and wept and kissed him. And the voices were heard in the house of Abraham, and Ishmael his 
son arose, and went to Abraham his father, and wept over Abraham his father, he and all the house 
of Abraham, and they wept with a great weeping. And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in 
the double cave, near Sarah his wife, and they wept for him forty days, all the men of his house, and 
Isaac and Ishmael, and all their sons, and all the sons of Keturah in their places; and the days of 
g weeping for Abraham were ended. And he lived three jubilees and four weeks of years, one hundred 
g and seventy-five years, and completed the days of his life, being old and full of days. For the days’ 


25. commanding : from Hebrew M8, used technically of a man’s last will and testament (2 Sam. xvii, 23; 2 Kings 
xx. 1; Isa. xxxviii. 1; Test. Reub. 1; Baba Bathra, 147 @, 151 6). 
27. Probably an interpolation—Jacob is not mentioned till the next verse. 
28. I rejoice: cd; ‘rejoices’, a 0. : 
be lift up upon him: from Num. vi. 26; Ps.iv.6. 
29. eyes be opened: Neh. i. 6; Dan. ix. 18; 1 Kings vill. 29, 52. 
XXIII. 1. Cf. Gen. xlvi. 4. Closing the eyes strictly forbidden till death had ensued in Shabb. 151 4. 
stretched out: as Gen. xlix. 33 Eth. and Syr., but Mass., LXX, Vulg. = gathered up. 
slept the sleep of eternity: as Jer. li. 39, 57- 


z age inserted. Cf. Deut. xxxiv.8. MSS.vary. ¢= ‘the lamentation of’; d = ‘ lamentation and’; @c omit. 


8. Cf. Gen. xxv. 8. See xxi. 1ofourtext. _ ; 
g. Men grow old quicker owing to the increasing degeneration. 


47 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 23. 9-23 


of the forefathers, of their life, were nineteen jubilees ; and after the Flood they began to grow less 
than nineteen jubilees, and to decrease in jubilees, and to grow old quickly, and to be full of their 
days by reason of manifold tribulation and the wickedness of their ways, with the exception of 
to Abraham. For Abraham was perfect in all his deeds with the Lord, and well-pleasing in righteous- 
ness all the days of his life; and behold, he did not complete four jubilees in his life, when he had 
Il grown old by reason of the wickedness, and was full of hisdays. And all the generations which shall 
arise from this time until the day of the great judgment’ shall grow old quickly, before they complete 
two jubilees, and their knowledge shall forsake them by reason of their old age [and all their know- 
12 ledge shall vanish away]. And in those days, if a man live a jubilee and a-half of years, they shall say 
regarding him: ‘He has lived long, and the greater part of his days are pain and sorrow and 
13 tribulation, and there is no peace: For calamity follows on calamity, and wound on wound, and 
tribulation on tribulation, and evil tidings on evil tidings, and illness on illness, and all evil judgments 
such as these, one with another, illness and overthrow, and snow and frost and ice, and fever, and 
chills, and torpor, and famine, and death, and sword, and captivity, and all kinds of calamities and 
14 pains.’ And all these shall come on an evil generation, which transgresses on the earth: their works 
15 are uncleanness and fornication, and pollution and abominations. Then they shall say: ‘ The days 
of the forefathers were many (even), unto a thousand years, and were good; but, behold, the days of 
our life, if a man has lived many, are three score years and ten, and, if he is strong, four score years, 
16 and those evil,and there is no peace in the days of this evil generation.’ And in that generation the 
sons shall convict their fathers and their elders of sin and unrighteousness, and of the words of their 
mouth and the great wickednesses which they perpetrate, and concerning their forsaking the covenant 
which the Lord made between them and Him, that they should observe and do all His command- 
ments and His ordinances and all His laws, without departing either to the right hand or the left. 
17 For ali have done evil, and every mouth speaks iniquity and all their works are an uncleanness and 
18 an abomination, and all their ways are pollution, uncleanness and destruction. Behold the earth 
shall be destroyed on account of all their works, and there shall be no seed of the vine, and no oil ; for 
their works are altogether faithless, and they shall all perish together, beasts and cattle and birds, and 
tg all the fish of the sea, on account of the children of men. And they shall strive one with another, the 
young with the old, and the old with the young, the poor with the rich, the lowly with the great, and 
the beggar with the prince, on account of the law and the covenant; for they have forgotten 
commandment, and covenant, and feasts, and months, and Sabbaths, and jubilees, and all judgments. 
zo And they shall stand (with bows and) swords and war to turn them back into the way ; but they shall 
2X not return until much blood has been shed on the earth, one by another. And those who have 
escaped shall not return from their wickedness to the way of righteousness, but they shall all exalt 
themselves to deceit and wealth, that they may each take all that is his neighbour’s, and they shall 
name the great name, but not in truth and not in righteousness, and they shall defile the holy of 
22 holies with their uncleanness and the corruption of their pollution. And a great punishment shall 
befall the deeds of this generation from the Lord, and He will give them over to the sword and to 
23 judgment and to captivity, and to be plundered and devoured. And He will wake up against them 
the sinners of the Gentiles, who have neither mercy nor compassion, and who shall respect the person 
of none, neither old nor young, nor any one, for they are more wicked and strong to do evil than all 
the children of men. 


And they shall use violence against Israel and transgression against Jacob, 
And much blood shall be shed upon the earth, 
And there shali be none to gather and none to bury. 


10. when: ‘until’, text. 
11. Here the Messianic kingdom seems to follow the judgment. But see ver. 30. 
12. the greater part...sorrow. Ps. xc. 10 (LXX, Syr., Vulg.). 
13-14. Melancholy account of Judah’s plight in his own day, i.e. early decades of second century B.C. 
14. on the earth, &c. Emended with Lat. cy 
15. those Eth. reads £uél/d corrupt for ’é/i. 
3 An eta the rise of an ee exactly parallel with 1 En. xc. 6, 7. ‘Lambs’ there are ‘sons’ here. _ 
orsaking the covenant: cf. Hellenizers in Dan. xi. 30; 1 Macc. i. 15. : Z 
ee Mice See 30; 15. Cf. Bousset, ZVTVW, 1900, p. 199. 
18-24. The woes before the Messianic Age are a feature of all Apocalypse. Cf. Ezek. xxxviii. 20; Hos. iv. oF 
Zeph. i. 3; 4 Ezra v. 7, Or. Stbyl. iii. 796; Apoc. Bar. xxvii, xlviii. 31-7, Ixx. 2-10; 4 Ezra vi. 14-18 21-4 . Matth. 
XXIV. 6-29 ; Sota ix. I5. : , ; : 
20. « ) supplied from Lat. 
the way: cf. Isa. xxx. 21; Acts ix. 2, xiv. 9, xxiv. 22. 
21. Shall name: So Lat. Eth. is easily emended. 
23. Describes religious wars of Judas Maccabaeus. The Syrian invasion is described in the language of Jer. vi. 23 
After 162 B.C. there was civil war in Judah, and peace with Syria. Thus this passage cannot be later than that date. 


48 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 28. 24—24. 7 


24 In those days they shall cry aloud, 
And call and pray that they may be saved from:the hand of the sinners, the Gentiles ; 
But none shall be saved. 


25 And the heads of the children shall be white with grey hair, 
And a child of three weeks shall appear old like a man of one hundred years, 
And their stature shall be destroyed by tribulation and oppression. 


26 And in those days the children shall begin to study the laws, 
- And to seek the commandments, 
And to return to the path of righteousness. 


27 And the days shall begin to grow many and increase amongst those children of men 
Till their days draw nigh to one thousand years, 
And to a greater number of years than (before) was the number of the days. 


28 And there shall be no old man 
Nor one who is (not) satisfied with his days, 
For all shall be (as) children and youths. 


29 And all their days they shall complete and live in peace and in joy, 
And there shall be no Satan nor any evil destroyer ; 
For all their days shall be days of blessing and healing. 


30 ©And at that time the Lord will heal His servants, 
And they shall rise up and see great peace, 
And drive out their adversaries. 


And the righteous shall see and be thankful, 


And rejoice with joy for ever and ever, 
And shall see all their judgments and all their curses on their enemies. 


31 And their bones shall rest in the earth, 
And their spirits shall have much joy, 
And they shall know that it is the Lord who executes judgment, 
And shows mercy to hundreds and thousands and to all that love Him 


32 And do thou, Moses, write down these words ; for thus are they written, and they record (them) 
on the heavenly tablets for a testimony for the generations for ever. 


Tsaac at the Well of Vision,1 (cf.Gen. xxv.11). Esau sells his birthright, 2-7 (cf. Gen. xxv. 29-34). 
Isaac goes down to Gerar, 8. Dealings hetween Isaac and Abimelech, 9-27. Isaac curses the a 
Philistines, 28-32. (Cf. Gen. xxvi. 1-6, 11, 13-25, 32; 33.) 


24, And it came to pass after the death of Abraham, that the Lord blessed Isaac his son, and he 


arose from Hebron and went and dwelt at the Well of the Vision in the first year of the third week 2073 a.m. 
2 of this jubilee, seven years. And in the first year of the fourth week a famine began in the land, 2080 A.M. 
3 besides the first famine, which had been in the days of Abraham. And Jacob sod lentil pottage, 
and Esau came from the field hungry. And he said to Jacob his brother : ‘Give me of this red 
pottage. And Jacob said to him: ‘Sell to me thy [primogeniture, this] birthright and I will give 
4 thee bread, and also some of this lentil pottage.’ And Esau said in his heart : ‘IT shall die; of 
3 what profit to me is this birthright ?’? And he said to Jacob: ‘I give it to thee.’ And Jacob said: 
6 ‘ Swear to me, this day,’ and he sware unto him. And Jacob gave his brother Esau bread and pottage, 
and he eat till he was satisfied, and Esau despised his birthright ; for this reason was Esau’s name 
7 called Edom, on account of the red pottage which Jacob gave him for his birthright. And Jacob became 


24. sinners and gentiles practically synonymous. Cf. Gal. il. 15. 

26. Renewed study of the law brings spiritual transformation. — ; 

27. nigh to one thousand years: cf. iv. 30. Asin Test. Levi. xviii all change is gradual. 
28. CE£. Isa. xv. 20, whence ‘ not’ is inserted here. 


: Satan: cf. Ass. Mos. x. 1, Jub. xl. 9 MW, Ty 29h k. : } 
ee Probably does not refer to a ee atk to the Messianic kingdom. Our author’s eschatology is that of 1 En. 
xci-civ. Judgement will be at the end of the Messianic kingdom, and precedes the spiritual bliss of the righteous. 


31. Cf. 1 En. xci. 10, XC:i. 3, Cill. 3, 4. The bodies rest, but the spirits rise. 

XXIV. Cf. Gen. xxv. II, 29-34, xxvi. 1-6, 13-25, 32, 33 No reference is made in 13 to Isaac’s lie regarding 
Rebecca. For derivation of name of Edom in 6 cf. Gen. xxv. 29. _ 

3. red pottage. Text = ‘ wheaten pottage’, ie. mupod for muppov. 
49 


Sell = drdSov, which here means ‘sell’ ’agbe’e. 
E 
1105.2 


12 


w 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES! 24..6=36 


8 the elder, and Esau was brought down from his dignity. And the famine was over the land, ig teri 
departed to go down into Egypt in the second year of this week, and went to the king of the hilis- 
9 tines to Gerar, unto Abimelech. And the Lord appeared unto him and said unto him: ‘Go te 
down into Egypt; dwell in the land that I shall tell thee of, and sojourn in this land, and I wi 
10 be with thee and bless thee. For to thee and to thy seed will I give all this land, and I will 
establish My oath which I sware unto Abraham thy father, and I will multiply thy seed as the 
11 stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed all this land. And in thy seed shall all the nations of 
the earth be blessed, because thy father obeyed My voice, and kept My charge and My command- 
ments, and My laws, and My ordinances, and My covenant ; and now obey My voice and dwell in 
13 this land.” And he dwelt in Gerar three weeks of years. And Abimelech charged concerning him, 
and concerning all that was his, saying: ‘Any man that shall touch him or aught that is his shall 
14 surely die.’ And Isaac waxed strong among the Philistines, and he got many possessions, oxen 
15 and sheep and camels and asses and a great household. And he sowed in the land of the Philistines 
and brought in a hundred-fold, and Isaac became exceedingly great, and the Philistines envied him. 


" 16 Now all the wells which the servants of Abraham had dug during the life of Abraham, the Philistines 


17 had stopped them after the death of Abraham, and filled them with earth. And Abimelech 
said unto Isaac: “Go from us, for thou art much mightier than we’; and Isaac departed thence in 
18 the first year of the seventh week, and sojourned in the valleys of Gerar. And they digged again 
the wells of water which the servants of Abraham, his father, had digged, and which the Philistines 
had closed after the death of Abraham his father, and he called their names as Abraham his father 
19 had named them. And the servants of Isaac dug a well in the valley, and found living water, and 
the shepherds of Gerar strove with the shepherds of Isaac, saying: ‘The water is ours’; and Isaac 
20 called the name of the well ‘ Perversity’, because they had been perverse with us. And they dug 
a second well, and they strove for that also, and he called its name ‘Enmity’. And he arose from 
thence and they digged another well, and for that they strove not, and he called the name of it 
‘Room’, and Isaac said: ‘Now the Lord hath made room for us, and we have increased in the 
21 Jand.’ And he went up from thence to the Well of the Oath, in the first year of the first week in the 
22 forty-fourth jubilee. And the Lord appeared to him that night, on the new moon of the first month, 
and said unto him: ‘I am the God of Abraham thy father; fear not, for I am with thee, and shall 
bless thee and shall surely multiply thy seed as the sand of the earth, for the sake of Abraham my 
23 servant.’ And he built an altar there, which Abraham his father had first built, and he called upon 
24 the name of the Lord, and he offered sacrifice to the God of Abraham his father. And they digged 
25 a well and they found living water. And the servants of Isaac digged another well and did not find 
water, and they went and told Isaac that they had not found water, and Isaac said: ‘I have sworn 
26 this day to the Philistines and this thing has been announced to us.’ And he called the name of that 
place the Well of the Oath; for there he had sworn to Abimelech and Ahuzzath his friend and 
27 Phicol the prefect of his host. And Isaac knew that day that under constraint he had sworn to them 
28 to make peace with them. And Isaac on that day cursed the Philistines and said: ‘Cursed be the 
Philistines unto the day of wrath and indignation from the midst of all nations; may God make 
them a derision and a curse and an object of wrath and indignation in the hands of the sinners the 
29 Gentiles and in the hands of the Kittim. And whoever escapes the sword of the enemy and the 
Kittim, may the righteous nation root out in judgment from under heaven; for they shall be the 
enemies and foes of my children throughout their generations upon the earth. 
30 And no remnant shall be left to them, 
Nor one that shall be saved on the day of the wrath of judgment ; 
For Ree and rooting out and expulsion from the earth is the whole seed of the Philistines 
reserved), 


And there shall no longer be left for these Caphtorim a name or a seed on the earth. 


14. household: mnisterium Lat. =72¥, Eth. has ‘ possession’. 
19. The: ‘this’ in Eth. = def. article. ~~ 
20. Enmity = se?¢ emended from sabéb = ‘narrow’. Lat. has enimecitias. An Ethiopic scribe has introduced the 
antithesis of ‘narrow’ as opposed to ‘room’. 
Room = se// emended from sef#th ; so Lat. capacitas. 
26. the prefect of his host. So Lat. Eth. has only ‘ his prefect’. 
28-32. Only intelligible during Maccabean wars ; fierce hatred of Philistines ; cf. 1 Macc. x. 89, v. 68, x. 84 
VA UOS XT OD): Joseph. Axzé. xiii. 13. 3. Cf. Bousset, ZIVTW, 1890, 200. , : 
28. Cf. Hdt. i. 205, ii. 157-9 for the Philistines’ suffering at the hands of the Egyptians. 
Kittim = Macedonians. Cf. 1 Macc. i. I, vill. 5; Joseph. Amt. xi.8. 4. 
29. righteous nation: Judah under Maccabees. 
generations: Lat. ; ‘days’, Eth. 
30. these = ’é//# emended from Aue = ‘all’. Lat. = ‘these’. 
Caphtorim = Philistines ; cf. Amos. ix. 73 Deut..i1. 23 ; Jer. -xlvii. 4. 


50 





2080- | 
2101 Ad 





i 
if 





2101 AD 











THE ROOK OF JUBILEES -24 91-25. 14 


31 For though he ascend unto heaven, 
Thence shall he be brought down, 


{And though he make himself strong on earth,t 
Thence shall he be dragged forth, 


And though he hide himself amongst the nations, 
Even from thence shall he be rooted out ; 


And though he descend into Sheol, 
There also shall his condemnation be great, 
And there also he shall have no peace. 
32. And if he go into captivity, 
By the hands of those that seek his life shall they slay him on the way, 
And neither name nor seed shall be left to him on all the earth ; 
For into eternal malediction shall he depart.’ 


33 “And thus is it written and engraved concerning him on the heavenly tablets, to do unto him on the 
day of judgment, so that he may be rooted out of the earth. 


Rebecca admonishes Facob not to marry a Canaanitish woman, 1-3. Facob promises to marry a 
daughter of Laban despite the urgent requests of Esau that he should marry a Canaanitish 
woman, 4-10. Rebecca blesses Facob, 11-23. (Cf. Gen. xxviii. 1-4.) 


425 1 And in the second year of this week in this jubilee, Rebecca called Jacob her son, and spake unto 





him, saying: ‘My son, do not take thee a wife of the daughters of Canaan, as Esau, thy brother, 
who took him two wives of the daughters of Canaan, and they have embittered my soul with all their 
unclean deeds: for all their deeds are fornication and lust, and there is no righteousness with them, 

2 for (their deeds) are evil. And I, my son, love thee exceedingly, and my heart and my affection 
3 bless thee every hour of the day and watch of the night. And now, my son, hearken to my voice, 
and do the will of thy mother, and do not take thee a wife of the daughters of this land, but only of 
the house of my father, and of my father’s kindred. Thou shalt take thee a wife of the house of my 
father, and the Most High God will bless thee, and thy children shall be a righteous generation and 
4a holy seed.’ And then spake Jacob to Rebecca, his mother, and said unto her: ‘Behold, mother, 
I am nine weeks of years old, and I neither know nor have I touched any woman, nor have I betrothed 

5 myself to any, nor even think of taking me a wife of the daughters of Canaan. For I remember, 
mother, the words of Abraham, our father, for he commanded me not to take a wife of the daughters 

6 of Canaan, but to take me a wife from the seed of my father’s house and from my kindred. I have 

’ heard before that daughters have been born to Laban, thy brother, and I have set my heart on them 
7 to take a wife from amongst them. And for this reason I have guarded myself in my spirit against 
sinning or being corrupted in all my ways throughout all the days of my life; for with regard to lust 

g and fornication, Abraham, my father, gave me many commands. And, despite all that he has com- 
manded me, these two and twenty years my brother has striven with me, and spoken frequently to 
me and said: ‘ My brother, take to wife a sister of my two wives’; but I refuse to do as he has done. 

9 I swear before thee, mother, that all the days of my life I will not take me a wife from the daughters 
to of the seed of Canaan, and I will not act wickedly as my brother has done. Fear not, mother; be 
rr assured that I shall do thy will and walk in uprightness, and not corrupt my ways for ever.’ And 
thereupon she lifted up her face to heaven and extended the fingers of her hands, and opened her 
mouth and blessed the Most High God, who had created the heaven and the earth, and she gave Him 

12 thanks and praise. And she said: ‘Blessed be the Lord God, and may His holy name be blessed 
for ever and ever, who has given me Jacob as a pure son and a holy seed ; for he is Thine, and Thine 
13 shall his seed be continually and throughout all the generations for evermore, Bless him, O Lord, 
14 and place in my mouth the blessing of righteousness, that I may bless him, And at that hour, when 


31. tt Lat, = udd fugiens erit. Corruption originated in Hebrew apparently. 
XXV. Gen. xxvii is put after Gen. xxviii. 1-4 to give more blame to Esau and to excuse Jacob, 
4. Jacob is sixty-three when he receives the blessing, as in Ber. Rabb. 68 ; Seder Olam, 2. 
neither, &c.: Syncell. i. 197 wrongly attributes this to Josephus. 
51 E 2 





2109 A.M. 


THE BOOK .OF: JUBIGEES (20) t42=20147 


the spirit of righteousness descended into her mouth, she placed both her hands on the head of Jacob, 
and said : 


15 ‘Blessed art thou, Lord of righteousness and God of the ages ; 
And may He bless thee beyond all the generations of men. 


May He give thee, my son, the path of righteousness, 
And reveal righteousness to thy seed. 


16 And may He make thy sons many during thy life, 
And may they arise according to the number of the months of the year. 
And may their sons become many and great beyond the stars of heaven, 
And their numbers be more than the sand of the sea. 


17 And may He give them this goodly land—as He said He would give it to Abraham and to his 
seed after him alway— 
And may they hold it as a possession for ever. 


And may I see (born) unto thee, my son, blessed children during my life, 
And a blessed and holy seed may all thy seed be. 


i 
(ove) 


1g And. as thou hast refreshed thy mother’s spirit during therf life, 
The womb of her that bare thee blesses thee thus, 


[My affection] and my breasts bless thee 
And my mouth and my tongue praise thee greatly. 


20 Increase and spread over the earth, 
And may thy seed be perfect in the joy of heaven and earth for ever ; 
And may thy seed rejoice, 
And on the great day of peace may it have peace. 


21 And may thy name and thy seed endure to all the ages, 
And may the Most High God be their God, 


And may the God of righteousness dwell with them, 
And by them may His sanctuary be built unto all the ages. 


22 Blessed be he that blesseth thee, 
And all flesh that curseth thee falsely, may it be cursed.’ 


23 And she kissed him, and said to him; 
‘May the Lord of the world love thee 
As the heart of thy mother and her affection rejoice in thee and bless thee.’ 
And she ceased from blessing. 


Isaac sends Esau Sor ventson,1—4. Rebecca instructs F¥acob to obtain the blessing, 5-9. Facob under 
the person of Esau obtains it, 10-24. Esau brings in his venison and by his importunity obtains 
a blessing, 25-34. Threatens Facob, 35. (Cf. Gen. xxvii.) 


261 And in the seventh year of this week Isaac called Esau, his elder son, and said unto him: ‘I am 21149 

2 old, my son, and behold my eyes are dim in seeing, and I know not the day of my death. And now 
take thy hunting weapons thy quiver and thy bow, and go out to the field, and hunt and catch me 
(venison), my son, and make me savoury meat, such as my soul loveth, and bring it to me that I may 

3 eat, and that my soul may bless thee before I die.’ But Rebecca heard Isaac speaking to Esau. 
4,5 And Esau went forth early to the field to hunt and catch and bring home to his father. And 
RKebecca called Jacob, her son, and said unto him: ‘Behold, I heard Isaac, thy father, speak unto 
Esau, thy brother, saying: “Hunt for me, and make me savoury meat, and bring (it) to me that 

6 I may eat and bless thee before the Lord before I die.” And now, my son, obey my voice in that 
which I command thee: Go to thy flock and fetch me two good kids of the goats, and I will make 
them savoury meat for thy father, such as he loves, and thou shalt bring (it) to thy father that he 

7 may eat and bless thee before the Lord before he die, and that thou mayst be blessed.’ And Jacob 


14. spirit of righteousness (24d): cf. John xiv. 17, xv. 26, xvi. 3. For ‘Holy § bole (é ill 

17. as He said... alway. Cf. Luke eh : f Ye ere 
19. thert. Read ‘thy’. [ ] out of place, or a dittography of OM. 

23. Cf. Sir. iv. 10. _ 

XXVI. Cf. Gen. xxvii. 1-41, often loosely rendered. 


52 


) 


| THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 26. 7-30 


said to Rebecca his mother: ‘ Mother, I shall not withhold anything which my father would eat, and 
which would please him: only I fear, my mother, that he will recognise my voice and wish to touch 
8me. And thou knowest that I am smooth, and Esau, my brother, is hairy, and I shall appear 
before his eyes as an evildoer, and shall do a deed which he had not commanded me, and he will. be 
9 wroth with me, and I shall bring upon myself a curse, and not a blessing.” And Rebecca, his 
ro mother, said unto him: ‘Upon me be thy curse, my son, only obey my voice.’ And Jacob obeyed 
the voice of Rebecca, his mother, and went and fetched two good and fat kids of the goats, and 
11 brought them to his mother, and his mother made them (savoury meat) such as he loved. And 
Rebecca took the goodly raiment of Esau, her elder son, which was with her in the house, and she 
clothed Jacob, her younger son, (with them), and she put the skins of the kids upon his hands and on 
12 the exposed parts of his neck. And she gave the meat and the bread which she had prepared into 
13 the hand of her son Jacob. And Jacob went in to his father and said: ‘I am thy son: I have done 
according as thou badest me: arise and sit and eat of that which I have caught, father, that thy soul 
15 may bless me.’ And Isaac said to his son: ‘ How hast thou found so quickly, my son?’ And Jacob 
16 said: ‘ Because (the Lord) thy God caused me to find.’ And Isaac said unto him: ‘Come near, that 
17 I may feel thee, my son, if thou art my son Esau or not.’ And Jacob went near to Isaac, his father, 
rg and he felt him and said: ‘ The voice is Jacob’s voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau,’ and he 
discerned him not, because it was a dispensation from heaven to remove his power of perception and 
19 Isaac discerned not, for his hands were hairy as (his brother) Esau’s,so that he blessed him. And he 
said : ‘Art thou my son Esau?’ and he said: ‘I am thy son’: and he said, ‘ Bring near to me that 
20 I may eat of that which thou hast caught, my son, that my soul may bless thee.’ And he brought 
21 near to him, and he did eat, and he brought him wine and he drank. And Isaac, his father, said unto 
22 him: ‘Come near and kiss me, my son. And he came near and kissed him. And he smelled the 
smell of his raiment, and he blessed him and said: ‘Behold, the smell of my son is as the smell of 

a (full) field which the Lord hath blessed, 


23 And may the Lord give thee of the dew of heaven 
And of the dew of the earth, and plenty of corn and oil : 


Let nations serve thee, 
And peoples bow down to thee. 


24 Be lord over thy brethren, 
And let thy mother’s sons bow down to thee ; 


And may all the blessings wherewith the Lord hath blessed me and blessed Abraham, my father, 
Be imparted to thee and to thy seed for ever: 


Cursed be he that curseth thee, 
And blessed be he that blesseth thee.’ 


25 And it came to pass as soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing his son Jacob, and Jacob had gone 
26 forth from Isaac his father the hid himself and} Esau, his brother, came in from his hunting. And 
he also made savoury meat, and brought (it) to his father, and said unto his father: ‘Let my father 
27 arise, and eat of my venison that thy soul may bless me. And Isaac, his father, said unto him: 
‘Who art thou?’ And he said unto him: ‘I am thy first born, thy son Esau: I have done as thou hast 
28 commanded me.’ And Isaac was very greatly astonished, and said: ‘ Who is he that hath hunted and 
caught and brought (it) to me, and I have eaten of all before thou camest, and have blessed him: 
29 (and) he shall be blessed, and all his seed for ever. And it came to pass when Esau heard the words 
of his father Isaac that he cried with an exceeding great and bitter cry, and said unto his father: 
30 ‘Bless me, (even) me also, father.’ And he said unto him: ‘Thy brother came with guile, and hath 
taken away thy blessing.’ And he said: ‘Now I know why his name is named Jacob: behold, he 
hath supplanted me these two times: he took away my birth-right, and now he hath taken away 


7a. Added by author in favour of Jacob. 
1o. ( ). Added from Latin. ‘Pee 
15. (The Lord). Supplied from Latin. caused me to find (4c): Latin adirexit. _ ‘ 
18. A dispensation to assist the deceit! Clause borrowed from 1 Kings xii. 15, ‘a thing brought about of the Lord’. 
< ) supplied from Lat. ; 
19. [am thy son. An evasion—not so bad as Ber. Rabb. 65. 2 : 
22. (full) added from Latin. So Sam., LXX, and Vulg., cf. Gen. xxvil. 27. Mass. omits. 
23. dew of the earth. So Gen. xxvii. 28 in Eth. version. ; P 
give thee: cd add ‘and multiply thee’, while a transposes it before ‘give thee’. : . 
and plenty: MSS. add before ‘ plenty ’ the words ‘ may He give plentifully to thee ’, against the parallelism and 
Gen. xxvii. 28. Na 5 
25. he hid himself and. This seems an addition. Read ‘that’. A 
30. I know why = oida os perhaps corrupt for Sikaiws, Cf. Gen, Xxvil. 36. 


53 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 26, 31—27. 14 


31 my blessing.’ And he said: ‘Hast thou not reserved a blessing for me, father?’ and Isaac answered 
and said unto Esau: : 
‘Behold, I have made him thy lord, 
And all his brethren have I given to him for servants, 
And with plenty of corn and wine and oil have I strengthened him : 
And what now shall I do for thee, my son?’ 
32 And Esau said to Isaac, his father : 
‘ Hast thou but one blessing, O father? 
Bless me, (even) me also, father :’ ; 
33 And Esau lifted up his voice and wept. And Isaac answered and said unto him: 
‘Behold, far from the dew of the earth shall be thy dwelling, 
And far from the dew of heaven from above. 


34 And by thy sword wilt thou live, 
And thou wilt serve thy brother. 


And it shall come to pass when thou becomest great, 
And dost shake his yoke from off thy neck, 
Thou shalt sin a complete sin unto death, 
And thy seed shall be rooted out from under heaven.’ 
35 And Esau kept threatening Jacob because of the blessing wherewith his father blessed him, and he 
said in his heart: ‘May the days of mourning for my father now come, so that I may slay my brother 
Jacob.’ 


Rebecca alarmed at Esau’s threats prevails on Isaac to send Facob to Mesopotamia, 1-12. Isaac 
comforts Rebecca on the departure of Facob, 13-18. Facob’s dream and vow at Bethel, 19-27. 
(Cf. Gen. xxviii.) 


27:1 And the words of Esau, her elder son, were told to Rebecca in a dream, and Rebecca sent and 
2 called Jacob her younger son, and said unto him: ‘ Behold Esau thy brother will take vengeance on 

3 thee so as to kill thee. Now, therefore, my son, obey my voice, and arise and flee thou to Laban, 
my brother, to Haran, and tarry with him a few days until thy brother’s anger turns away, and he 
remove his anger from thee, and forget all that thou hast done ; then I will send and fetch thee from 
4,5 thence.’ And Jacob said: ‘I am not afraid; if he wishes to kill me, I will kill him.’ But she said 
6 unto him: ‘Let me not be bereft of both my sons on one day.’ And Jacob said to Rebecca his 
mother: ‘ Behold, thou knowest that my father has become old, and does not see because his eyes are 
dull, and if I leave him it will be evil in his eyes, because I leave him and go away from you, and 
my father will be angry, and will curse me. I will not go; when he sends me, then only will I go.’ 
7,8 And Rebecca said to Jacob: ‘I will go in and speak to him, and he will send thee away.’ And 
Rebecca went in and said to Isaac: ‘I loathe my life because of the two daughters of Heth, whom 
Esau has taken him as wives; and if Jacob take a wife from among the daughters of the land such 

g as these, for what purpose do I further live ; for the daughters of Canaan are evil. And Isaac called 
10 Jacob and blessed him, and admonished him and said unto him: ‘ Do not take thee a wife of any of 
the daughters of Canaan; arise and go to Mesopotamia, to the house of Bethuel, thy mother’s father, 

11 and take thee a wife from thence of the daughters of Laban, thy mother’s brother. And God 
Almighty bless thee and increase and multiply thee that thou mayest become a company of nations, 
and give thee the blessings of my father Abraham, to thee and to thy seed after thee, that thou 
mayest inherit the land of thy sojournings and all the land which God gave to Abraham: go, my 

12 son, in peace. And Isaac sent Jacob away, and he went to Mesopotamia, to Laban the son of 
13 Bethuel the Syrian, the brother of Rebecca, Jacob’s mother. And it came to pass after Jacob had 
14 arisen to go to Mesopotamia that the spirit of Rebecca was grieved after her son,and she wept. And 


34. becomest great = ‘abazka (4). ac = ‘refusest’ =’abaika, a corruption of 6. The text here agrees with the 
Sam, VSN, Gen. xxvii. 40. The Mass. = 1"N, which the versions variously translate. The LXX gives KaOéXps, i.e. 
TUN from 77. 

sin a complete sin unto death, &c.: changed contrary to all tradition. This version is adopted by Syncell. 
i, 202 and Glycas. 263 (who, however, attributes it to Josephus). For ‘ sin unto death’ cf. xxi. 22. 
35. Note malicious turn here given to Esau’s words in Gen. xxvii. 41. 


XXVII. 1-5. Cf. Gen. xxvii. 42-5. in a dream: Ps.-Jon. on Gen. xxvii. 42 ‘ by the Holy Spirit’. 
6. Cf. xii. 31. Defends Jacob from the reproach of leaving his old father (Singer). 

_ 8. Cf. Gen. xxvii. 46. 
g-12. Gen. xxviii. 1-5, 


54 


Tie DOOK OF JUBILEES 27. 14—28. 6 


Isaac said to Rebecca: ‘ My sister, weep not on account of Jacob, my son; for he i 
15 in peace will he return. The Most High God will set pcan all evil, a Seill isa Pa 
16 for He will not forsake him all his days; For I know that his ways will be prospered in all things 
17 wherever he goes, until he return in peace to us, and we see him in peace. Fear not on his account 
my sister, for he is on the upright path and he is a perfect man: and he is faithful and will not perish. 
19 Weep not.’ And Isaac comforted Rebecca on account of her son Jacob, and blessed him. And Jacob 
went from the Well of the Oath to go to Haran on the first year of the second week in the forty- 
fourth jubilee, and he came to Luz on the mountains, that is, Bethel, on the new moon of the first 
month of this week, and he came to the place at even and turned from the way to the west of the 
20 toad that night:-and he slept there; for the sun had set. And he took one of the stones of that 
21 place and laid (it at his head) under the tree, and he was journeying alone, and he slept. And he 
dreamt that night, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven, and 
behold, the angels of the Lord ascended and descended on it: and behold, the Lord stood upon it. 
22 And he spake to Jacob and said: ‘I am the Lord God of Abraham, thy father, and the God of 
23 Isaac; the land whereon thou art sleeping, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed after thee. And 
thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt increase to the west and to the east, to the 
24 north and the south, and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the nations be blessed. And 
behold, I will be with thee, and will keep thee whithersoever thou goest, and I will bring thee 
again into this land in peace; for I will not leave thee until I do everything that I told thee of.’ 
25 And Jacob awoke from his sleep, and said, ‘ Truly this place is the house of the Lord, and I knew 
it not. And he was afraid and said: ‘ Dreadful is this place which is none other than the house of 
26 God, and this is the gate of heaven.’ And Jacob arose early in the morning, and took the stone 
which he had put under his head and set it up as a pillar for a sign, and he poured oil upon the top 
of it. And he called the name of that place Bethel; but the name of the place was Luz at the first. 
27 And Jacob vowed a vow unto the Lord, saying: ‘If the Lord will be with me, and will keep me in 
this way that I go, and give me bread to eat and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my 
father’s house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God, and this stone which I have set up as a pillar 
for a sign in this place, shall be the Lord’s house, and of all that thou givest me, I shall give the tenth 
to thee, my God.’ 


$acob marries Leah and Rachel,1-10. His children by Leah and Rachel and by their handmaids, 
11-24. Yacob seeks to leave Laban, 25: but stays on at a certain wage, 26-8. Facob becomes 
rich, 29-30. (Cf. Gen. xxix. 1,17, 18, 21-35; Xxx. 1-13, 17-22, 24, 25, 28, 32, 39,43; XXXi 
2) 


281 And he went on his journey, and came to the land of the east, to Laban, the brother of Rebecca, 
2 and he was with him, and served him for Rachel his daughter one week. And in the first year of 2122 A.M- 


the third week he said unto him: ‘Give me my wife, for whom I have served thee seven years’; and 
3 Laban said unto Jacob: ‘I will give thee thy wife.’ And Laban made a feast, and took Leah his 
elder daughter, and gave (her) to Jacob as a wife, and gave her Zilpah his handmaid for an hand- 
4 maid; and Jacob did not know, for he thought that she was Rachel. And he went in unto her, and 
behold, she was Leah; and Jacob was angry with Laban, and said unto him: ‘ Why hast thou dealt 
thus with me? Did not I serve thee for Rachel and not for Leah? Why hast thou wronged me? 
5 Take thy daughter, and I will go; for thou hast done evil to me.’ For Jacob loved Rachel more 
than Leah; for Leah’s eyes were weak, but her form was very handsome ; but Rachel had beautiful 
6 eyes and a beautiful and very handsome form. And Laban said to Jacob: ‘It is not so done in our 
country, to give the younger before the elder.’ And it is not right to do this; for thus it is ordained 
and written in the heavenly tablets, that no one should give his younger daughter before the elder— 
but the elder, one gives first and after her the younger—and the man who does so, they set down 
guilt against him in heaven, and none is righteous that does this thing, for this deed is evil before the 


14. My sister: affectionate term for wife; cf. Tobit v. 21, vii. 15, viii. 4, 7; Song of Solomon iv. 9, 10, 12, v. I. 
Compare Isaac’s answer to Abimelech’s men in Gen. xxvi. 7. 

16. will be prospered: so Lat. ; ‘he will prosper’, Eth. 

17. on the upright path: Lat. So 4, or perhaps ‘upright in his way’. 

19-27. Gen. xxviii, 10-22. 

20. Add with Latin ‘at his head’. Genesis has not ‘under the tree’, This was probably an asherah. 

25 a. MSS. corrupt; ‘slept a sleep’ emended to ‘ awoke from his sleep ss 


XXVIII. Cf. Gen. xxix. 1, 17, 18, 21-29, XXX. 2,43, XXXL.1,2. 0 ; 
6. No hint of this ordinance in tradition (Singer, Beer). Lev. xvii, 18 expressly forbade Jacob’s conduct in marry- 
ing both sisters. Cf. Justin, Dzad. Trypho. 134. 
55 


2115 A.M. 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEE S257 7-30 


+ Lord. And command thou the children of Israel that they do not this thing ; let them seeapaiorgh 
g nor give the younger before they have given the elder, for it is very wicked. And Laban sai one 
Jacob: ‘Let the seven days of the feast of this one pass by, and I shall give thee Rachel, that t ou 
mayst serve me another seven years, that thou mayst pasture my sheep as thou didst in the former 
y week.’ And on the day when the seven days of the feast of Leah had passed, Laban gave Ee 
to Jacob, that he might serve him another seven years, and he gave to Rachel Bilhah, the sister o 
10 Zilpah, as a handmaid. And he served yet other seven years for Rachel, for Leah had been given 
1; to him for nothing. And the Lord opened the womb of Leah, and she conceived and bare Jacob 
a son, and he called his name Reuben, on the fourteenth day of the ninth month, in the first year of 2122 4. 
12 the third week. But the womb of Rachel was closed, for the Lord saw that Leah was hated and 
13 Rachel loved. And again Jacob went in unto Leah, and she conceived, and bare Jacob a second son, 
and he called his name Simeon, on the twenty-first of the tenth month, and in the third year of this 2124 a. 
14 week. And again Jacob went in unto Leah, and she conceived, and bare him a third son, and he 
15 called his name Levi, in the new moon of the first month in the sixth year of this week. And again 2127 a. 
Jacob went in unto her, and she conceived, and bare him a fourth son, and he called his name Judah, 
16 on the fifteenth of the third month, in the tfirstt year of the tfourtht week. And on account of all 2129 a. 
this Rachel envied Leah, for she did not bear, and she said to Jacob: ‘Give me children’; and Jacob 
17 said: ‘Have I withheld from thee the fruits of thy womb? Have I forsaken thee?’ And when Rachel 
saw that Leah had borne four sons to Jacob, Reuben and Simeon and Levi and Judah, she said unto 
18 him: ‘Go in unto Bilhah my handmaid, and she will conceive, and bear a son unto me. (And she 
gave (him) Bilhah her handmaid to wife). And he went in unto her, and she conceived, and bare 
him a son, and he called his name Dan, on the ninth of the sixth month, in the fsixtht year of the 21274. 
19 tthird} week. And Jacob went in again unto Bilhah a second time, and she conceived, and bare 
Jacob another son, and Rachel called his name Napthali, on the fifth of the seventh month, in the 2130 au 
oo Second year of the fourth week. And when Leah saw that she had become sterile and did not bear, 
~ she envied Rachel, and she also gave her handmaid Zilpah to Jacob to wife, and she conceived, and 
bare a son, and Leah called his name Gad, on the twelfth of the eighth month, in the third year of 2131 a. 
21 the fourth week. And he went in again unto her, and she conceived, and bare him a second son, and 
Leah called his name Asher, on the second of the eleventh month, in the ffiftht year of the fourth 2133 a. 
22 week. And Jacob went in unto Leah, and she conceived, and bare a son, and she called his name 
Issachar, on the fourth of the fifth month, in the ¢fourth} year of the fourth week, and she gave him 2132 a, 
23toanurse. And Jacob went in again unto her, and she conceived, and bare two (children), a son 
and a daughter, and she called the name of the son Zabulon, and the name of the daughter Dinah, 213, a, 
24in the seventh of the seventh month, in the sixth year of the fourth week: And the Lord was 
gracious to Rachel, and opened her womb, and she conceived, and bare a son, and she called his 2134 a. 
25 name Joseph, on the new moon of the fourth month, in the tsixth} year in this fourth week. And 
in the days when Joseph was born, Jacob said to Laban: ‘Give me my wives and sons, and let me 
go to my father Isaac, and let me make me an house; for I have completed the years in which I 
26 have served thee for thy two daughters, and I will go to the house of my father. And Laban said 
to Jacob: ‘+Tarry with me for thy wages, and pasture my flock for me again, and take thy wages.’ 
27 And they agreed with one another that he should give him as his wages those of the lambs and kids 
28 which were born black and spotted and {whitef, (these) were to be his wages. And all the sheep 
brought forth spotted and speckled and black, variously marked, and they brought forth again 
lambs like themselves, and all that were spotted were Jacob’s and those which were not were 
29 Laban’s. And Jacob’s possessions multiplied exceedingly, and he possessed oxen and sheep and 
30 asses and camels, and menservants and maid-servants. And Laban and his sons envied Jacob, and 
Laban took back his sheep from him, and he observed him with evil intent. 


8. Rachel given to Jacob as soon as Leah’s wedding feast (seven days) was over. 

9. Zilpah and Bilhah: sisters, as in Test. Naph. i. 

11-24. Twelve sons of Jacob, as in Gen, xxix. 32-4, xxx. I-24, xxxv. 17-18. In date of birth, all lists differ. 
Various explanations are given. Cf. also Syncell. i. 198; Fabric. i. 749-54; Ronsch, 327-9. See Test. XII Patri- 
archs passim ; Euseb. Praep. Ev. ix. 21. See my Comm. 170-2. 

18. ¢ ) added from Lat. and Gen, xxx. 4. 

26. tarry with me for thy wages: ‘expecta me in mercede’, Lat. Both seem wrong. Gen. xxx. 28 has 
‘Appoint (F3p3) me thy wages’. 

27-28. See my Eth. text for emendations. 

27. Read ‘speckled’ for ‘ white’. 

29. and sheep: only in LXX of Gen. xxx. 43. 


ie DOOK OF JUBILEES 29, 1-20 


Facob departs secretly, 1-4. Laban pursues after him, 5-6. Covenant of Facob and Laban, 7-8. 
Abodes of the Amorites (anciently of the Rephaim) destroyed in the time of the writer, 9-11. 
Laban departs, 12. Facob ts reconciled to Esau, 13. Facob sends supplies of food to his parents 
four times a year to Hebron, 14-17, 19-20. Esau marries again, 18. . (Cf. Gen. xxxi. 3, 4, 10, 
12, 10, 21, 93, 24,-40, 47 3. XXXil. 22 {-xxxiili, 10, 16.) 


29 : And it came to pass when Rachel had borne Joseph, that Laban went to shear his sheep ; for they 
2 were distant from him a three days’ journey.. And Jacob saw that Laban was going to shear his 
sheep, and Jacob called Leah and Rachel, and spake kindly unto them that they should come with 
3 him to the land of Canaan. For he told them how he had seen everything in a dream, even all that 
He had spoken unto him that he should return to his father’s house ; and they said: ‘To every place 
4 whither thou goest we will go with thee. And Jacob blessed the God of Isaac his father, and the 
-God of Abraham his father’s father, and he arose and mounted his wives and his children, and took 
all his possessions and crossed the river, and came to the land of Gilead, and Jacob hid his intention 
5 from Laban and told him not. And in the seventh year of the fourth week Jacob turned (his face) 2135 A.M. 
toward Gilead in the first month, on the twenty-first thereof. And Laban pursued after him and 
6 overtook Jacob in the mountain of Gilead in the third month, on the thirteenth thereof. And the 
Lord did not suffer him to injure Jacob; for he appeared to him in a dream by night. And Laban 
7 spake to Jacob. And on the fifteenth of those days Jacob made a feast for Laban, and for all who 
came with him, and Jacob sware to Laban that day, and Laban also to Jacob, that neither should 
8 cross the mountain of Gilead to the other with evil purpose. And he made there a heap for 
9 a witness; wherefore the name of that place is called: ‘The Heap of Witness, after this heap. But 
before they used to call the land of Gilead the land of the Rephaim ; for it was the land of the 
Rephaim, and the Rephaim were born (there), giants whose height was ten, nine, eight down to 
10 seven cubits. And their habitation was from the land of the children of Ammon to Mount Hermon, 
11 and the seats of their kingdom were Karnaim and Ashtaroth, and Edrei,and Misar, and Beon. And 
the Lord destroyed them because of the evil of their deeds; for they were very malignant, and the 
Amorites dwelt in their stead, wicked and sinful, and there is no people to-day which has wrought 
12 to the full all their sins, and they have no longer length of life on the earth. And Jacob sent away 
Laban, and he departed into Mesopotamia, the land of the East, and Jacob returned to the land of 
13 Gilead. And he passed over the Jabbok in the ninth month, on the eleventh thereof. And on that 
day Esau, his brother, came to him, and he was reconciled to him, and departed from him unto 
14 the land of Seir, but Jacob dwelt in tents. And in the first year of the fifth week in this jubilee he 2136 a.m. 
crossed the Jordan, and dwelt beyond the Jordan, and he pastured his sheep from the sea fof the 
15 heap} unto Bethshan, and unto Dothan and unto the {forestt of Akrabbim. And he sent to his 
father Isaac of all his-substance, clothing, and food, and meat, and drink, and milk, and butter, and 
16 cheese, and some dates of the valley, And to his mother Rebecca also four times a year, between the 
times of the months, between ploughing and reaping, and between autumn and the rain (season) 
17 and between winter and spring, to the tower of Abraham. For Isaac had returned from the Well 
of the Oath and gone up to the tower of his father Abraham, and he dwelt there apart from his son 
18 Esau. For in the days when Jacob went to Mesopotamia, Esau took to himself a wife Mahalath, 
the daughter of Ishmael, and he gathered together all the flocks of his father and his wives, and went 
19 up and dwelt on Mount Seir, and left Isaac his father at the Well of the Oath alone. And Isaac 
went up from the Well of the Oath and dwelt in the tower of Abraham his father on the mountains 
20 of Hebron, And thither Jacob sent all that he did send to his father and his mother from time to 
time, all they needed, and they blessed Jacob with all their heart and with all their soul. 


XXIX. 1-6. Cf. Gen. xxxi. 3, 4, 10, 13, 19, 20, 21, 24. 
4. hid. As LXX and Onk. Mass., Sam., Syiip—stolex. 
7-8. Gen. xxx. 46, 47- 
7, to the other. See Eth. text. : 
g foll. Places mentioned are scenes of great Maccabean victories. Cf. 1 Macc. v. 26, 43, 44; 2 Macc. xi. 21, 26. 
Rephaim (Gen. xiv. 5; Deut. iii.11) ; Edrei: Og’s capital (Joshua xii. 4, xi. 12, 31); Misr (Deut. ili.10; Joshua 
xv. 8); Beon (Num. xxxil. 3, destroyed by Judas Maccabaeus (1 Macc. v. 4, 5); Bethshan (1 Macc. v. 52, xu. 40) = 
“Scythopolis ’ (cf. 2 Macc. xii. 29), friendly to the Maccabees ; Dothan (Gen. xxxvil. 17; Judith iv. 6, vil. 3); the 
forest of Akrabbim.—Read ‘the ascent’ of Akrabbim (Numb, xxxiv. 4; Joshua xv. 3). Fado 
"13. passed... Jabbok. Gen. xxxii. 22, on the eleventh thereof. Lat. has ‘et undecim filii ipsius’. 
he was reconciled. So Lat. Eth. easily emended. 
15-16. Another proof of Jacob’s filial piety. 
16. rain is ‘former rain’; falls from middle of October to middle of December. 
between winter and spring = the latter rain in March and April. 
18. Put in to show Esav’s selfishness. 


57 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES S05 1x. 


Dinah ravished, 1-3. Slaughter of the Shechemites, 4-6. Laws against intermarriage between 
Israel and the heathen, 7-17. Levi chosen for the priesthood on account of his slaughter of the 
Shechemites, 18-23. Dinah recovered, 24. Facob’s reproof, 25-6. (Cf. Gen. xxxiii. 18, xxxiv. 


2, 4, 7, 13-14, 25-30, XXXV. 5,) 


30: And in the first year of the sixth week he went up to Salem, to the east of Shechem, in peace, in 


2the fourth month. And there they carried off Dinah, the daughter of Jacob, into the house of 
Shechem, the son of Hamor, the Hivite, the prince of the land, and he lay with her and defiled her, 

3 and she was a little girl, a child of twelve years. And he besought his father and her brothers that 
she might be given to him to wife. And. Jacob and his sons were wroth because of the men of 
Shechem ; for they had defiled Dinah, their sister, and they spake to them with evil intent and dealt 

4 deceitfully with them and beguiled them. And Simeon and Levi came unexpectedly to Shechem 
and executed judgment on all the men of Shechem, and slew all the men whom they found in it, 
and left not a single one remaining in it: they slew all in torments because they had dishonoured 

5 their sister Dinah. And thus let it not again be done from henceforth that a daughter of Israel be 
defiled ; for judgment is ordained in heaven against them that they should destroy with the sword 

6 all the men of the Shechemites because they had wrought shame in Israel. And the Lord delivered 
them into the hands of the sons of Jacob that they might exterminate them with the sword and 
execute judgment upon them, and that it might not thus again be done in Israel that a virgin of 

7 Israel should be defiled. And if there is any man who wishes in Israel to give his daughter or his 
sister to any man who is of the seed of the Gentiles he shall surely die, and they shall stone him 
with stones ; for he hath wrought shame in Israel ; and they shall burn the woman with fire, because 

8 she has dishonoured the name of the house of her father, and she shall be rooted out of Israel. And 
let not an adulteress and no uncleanness be found in Israel throughout all the days of the generations 
of the earth; for Israel is holy unto the Lord, and every man who has defiled (it) shall surely die: 

9 they shall stone him with stones. For thus has it been ordained and written in the heavenly tablets 
regarding all the seed of Israel: he who defileth (it) shall surely die, and he shall be stoned with 
ro stones. And to this law there is no limit of days, and no remission, nor any atonement: but the 
man who has defiled his daughter shall be rooted out in the midst of all Israel, because he has given 

t1 of his seed to Moloch, and wrought impiously so as to defile it. And do thou, Moses, command the 
children of Israel and exhort them not to give their daughters to the Gentiles, and not to take for 

12 their sons any of the daughters of the Gentiles, for this is abominable before the Lord. For this 
reason I have written for thee in the words of the Law all the deeds of the Shechemites, which they 
wrought against Dinah, and how the sons of Jacob’spake, saying: ‘We will not give our: daughter 
13 to a man who is uncircumcised ; for that were a reproach unto us.’ And it isa reproach to Israel, to 
those who give, and to those that take the daughters of the Gentiles; for this is unclean and 


XXX. 1. to Salem. .. in peace combines interpretations of all versions of Gen. xxxiii. 18 where Sam. reads Dv9v. 

1-3. Gen: xxiv. 2-13. 

2. child of twelve. Cf. Test. Levi xii. 5 and Jub. xxviii. 14, 23, which together make her eleven. 

2-6. The history of Jacob’s connexion with the Shechemites caused much trouble to our author. He could hardly 
approve of their slaughter after they had consented to circumcision. Accordingly he omits all reference to the 
circumcision of the Shechemites, as also does Josephus (Avzé. i. 21.1). On the other hand, this is given as the reason 
for Jacob’s anger against Simeon and Levi in Test. Levi vi: kai feovcev 6 maTnp, kal @pyicOn, kai édumnOn, Ste karedéEavro 
THY TepiTomiy Kal pera Tadra dwébavoy. Notwithstanding the severe disapprobation of Simeon and Levi in Gen. xlix. 5-7 
for their conduct in this matter, it was highly extolled in the two centuries preceding the Christian era. This is done 
in our text and in Test. Levi v, where the angel bids Levi roinoov exdixnow ev Svxew bmp Aivas, Kayo €vopat peta cou, 
Ort KUplos dméoTaNké pe. kal ovverédeva TH Kalpe ekeivw Tods viods "Eppop, xabas yéypanra év rais maki rov ovpavav: and 
in the Test. Levi vi-vii, where Levi says that he saw that ‘the sentence of God had gone forth for evil against 
Shechem’, and still more strongly : dace 6¢ 1) dpyi) kupiov én’ abrods eis réhos. Again in Judith (a Hebrew work of 
the first cent. B.C.) ix. 2: Kupte 6 Beds tod marpds pou Sypewy, b Cdwxas ev xeupt poudaiay cis exdixnow addoyevar, of ~dvcay 
pTpay mrapOévov eis playa Kal eyipyvacay pnpov eis aiayovny, KTr. Again in Philo, De Migr. Abraham, 39, Simeon and 
Levi are called of ppovjaews dkovorai kat yrwpior for their action in this matter, and in the next few lines it is implied 
that Shechem was not circumcised. See also the Book of Jashar for a reproduction of the ancient favourable view of 
Simeon and Levi (Déc¢. des Apocr. ii. 1166-8). In the late rabbinic tradition, however, Simeon and Levi are judged 
more in accordance with the sentence pronounced upon them in Gen. xlix. In Gen. rabba 80, it is true, there is some 
extenuation of their conduct ; but in section 98 of the same work it is said that the fact that most of the poor were of 
pee of Simeon is to be traced to the curse in Gen. xlix. 7. Singer (p. 115 note) compares also Sifre on Deut. 
Xxxiii. 8, 

7. Cf. xli.17, To our author, marriage with a Gentile was no better than fornication. To give your daughter 
to a non-Israelite was to give her ‘to Moloch’, and merited the same penalty, i.e. death by stoning. Cf. Lev. xx 2 
A woman was to be treated as Tamar was threatened in Gen. xxxviii or a priest’s daughter commanded in Lev. xxi. 9. 

Io. given. ..to Moloch. Cf. Ps.-Jon. on Lev. xviii. 21; Sanh. 82a; Megill. 25a. Perhaps this dates from 
ee ee when Fee « measures were needed. Contrast Megill. iv. 9. 

11. for their sons. So Latin. >dcd. a= aibroi, i.e. lalthémi, corrupt f Lundbmiu, = ‘ i > 

a ate Ce Can ; 5 pt for Zaweliddmi, for their sons’. 

58 


dS 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 30. 14—81. 2 


14 abominable to Israel. And Israel will not be free from this uncleanness if it has a wife of the 
daughters of the Gentiles, or has given any of its daughters to a man who is of any of the Gentiles. 
15 For there will be plague upon plague, and curse upon curse, and every judgment and plague and 
curse will come (upon him): if he do this thing, or hide his eyes from those who commit uncleanness 
or those who defile the sanctuary of the Lord, or those who profane His holy name, (then) will the 
16 whole nation together be judged for all the uncleanness and profanation of this man. And there 
will be no respect of persons [and no consideration of persons], and no receiving at his hands of fruits 
and offerings and burnt-offerings and fat, nor the fragrance of sweet savour, so as to accept it: and 
17 so fare every man or woman in Israel who defiles the sanctuary. For this reason I have commanded 
thee, saying: ‘ Testify this testimony to Israel: see how the Shechemites fared and their sons: how 
they were delivered into the hands of two sons of Jacob, and they slew them under tortures, and it 
18 was (reckoned) unto them for righteousness, and it is written down to them for righteousness. And 
the seed of Levi was chosen for the priesthood, and to be Levites, that they might minister before 
the Lord, as We, continually, and that Levi and his sons may be blessed for ever; for he was zealous 
19 to execute righteousness and judgment and vengeance on all those who arose against Israel. And 
so they inscribe as a testimony in his favour on the heavenly tablets blessing and righteousness before 
20 the God of all: And we remember the righteousness which the man fulfilled during his life, at all 
periods of the year; until a thousand generations they will record it, and it will come to him and to 
his descendants after him, and he has been recorded on the heavenly tablets as a friend and a righteous 
21man. All this account I have written for thee, and have commanded thee to say to the children of 
Israel, that they should not commit sin nor transgress the ordinances nor break the covenant which 
22 has been ordained for them, (but) that they should fulfil it and be recorded as friends. But if they 
transgress and work uncleanness in every way, they will be recorded on the heavenly tablets as adver- 
saries, and they will be destroyed out of the book of life, and they will be recorded in the book of 
23 those who will be destroyed and with those who will be rooted out of the earth. And on the day 
when the sons of Jacob slew Shechem a writing was recorded in their favour in heaven that they had 
executed righteousness and uprightness and vengeance on the sinners, and it was written for a blessing. 
24 And they brought Dinah, their sister, out of the house of Shechem, and they took captive everything 
that was in Shechem, their sheep and their oxen and their asses, and all their wealth, and all their 
25 flocks, and brought them all to Jacob their father. And he reproached them because they had put 
the city to the sword ; for he feared those who dwelt in the land, the Canaanites and the Perizzites. 
26 And the ‘dread of the Lord was upon all the cities which are around about Shechem, and they did 
not rise to pursue after the sons of Jacob; for terror had fallen upon them. 


Facob goes to Bethel to offer sacrifice, 1-3 (cf. Gen. xxxv. 2-4, 7, 14). Isaac blesses Levi, 4-17, and 
Fudah, 18-22. Facob recounts to [saac how God prospered him, 24. Facob goes to Bethel with 
Rebecca and Deborah, 26-30. Facob blesses the God of his fathers, 31-2. 


31: And on the new moon of the month Jacob spake to all the people of his house, saying: ‘ Purify 
yourselves and change your garments, and let us arise and go up to Bethel, where I vowed a vow to 

Him on the day when I fled from the face of Esau my brother, because he has been with me and 

2 brought me into this land in peace, and put ye away the strange gods that are among you.’ And 
they gave up the strange gods and that which was in their ears and which was ton their necks,7 

and the idols which Rachel stole from Laban her father she gave wholly to Jacob. And he burnt 


14. Based on Lev. xx, 2-4. 
15. (upon him) from Latin. 
whole,nation: an extension of the area of guilt to justify the massacre; cf. charges in Test. Levi vi against the 
Shechemites in general. 
profanation of this man = Lat. Eth. = ‘this profanation’. 

16. { ] dittography; Latin omits. 

18. for he was zealous, &c. Contrast xxxil. 3 (Levi became priest as the tenth son); Test. Levi iv (in answer to 
his prayer) ; Shem. Rabb. 19 (the Levites’ constancy in Egypt in retaining circumcision). Cf. Weber, /. 7. 371 300; 
Singer (115 note) for different motives for God’s choice of Levi. 

22. transgress: Latin + ¢estamentum. book of life : cf. 1 En. xlvii. 3. Latin has ‘ of destructions’ instead of ‘ of 
those who will be destroyed’. 

24. Gen. xxxiii. 26, 28. : ie 

25. reproached: needed by sense of context for ‘ spake to them’ (Eth. and Latin) ; cf. Test. Levi vi. 6. 

26. Cf. Gen. xxxv. 5. 


XXXI. 1, 2. Gen. xxxv. 2-4. 


4 
2. gave up (matawéwémt) emended from masawéwomi, melted’. — 
on their necks. Read perhaps ‘in their hands’. If so, take ‘ which were in their hands’ after ‘ gods’. 


her father (’2d#/4) : for ‘ her brother’ (27/4). 
59 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 81. 2-17 


and brake them to pieces and destroyed them, and hid them under an oak which is in the land of: 
3 Shechem. And he went up on the new moon of the seventh month to Bethel. And he built an 
altar at the place where he had slept, and he set up a pillar there, and he sent word to his father 
4 Isaac to come to him to his sacrifice, and to his mother Rebecca. And Isaac said: ‘Let my son 
5 Jacob come, and let me see him before I die. And Jacob went to his father Isaac and 
to his mother Rebecca, to the house of his father Abraham, and he took two of his sons 
with him, Levi and Judah, and he came to his father Isaac and to his mother Rebecca. 
6 And Rebecca came forth from the tower to the front of it to kiss Jacob and embrace 
him ; for her spirit had revived when she heard: ‘Behold Jacob thy son has come’; and she kissed 
7 him. And she saw his two sons, and she recognised them, and said unto him: ‘ Are these thy sons, 
my son?’ and she embraced them and kissed them, and blessed them, saying: ‘In you shall the 
8 seed of Abraham become illustrious, and ye shall prove a blessing on the earth.’ And Jacob went in 
to Isaac his father, to the chamber where he lay, and his two sons were with him, and he took the 
hand of his father, and stooping down he kissed him, and Isaac clung to the neck of Jacob his son, 
g and wept upon his neck. And the darkness left the eyes of Isaac,and he saw the two sons of Jacob, 
10 Levi, and Judah, and he said: ‘ Are these thy sons, my son? for they are like thee.’ And he said 
unto him that they were truly his sons: ‘And thou hast truly seen that they are {truly} my sons’. 
11 And they came near to him, and he turned and kissed them and embraced them both together. 
12 And the spirit of prophecy came down into his mouth, and he took Levi by his right hand and 
13 Judah by his left. And he turned to Levi first, and began to bless him first, and said unto him: 
‘May the God of all, the very Lord of all the ages, bless thee and thy children throughout all the 
14 ages. /\nd may the Lord give to thee and to thy seed fgreatness and great glory+, and cause thee 
and thy seed, from among all flesh, to approach Him to serve in His sanctuary as the angels of the 
presence and as the holy ones. (Even) as they, shall the seed of thy sons be for glory and greatness 
15 and holiness,and may He make them great unto all the ages. And they shall be judges and princes, 
and chiefs of all the seed of the sons of Jacob; 


They shall speak the word of the Lord in righteousness, 
And they shall judge all His judgments in righteousness. 


And they shall declare My ways to Jacob 
And My paths to Israel. 


The blessing of the Lord shall be given in their mouths 
To bless all the seed of the beloved. 


16 Thy mother has called thy name Levi, 
And justly has she called thy name; 


Thou shalt be joined to the Lord 
And be the companion of all the sons of Jacob; 


Let His table be thine, 
And do thou and thy sons eat thereof; 


And may thy table be full unto all generations, 
And thy food fail not unto all the ages. 


17 And let all who hate thee fall down before thee, 
And let all thy adversaries be rooted out and perish ; 


3, 4. Cf. Test. Levi ix. 
5. Last meeting with Isaac and Rebecca, unknown to later Haggada, 
Io. truly: Lat. has ‘father’. So read ’addd in Eth. for ’amdn. 
11. both: Lat. wérosgue. Eth. kuéllémd corrupt for kel ’éhému. Cf. xxii. 3. 
13. Cf. Test. Levi ix. 
14. t+ t Lat. = ‘ great seed to understand His glory.’ 
holy ones here = ‘ angels of sanctification’ ; cf. ii. 2, 18, xv. 27. Cf. Test. Levi iii (Arm.) for one or two orders 
of ministering angels. 
ey Herieke Foes ereat : Latin sanctificabit. 
15. Vescribes early Maccabean princes (kings as well as priests); cf. Test. i viii. 
to John Hyrcanus. Cf. Bousset, ZNT W, Pe ; Joseph. MAnt. Hi Io. any Mees eae 
the blessing of the Lord shall be given in their mouths : cf. Sir. 1. 20, Test. Reub. vi. 
16. Cf. Gen. xxix. 34; Numb. xviii. 2-4, play on words, The Lat. has instead of ¢ joined to the Lord’ ad decorem 
Dei =i") *a crown’. 
Let His table be thine: cf. Test. Judah xxi; Test. Levi viii. 
60 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 31. 17—82. 1 


And blessed be he that blesses thee, 
And cursed be every nation that curses thee.’ 


18 “And to Judah he said: 
‘May the Lord give thee strength and power 


To tread down all that hate thee ; 
A prince shalt thou be, thou and one of thy sons, over the sons of Jacob ; 


May thy name and the name of thy sons go forth and traverse every land and region. 
~ Then shall the Gentiles fear before thy face, 


’ And all the nations shall quake 
[And all the peoples shall quake]. 


19 . In thee shall be the help of Jacob, 
And in thee be found the salvation of Israel. 


20 And when thou sittest on the throne of honour of thy righteousness 
There shall be great peace for all the sced of the sons of the beloved ; 


Blessed be he that blesseth thee, 
And all that hate thee and afflict thee and curse thee 
Shall be rooted out and destroyed from the earth and be accursed.’ 


21 And turning he kissed him again and embraced him, and rejoiced greatly ; for he had seen the 
22 sons of Jacob his son in very truth. And he went forth from between his feet and fell down and 
bowed down to him, and he blessed them and rested there with Isaac his father that night, and they 
23 eat and drank with joy. And he made the two sons of Jacob sleep, the one on his right hand and the 
24 other on his left, and it was counted to him for righteousness. And Jacob told his father everything 
during the night, how the Lord had shown him great mercy, and how he had prospered (him in) all 
25 his ways, and protected him from all evil. And Isaac blessed the God of his father Abraham, who 
26 had not withdrawn his mercy and his righteousness from the sons of his servant Isaac. And in the 
morning Jacob told his father Isaac the vow which he had vowed to the Lord, and the vision which 
he had seen, and that he had built an altar, and that everything was ready for the sacrifice to be 
24 made before the Lord as he had vowed, and that he had come to set him on an ass. And Isaac said 
unto Jacob his son: ‘I am not able to go with thee; for I am old and not able to bear the way: go, 
my son, in peace; for I am one hundred and sixty-five years this day; I am no longer able to 
28 journey ; set thy mother (on an ass) and Ict her go with thee. And I know, my son, that thou hast 
come on my account, and may this day be blessed on which thou hast seen me alive, and I also have 
29 seen thee, my son. Mayest thou prosper and fulfil the vow which thou hast vowed ; and put not off 
thy vow; for thou shalt be called to account as touching the vow; now therefore make haste to 
perform it, and may He be pleased who has made all things, to whom thou hast vowed the vow.’ 
30 And he said to Rebecca : ‘Go with Jacob thy son’; and Rebecca went with Jacob her son, and 
31 Deborah with her, and they came to Bethel. And Jacob remembered the prayer with which his 
father had blessed him and his two sons, Levi and Judah, and he rejoiced and blessed the God of his 
32 fathers, Abraham and Isaac. And he said: ‘Now I know that I have an eternal hope, and my sons 
also, before the God of all’ ; and thus is it ordained concerning the two; and they record it as an 
eternal testimony unto them on the heavenly tablets how Isaac blessed them. 


Levi's dream at Bethel,1. Levit chosen to the priesthood, as the tenth son, 2-3. Facob celebrates the 
feast of tabernacles and offers tithes through Levi: also the second tithe, 4-9. Law of tithes 
ordained, 10-15. Facob’s visions im which ¥acob reads on the heavenly tablets las own future 
and that of his descendants, 16-26. Celebrates the eighth day of feast of tabernactles, 27-9. 
Death of Deborah, 30. Birth of Benjamin and death of Rachel, 33-4- (Cf. Gen, xxxv. 8, 10, 
II, 13, 16-20.) : 

32: And he abode that night at Bethel, and Levi dreamed that they had ordained and made him the 
priest of the Most High God, him and his sons for ever; and he awoke from his sleep and blessed 
18-19. Cf. Test. Levi xviii ; Reub. vi: Signs of Messiah’s coming. As in I En. xc He has no active part to play, 

but springs from Judah (‘one of thy sons’). This seems to be the earliest instance of the presence of a Messiah in a 

temporary Messianic kingdom ; cf. xxili. 30. : 

18. thy name: i.e. that of the Jewish people. [ ] bracketed as dittography. 


20. honour... peace. So@d. But ¢ reads ‘honour ; thy righteousness shall be great peace’. 
XXXII. Cf. Test. Levi v, viii, ix. ; , 
I. priest of the Most High God : title assumed by the Maccabean priest-kings ; cf. Ass. Mos. vi. 1; Josephus, 
Ant. xvi. 6.2; Ps. cx. 1-4 (acrostic on Simon as Bickell has shown) ; Rosh-ha-Shanah 184. See Test. Levi vill. 14. 
Pea 61 


THE -BOOK OF JUBILEES 82. 2-24 


2the Lord. And Jacob rose early in the morning, on the fourteenth of this month, and he gave a 
tithe of all that came with him, both of men and cattle, both of gold and every vessel and garment, 

3 yea, he gave tithes of all. And in those days Rachel became pregnant with her son Benjamin. 
And Jacob counted his sons from him upwards and Levi fell to the portion of the Lord, and his 

4 father clothed him in the garments of the priesthood and filled his hands. And on the fifteenth of 
this month, he brought to the altar fourteen oxen from amongst the cattle, and twenty-eight rams, 
and forty-nine sheep, and seven lambs, and twenty-one kids of the goats as a burnt-offering on the 

5 altar of sacrifice, well pleasing for a sweet savour before God. This was his offering, in consequence 
of the vow which he had vowed that he would give a tenth, with their fruit-offerings and their drink- 

6 offerings. And when the fire had consumed it, he burnt incense on the fire over the fire, and for a 
thank-offering two oxen and four rams and four sheep, four he-goats, and two sheep of a year old, 

7 and two kids of the goats; and thus he did daily for seven days. And he and all his sons and his 
men were eating (this) with joy there during seven days and blessing and thanking the Lord, who 

8 had delivered him out of all his tribulation and had given him his vow. And he tithed all the clean 
animals, and made a burnt sacrifice, but the unclean animals he gave (not) to Levi his son, and he 

9 gave him all the souls of the men. And Levi discharged the priestly office at Bethel before Jacob 
his father in preference to his ten brothers, and he was a priest there, and Jacob gave his vow: thus 
10 he tithed again the tithe to the Lord and sanctified it, and it became holy unto Him. And for this 
reason it is ordained on the heavenly tablets as a law for the tithing again the tithe to eat before the 
Lord from year to year, in the place where it is chosen that His name should dwell, and to this law 

11 there is no limit of days for ever. This ordinance is written that it may be fulfilled from year to 
year in eating the second tithe before the Lord in the place where it has been chosen, and nothing 
12 shall remain over from it from this year to the year following. For in its year shall the seed be 
eaten till the days of the gathering of the seed of the year, and the wine till the days of the wine, 
‘3 and the oil till the days of its season. And all that is left thereof and becomes old, let it be regarded 
14 as polluted: let it be burnt with fire, for it is unclean. And thus let them eat it together in the 
15 sanctuary, and let them not suffer it to become old. And all the tithes of the oxen and sheep shall 
be holy unto the Lord, and shall belong to his priests, which they will eat before Him from year to 
16 year ; for thus is it ordained and engraven regarding the tithe on the heavenly tablets. And on the 
following night, on the twenty-second day of this month, Jacob resolved to build that place, and to 
surround the court with a wall, and to sanctify it and make it holy for ever, for himself and his children 

17 after him. And the Lord appeared to him by night and blessed him and said unto him: ‘Thy name 
18 shall not be called Jacob, but Israel shall they name thy name.’ And He said unto him again: ‘I 
am the Lord who created the heaven and the earth, and I will increase thee and multiply thee 
exceedingly, and kings shall come forth from thee, and they shall judge everywhere wherever the foot 
19 of the sons of men has trodden. And I will give to thy seed all the earth which is under heaven, 
and they shall judge all the nations according to their desires, and after that they shall get possession 
20 of the whole earth and inherit it for ever. And He finished speaking with him, and He went up 
21 from him, and Jacob looked till He had ascended into heaven. And he saw in a vision of the night, 
and behold an angel descended from heaven with seven tablets in his hands, and he gave them to 
Jacob, and he read them and knew all that was written therein which would befall him and his sons 
22 throughout all the ages. And he showed him all that was written on the tablets, and said unto him: 
‘Do not build this place, and do not make it an eternal sanctuary, and do not dwell here; for this is 
not the place. Go to the house of Abraham thy father and dwell with Isaac thy father until the day 
?3 of the death of thy father. For in Egypt thou shalt die in peace, and in this land thou shalt be buried 
24 with honour in the sepulchre of thy fathers, with Abraham and Isaac. Fear not, for as thou hast 
seen and read it, thus shall it all be; and do thou write down everything as thou hast seen and read.’ 


3- Known to Syncell. i. 200; probably to Cedren. i. 60 ; new version in P, R. Eliezer, xxxvii. 
filled his hands: a technical expression, as Exod, xxviii. ANI Obs OF 
4. Celebration of Feast of ‘ Tabernacles’ differs from Lev, xxiii. 34-44 and Numb. xxix, 12-40, 
seven lambs: Lat. seféem; Eth. = sixty, but the heptadic system is here followed, 
twenty-one: Lat.; Eth. = twenty-nine (€vveéa for éva). 
altar of sacrifice: i.e. meshwé'dé querban emended according to Lat. altarium Sructuum from meshwh'd 
guerbana (a). 
8. Corrects Test. Levi ix. Unclean animals are excepted. 
9 tithed, &c.: Numb. xviii. 26. 
10, eat before the Lord: cf. Deut. xiv. 22; Tobit i. Re 
15. tithes of the oxen and sheep: cf. Lev. xxvii. 32; 2 Chron. xxxi.6. These tithes were unknown to Nehemiah 
Neh. x. 37-9; xii. 44-7, xiii. 5, 12, and were limited to.yearly increase by later Rabbis. Cf. Rosh-ha-Shanah, 1 ‘ 
17-20. Cf. Gen. xxxv. 10-13. Ig isa great exaggeration of Gen. xxxv. 12. 
21. tablets: cf. 4 Ezra xiv. 24. 
knew: emended with Latin. Text =‘read’ Both words may be dittographic renderings of dvéyva, 
62 


. 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 32. 25—88. 14 


25 And Jacob said: ‘Lord, how can I remember all that I have read and seen?’ And he said unto 
26 him : ‘T will bring all things to thy remembrance.’ And he went up from him, and he awoke from 
his sleep, and he remembered everything which he had read and seen, and he wrote down all the 
27 words which he had read and seen. And he celebrated there yet another day, and he sacrificed 
thereon according to all that he sacrificed on the former days, and called its name +‘ Addition, + for 
28 {this day was added,} and the former days he called ‘The Feast’. And thus it was manifested that 
it should be, and it is written on the heavenly tablets: wherefore it was revealed to him that he should 
29 celebrate it, and add it to the seven days of the feast. And its name was called +‘ Addition, + 
+because that} it was recorded amongst the days of the feast days, faccording toy the number of 
30 the days of the year. And in the night, on the twenty-third of this month, Deborah Rebecca’s nurse 
died, and they buried her beneath the city under the oak of the river, and he called the name of this 
31 place, ‘The river of Deborah, and the oak, ‘The oak of the mourning of Deborah. And Rebecca 
went and returned to her house to his father Isaac, and Jacob sent by her hand rams and sheep and 
32 he-goats that she should prepare a meal for his father such as he desired. And he went after his 
33 mother tili he came to the land of Kabratan, and he dwelt there. And Rachel bare a son in the 
night, and called his name ‘Son of my sorrow’; for she suffered in giving him birth: but his father 
called his name Benjamin, on the eleventh of the eighth month in the first of the sixth week of this 
34 jubilee. And Rachel died there and she was buried in the land of Ephrath, the same is Bethlehem, 2143 a.m. 
and Jacob built a pillar on the grave of Rachel, on the road above her grave. 


Reuben sins with Bilhah, 1-9 (cf..Gen xxxv. 21, 22). Laws regarding icest, 10-20. Facob’s 
children, 22. (Cf. Gen. xxxv. 23-7.) 


331 And Jacob went and dwelt to the south of Magdaladra’éf. And he went to his father Isaac, he 
2 and Leah his wife, on the new moon of the tenth month. And Reuben saw Bilhah, Rachel’s maid, 
3 the concubine of his father, bathing in water in a secret place,and he loved her. And he hid himself 

at night, and he entered the house of Bilhah [at night], and he found her sleeping alone on a bed in 
4her house. And he lay with her, and she awoke and saw, and behold Reuben was lying with her in 
the bed, and she uncovered the border of her covering and seized him, and cried out, and discovered 

5 that it was Reuben. And she was ashamed because of him, and released her hand from him, and he 
6,7 fed. And she lamented because of this thing exceedingly, and did not tell it to any one. And 
when Jacob returned and sought her, she said unto him: ‘I am not clean for thee, for I have been 
defiled as regards thee; for Reuben has defiled me, and has lain with me in the night, and I was 

8 asleep, and did not discover until he uncovered my skirt and slept with me.’ And Jacob was 
exceedingly wroth with Reuben because he had lain with Bilhah, because he had uncovered his 

9 father’s skirt. And Jacob did not approach her again because Reuben had defiled her. And as for 
any man who uncovers his father’s skirt his deed is wicked exceedingly, for he is abominable before 
ro the Lord. For this reason it is written and ordained on the heavenly tablets that a man should not 
lie with his father’s wife, and should not uncover his father’s skirt, for this is unclean: they shall 
surely die together, the man who lies with his father’s wife and the woman also, for they have 
11 wrought uncleanness on the earth. And there shall be nothing unclean before our God in the nation 
12 which He has chosen for Himself as a possession. And again, it is written a second time: ‘Cursed 
be he who lieth with the wife of his father, for he hath uncovered his father’s shame’; and all the 
13 holy ones of the Lord said ‘So be it; so be it.’ And do thou, Moses, command the children of 
Israel that they observe this word; for it (entails) a punishment of death ; and it is unclean, and 
there is no atonement for ever to atone for the man who has committed this, but he is to be put to 
death and slain, and stoned with stones, and rooted out from the midst of the people of our God. 
14 For to no man who does so in Israel is it permitted to remain alive a single day on the earth, for he 


25. Cf. John xiv. 26. ; 
27. tAdditiont. Perhaps enioxeors in Greek was misread éideots, as Rénsch suggests. Latin has vecentaizo, a 
keeping back’. Cf. Chagiga, 18a. The Hebrew is MSY, really = ‘sacred assembly >: cf. 2 Chron. vil. 9, 
The Feast: as in Sukk. 424, 48 a, for ‘the Feast of Tabernacles’. 
29. because that = duéri = ‘D = ‘ when’. 
amongst the days : emended with Latin iz dies. according to; 2 for 2 = ‘in’. 
30. Gen. xxxv. 8. 
32-4. Gen. XXxv. 16, 18-20. 
32. Kabratén = 7080 N33 = ‘some distance’. Cf. LXX, xaSpaéd, i.e. N35 taken as a proper name. 
34. Gen. xxxv. 19 ; Jashar ii. 1172 adds that she was forty-five at her death. 


XXXIII. 1. Magdaladra’éf, ‘ tower of Eder of Ephrath’ (Gen. xxxv. 21) compressed. 
2. Cf. Test. Reub. ili. 11-14; Shabb. 554. Later Rabbis wholly denied Reuben’s guilt. 


8-10. Phrases from Deut. xxii. 30; IRAs UI ; 
3 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES) 83. 1534/3) 


15 is abominable and unclean. And let them not say: to Reuben was granted life and forgiveness after 
he had lain with his father’s concubine, and to her also though she had a husband, and her husband 
16 Jacob, his father, was still alive. For until that time there had not been revealed the ordinance and 
judgment and law in its completeness for all, but in thy days (it has been revealed) as a law of 
17 seasons and of days, and an everlasting law for the everlasting generations. And for this law there 
is no consummation of days, and no atonement for it, but they must both be rooted out in the midst 
18 of the nation: on the day whereon they committed it they shall slay them. And do thou, Moses, 
write (it) down for Israel that they may observe it, and do according to these words, and not commit 
a sin unto death; for the Lord our God is judge, who respects not persons and accepts not gifts. 
19 And tell them these words of the covenant, that they may hear and observe, and be on their guard 
with respect to them, and not be destroyed and rooted out of the land; for an uncleanness, and an 
abomination, and a contamination, and a pollution are all they who commit it on the earth ‘before 
20 our God. And there is no greater sin than the fornication which they commit on earth; for Israel 
is a holy nation unto. the Lord its God, and a nation of inheritance, and a priestly and royal nation 
and for (His own) possession ; and there shall no such uncleanness appear in the midst of the holy 
21nation. And in the third year of this sixth week Jacob and all his sons went and dwelt in the house 
22 of Abraham, near Isaac his father and Rebecca his mother. And these were the names of the sons 
of Jacob: the first-born Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Zebulon, the sons of Leah; and the 
sons of Rachel, Joseph and Benjamin; and the sons of Bilhah, Dan and Naphtali; and the sons of 
Zilpah, Gad and Asher ; and Dinah, the daughter of Leah, the only daughter of Jacob. And they 
23 came and bowed themselves to Isaac and Rebecca, and when they saw them they blessed Jacob and 
all his sons, and Isaac rejoiced exceedingly, for he saw the sons of Jacob, his younger son, and he 
blessed them. 


Warfare of the Amorite kings against Facob and his sons, 1-9. Facob sends Foseph to visit his 
brethren, 10. Foseph sold and carried down into Egypt, 11-12 (cf. Gen. xxxvii. 14, 17, 18, 25s 
32-6). Deaths of Bithah and Dinah, 15. $acob mourns for Foseph, 13, 14,17. Institution 
of Day of Atonement on day when news of Foseph’s death arrived, 18—r yg. Wives of Facob’s 
SONS, 20-1. 


34: And in the sixth year of this week of this forty-fourth jubilee Jacob sent his sons to pasture their 


2 sheep, and his servants with them to the pastures of Shechem. And the seven kings of the Amorites 
assembled themselves together against them, to slay them, hiding themselves under the trees, and 
3 to take their cattle as a prey. And Jacob and Levi and Judah and Joseph were in the house with 
Isaac their father; for his spirit was sorrowful, and they could not leave him: and Benjamin was 
4 the youngest, and for this reason remained with his father. And there came the king[s| of Tapha, 
and the king[s] of ’Arésaf, and the king[s] of Séragan, and the king[s] of Sél6, and the king|s] of 
Ga’as, and the king of Béthérén, and the king of +Ma’anisakir}, and all those who dwell in these 
5 mountains (and) who dwell in the woods in the land of Canaan. And they announced this to Jacob 
saying : ‘Behold, the kings of the Amorites have surrounded thy sons, and plundered their herds.’ 
6 And he arose from his house, he and his three sons and all the servants of his father, and his own 
7 servants, and he went against them with six thousand men, who carried swords. And he 
slew them in the pastures of Shechem, and pursued those who fled, and he slew them with 
the edge of the sword, and he slew }’Arésat and Taphti and Sarégan and Sélé and +’ Améni- 
8 sakirt and Ga[ga]’as, and he recovered his herds. And he prevailed over them, and imposed 
tribute on them that they should pay him tribute, five fruit products of their land, and he built Rdbél 


16. Theory of Romans iv. 15,{that where there is no law there is no transgression. 
and = wa emended from éa. : 


22. Cf. Gen. xxx. 23=72 


XXXIV. 2-8. Short outline of ancient legend of Jacob’s wars, suggested, perhaps, by Maccab an victori 
germ is seen in Gen. xlviii. 22, developed in Targ. Jerusalem, Gen. rabb. 97, Behe edie a2 A, “Theta end 
sword and bow’ into ‘merits and good deeds’. Cf. Test. Jud. ili-vii, Midr. Wajjissau in “ Chronicles of Jerahmeel’ 
(Gaster) 80-7, Jashar 1173-84. _Proper names, whether of kings or of places, differ in all.accounts; but there are 
almost invariably links of connexion, though place and personal names are hopelessly confused. ; 
4. Tapha = Tephon (1 Macc. ix. 50), Tappuah (Joshua xv. 53). ’Arésa = Aser (Tobit .i. 2) = Hazor (cf. 1 Macc. xi. 
Up, Aer dadaa se Pe panes a ae 3°). Béthoron = Beth-Horon (1 Macc. iii. 13-24, vil. 39-47) 
isakir = no akir of Mahanaim’ (so Midrash Wajjissa d Jash isakir, i 
Camps of Shakir—See Test. Jud. vi. 3 (note). Jjissau and Jashar probably read) but Mahanisakir, i. e. the 
7. Shechem: Cf. Test. Jud. iv. 1. ; 
8-9. Test. Jud. vii. has di i Obél = i i 
Mi ss oe lies Ae as different version of the sequel. R6bél = Arbela in Jashar 1184 (cf. 1 Macc. ix. 2) Rabael 


64 


2145 AM. 


2748 A.M. 





tHe BOOK. OF JUBILEES 34, 9—35. 4 


g and Tamnatarés. And he returned in peace, and made peace with them, and they became his 
to servants, until the day that heand his sons went down into Egypt. And in the seventh year of this 2149 AM. 
week he sent Joseph to learn about the welfare of his brothers from his house to the land of Shechem, 
11 and he found them in the land of Dothan. And they dealt treacherously with him, and formed 
a plot against him to slay him, but changing their minds, they sold him to Ishmaelite merchants, 
and they brought him down into Egypt, and they sold him to Potiphar, the eunuch of Pharaoh, the 
12 {chief of the cooks}, priest of the city of Eléw. And the sons of Jacob slaughtered a kid, and dipped 
the coat of Joseph in the blood, and sent (it) to Jacob their father on the tenth of the seventh month. 
13 And he mourned all that night, for they had brought it to him in the evening, and he became 
feverish with mourning for his death, and he said: ‘An evil beast hath devoured Joseph’; and all 
the members of his house [mourned with him that day, and they] were grieving and mourning with 
14 him all that day. And his sons and his daughter rose up to comfort him, but he refused to be 
15 comforted for his son. And on that day Bilhah heard that Joseph had perished, and she died 
mourning him, and she was living in {Qafratéf,} and Dinah also, his daughter, died after Joseph had 
16 perished. And there came these three mournings upon Israel in one month. And they buried 
17 Bilhah over against the tomb of Rachel, and Dinah also, his daughter, they buried there. And he 
mourned for Joseph one year, and did not cease, for he said ‘Let me go down to the grave mourning 
18 for my son’. For this reason it is ordained for the children of Israel that they should afflict 
themselves on the tenth of the seventh month—on the day that the news which made him weep for 
Joseph came to Jacob his father—that they should make atonement for themselves thereon with 
a young goat on the tenth of the seventh month, once a year, for their sins; for they had grieved the 
19 affection of their father regarding Joseph his son. And this day has been ordained that they should 
grieve thereon for their sins, and for all their transgressions and for all their errors, so that they 
20 might cleanse themselves on that day once a year. And after Joseph perished, the sons of Jacob 
took unto themselves wives. The name of Reuben’s wife is’Ad&; and the name of Simeon’s wife 
is “Adiba’a, a Canaanite ; and the name of Levi's wife is Mélk4, of the daughters of Aram, of the seed 
of the sons of Terah ; and the name of Judah’s wife, Bétasd’él, a Canaanite ; and the name of Issachar's 
wife, Hézaq4; and the name of Zabulon’s wife, {N?imant ; and the name of Dan’s wife, Egla ; and 
the name of Naphtali’s wife, Rasti’t, of Mesopotamia ; and the name of Gad’s wife, Maka; and the 
name of Asher’s wife, Ijéna4; and the name of Joseph’s wife, Asenath, the Egyptian ; and the name 
21 of Benjamin’s wife, Ijasaka. And Simeon repented, and took a second wife from Mesopotamia as his 
brothers. 


Rebecca's admonition to Facob and his reply, 1-8. Rebecca asks Isaac to make Esau swear that he 
will not injure Facob,g-12. Tsaac consents, 13-17. Esau takes the oath and likewise Facob, 
18-26. Death of Rebecca, 27. 


351 And in the first year of the first week of the forty-fifth jubilee Rebecca called Jacob, her son, and 2157 a.m. 
commanded him regarding his father and regarding his brother, that he should honour them all the 
2 days of his life. And Jacob said: ‘I will do everything as thou hast commanded me; for this thing 
will be honour and greatness to me, and righteousness before the Lord, that I should honour them. 
3 And thou too, mother, knowest from the time I was born until this day, all my deeds and all that is in 
4 my heart, that I always think good concerning all. And how should I not do this thing which thou 
5 hast commanded me, that I should honour my father and my brother! Tell me, mother, what 
6 perversity hast thou seen in me and I shall turn away from it, and mercy will be upon me. And 
she said unto him: ‘My son, I have not seen in thee all my days any perverse but (only) upright 
deeds. And yet I will tell thee the truth, my son: I shall die this year, and I shall not survive 
this year in my life; for I have seen in a dream the day of my death, that I should not live beyond 
a hundred and fifty-five years: and behold I have completed all the days of my life which I am to 
4 live.’ And Jacob laughed at the words of his mother, because his mother had said unto him that 


8. TamnAtarés = ‘ Timnah’ (cf. 1 Macc. ix. 50). 

10. Cf. Gen. xxxvii. 12, 13, 17-20, 28-36. 

11. tchief of the cookst: so LXX of Gen. xxxvii. 36, wrongly, for DNADN TW = ‘the captain of the bodyguard’. 

12-14. Cf. Gen. xxxvli. 31-5. 

TiS: Ps.-Philo Ant. bibl. Lib. p. 51 says Dinah married Job ; Gen. rabb. 80 says Simeon. 

17. Gen. xxxvii. 35. aie ; ae ¥: 

18. afflict themselves : = fasting in Lev. xvi. 31 5 xxiii. 27-32; Ezra viii. 21; Dan. x. 12. E : 

20. ’Adtba’-a, a Canaanite. Cf. Shaul—son of a Canaanitish woman’, Gen. xlvi. 10; Exod. vi. 15. It is to our 
author’s credit that he does not seek to explain this away, as was done by later Rabbis. Cf. Beer, /wbilaen, 51. 

étastél cf. Bathshua in Test. Jud. viii, xiii, xvi. F ; wie 
Fae ensth Sion Gen. xi. ie Other names obscure. Ni’im&n: ? invention of an Ethiopic scribe. Syr. Frag. 
gives ‘Adni’, Jasher ‘ Marusa’, abd >. 


XXXV. 5. mercy: Latin mdsericordia domint, E i 
5 
1105°2 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 85. 7-27 


she should die; and she was sitting opposite to him in possession of her strength, and she was not 
infirm in her strength ; for she went in and out and saw, and her teeth were strong, and no ailment 
8 had touched her all the days of her life. And Jacob said unto her: ‘ Blessed am I, mother, if my 
days approach the days of thy life, and my strength remain with me thus as thy strength: and thou 
9 wilt not die, for thou art jesting idly with me regarding thy death.’ And she went in to Isaac and 
said unto him: ‘One petition I make unto thee: make Esau swear that he will not injure Jacob, nor 
pursue him with enmity; for thou knowest Esau’s thoughts that they are perverse from his youth, 
ro and there is no goodness in him; for he desires after thy death to kill him. And thou knowest all 
that he has done since the day Jacob his brother went to Haran until this day ; how he has forsaken 
us with his whole heart, and has done evil to us; thy flocks he has taken to himself, and carried off 
11 all thy possessions from before thy face. And when we implored and besought him for what was 
12 our own, he did as a man who was taking pity on us. And he is bitter against thee because thou 
didst bless Jacob thy perfect and upright son; for there is no evil but only goodness in him, and 
since he came from Haran unto this day he has not robbed us of aught, for he brings us everything 
in its season always, and rejoices with all his heart when we take at his hands, and he blesses us, and 
has not parted from us since he came from Haran until this day, and he remains with us continually 
13 at home honouring us.’ And Isaac said unto her: ‘1, too, know and see the deeds of Jacob who is 
with us, how that with all his heart he honours us; but I loved Esau formerly more than Jacob, 
because he was the firstborn; but now I love Jacob more than Esau, for he has done manifold evil 
deeds, and there is no righteousness in him, for all his ways are unrighteousness and violence, [and 
14 there is no righteousness around him.] And now my heart is troubled because of all his deeds, 
and neither he nor his seed is to be saved, for they are those who will be destroyed from the earth, 
and who will be rooted out from under heaven, for he has forsaken the God of Abraham and gone 
15 after his wives and after their uncleanness and after their error, he and his children. And thou dost 
bid me make him swear that he will not slay Jacob, his brother; even if he swear he will not abide 
16 by his oath, and he will not do good but evil only. But if he desires to slay Jacob, his brother, into 
Jacob’s hands will he be given, and he will not escape from his hands, [for he will descend into his 
17 hands.]_ And fear thou not on account of Jacob; for the guardian of Jacob is great and powerful 
18 and honoured, and praised more than the guardian of Esau.’ And Rebecca sent and called Esau, 
and he came to her, and she said unto him: ‘I have a petition, my son, to make unto thee, and do 
19 thou promise to do it, my son.’ And he said: ‘I will do everything that thou sayest unto me, and 
20 I will not refuse thy petition.’ And she said unto him: ‘I ask you that the day I die, thou wilt take 
me in and bury me near Sarah, thy father’s mother, and that thou and Jacob will love each other, 
and that neither will desire evil against the other, but mutual love only, and (so) ye will prosper, my 
sons, and be honoured in the midst of the land, and no enemy will rejoice over you, and ye will be 
21 a blessing and a mercy in the eyes of all those that love you.’ And he said: ‘I will do all that 
thou hast told me, and I shall bury thee on the day thou diest near Sarah, my father’s mother, as 
22 thou hast desired that her bones may be near thy bones. And Jacob, my brother, also, I shall love 
above all flesh; for I have not a brother in all the earth but him only : and this is no great merit for 
me if I love him; for he is my brother, and we were sown together in thy body, and together came 
23 we forth from thy womb, and if I do not love my brother, whom shall I love? And I, myself, beg 
thee to exhort Jacob concerning me and concerning my sons, for I know that he will assuredly be 
king over me and my sons, for on the day my father blessed him he made him the higher and me 
24 the lower. And I swear unto thee that I shall love him, and not desire evil against him all the 
25 days of my life but good only.’ And he sware unto her regarding all this matter. And she 
called Jacob before the eyes of Esau, and gave him commandment according to the words which 
26 she had spoken to Esau. And he said: ‘I shall do thy pleasure; believe me that no evil will 
proceed from me or from my sons against Esau, and I shall be first in naught save in love only.’ 
27 And they eat and drank, she and her sons that night, and she died, three jubilees and one week and 
one year old, on that night, and her two sons, Esau and Jacob, buried her in the double cave near 
Sarah, their father’s mother. 


g. Referred to by Syncell. i. 202. 

13. [and there...]. A dittography. 

16. |for he ...]. A gloss from xxxvi. 9. 

17. guardian of Jacob. Earliest reference to belief in guardian an els; cf. Matt. xviii. 10; A ii . 
Hebrews i.14. Edersheim, Jesus the Messiah, ii. 752. 2 ars ee ae 


66 


PaeybOOk OF JUBILEES ‘86; 4-21 


Lsaac gives directions to his sons as to his burial: exhorts them to love one another and makes them 
imprecate destruction on him who injures his brother, 1-11. Divides his possessions, giving the 
larger portion to Facob, and dies, 12-18. Leah dies: Facob’s sons come to comfort him, 21-4. 


361 _And in the sixth year of this week Isaac called his two sons, Esau and Jacob, and they came to 2162 A.M. 
him, and he said unto them: ‘My sons, I am going the way of my fathers, to the eternal house 
2 where my fathers are. Wherefore bury me near Abraham my father, in the double cave in the field 
of Ephron the Hittite, where Abraham purchased a sepulchre to bury in; in the sepulchre which 
3 I digged for myself, there bury me. And this I command you, my sons, that ye practise righteous- 
ness and uprightness on the earth, so that the Lord may bring upon you all that the Lord said that 
4 he would do to Abraham and to his seed. And love one another, my sons, your brothers as a man 
who loves his own soul, and let each seek in what he may benefit his brother, and act together on 
5 the earth; and let them love each other as their own souls. And concerning the question of idols, 
I command and admonish you to reject them and hate them, and love them not; for they are full 
6 of deception for those that worship them and for those that bow down to them. Remember ye, my 
sons, the Lord God of Abraham your father, and how I too worshipped Him and served Him in 
righteousness and in joy, that He might multiply you and increase your seed as the stars of heaven 
in multitude, and establish you on the earth as the plant_of righteousness which will not be rooted 
7 out unto all the generations for ever. And now I shail make you swear a great oath—for there is 
no oath which is greater than it by the name glorious and honoured and great and splendid and 
wonderful and mighty, which created the heavens and the earth and all things together—that ye will 
8 fear Him and worship Him. And that each will love his brother with affection and righteousness, 
and that neither will desire evil against his brother from henceforth for ever all the days of your life, 
9 so that ye may prosper in all your deeds and not be destroyed. And if either of you devises evil 
against his brother, know that from henceforth everyone that devises evil against his brother shall fall 
into his hand, and shall be rooted out of the land of the living, and his seed shall be destroyed from 
ro under heaven. But on the day of turbulence and execration and indignation and anger, with flaming 
devouring fire as He burnt Sodom, so likewise will He burn his land and his city and all that is 
his, and he shall be blotted out of the book of the discipline of the children of men, and not be 
recorded in the book of life, but in that which is appointed to destruction, and he shall depart into 
eternal execration; so that their condemnation may be always renewed in hate and in execration 
t1 and in wrath and in torment and in indignation and in plagues and in disease for ever. I say and 
testify to you, my sons, according to the judgment which shall come upon the man who wishes to 
12 injure his brother.’ And he divided all his possessions between the two on that day, and he gave 
the larger portion to him that was the first-born, and the tower and all that was about it, and all that 
13 Abraham possessed at the Well of the Oath. And he said: ‘ This larger portion I will give to the 
14 firstborn.’ And Esau said, ‘1 have sold to Jacob and given my birthright to Jacob ; to him let it be 
15 given, and I have not a single word to say regarding it, for it is his.’ And Isaac said, ‘May a blessing 
rest upon you, my sons, and upon your seed this day, for ye have given me rest, and my heart is not 
16 pained concerning the birthright, lest thou shouldest work wickedness on account of it. May the 
17 Most High God bless the man that worketh righteousness, him and his seed for ever. And he ended 
commanding them and blessing them, and they eat and drank together before him, and he rejoiced 
because there was one mind between them, and they went forth from him and rested that day and 
18 slept. And Isaac slept on his bed that day rejoicing ; and he slept the eternal sleep, and died one 
hundred and eighty years old. He completed twenty-five weeks and five years; and his two sons 
19 Esau and Jacob buried him. And Esau went to the land of Edom, to the mountains of Seir, and 
0 dwelt there. And Jacob dwelt in the mountains of Hebron, in the tower of the land of the sojournings 
of his father Abraham, and he worshipped the Lord with all his heart and according to the visible 

21 commands according as He had divided the days of his generations. And Leah his wife died in 2167 a.m. 
the fourth year of the second week of the forty-fifth jubilee, and he buried her in the double cave 


XXXVI. 1. eternal house: cf. Eccles. xii. 5. 

6. how = ama emended for emze, ‘ after this’. 

10. turbulence and execration and indignation and anger : Gb, it Inn POSs bs BX 

13. give (’ehi0) for ‘make great’ (a a0). j : ; es ; 

16. Most High God : twenty-five times in this book, thirteen in Daniel, forty-eight times In Sir., twenty-one in Pss., 
nine times in N.T., three times in Tobit, not at all in Pss.-Solomon, nine times In I En. xci-civ, six times in Test. Levi, 
twenty-three times in Apoc. Bar., frequent in 4 Ezra, twice in Ass. Mos., four times in 1 En. XXxXvVil-lxx, once in Judith, 
twice in Pentateuch outside Gen. xiv, and only once in the prophets. It was most used in early part of Maccabean 
age, though rare in I En. i-xxxvi, lxxii-xc and absent from I Macc. 

18. Cf. Gen. Xxxv. 29. é 

20. generations. So Lat. Eth.= lédatd corrupt for téwladi. 


67 


ies) 
re) 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 386. 22—387, 20 


22 near Rebecca his mother, to the left of the grave of Sarah, his father’s mother. And all her sons 
and his sons came to mourn over Leah his wife with him, and to comfort him regarding her, for he 

3 was lamenting her. For he loved her exceedingly after Rachel her sister died ; for she was perfect 
and upright in all her ways and honoured Jacob, and all the days that she lived with him he did not 
hear from her mouth a harsh word, for she was gentle and peaceable and upright and honourable. 

24 And he remembered all her deeds which she had done during her life, and he lamented her exceed- 
ingly ; for he loved her with all his heart and with all his soul. 


E'sau’s sons reproach him for his subordination to Facob, and constrain him to war woth the assistance 
of 4,000 mercenaries against Facob, 1-15. Facob reproves Esau, 16-17. Esanu’s reply, 18-25. 


37: And on the day that Isaac the father of Jacob and Esau died, the sons of Esau heard that Isaac 2162 a.m. 
2 had given the portion of the elder to his younger son Jacob and they were very angry. And they 
strove with their father, saying: ‘Why has thy father given Jacob the portion of the elder and passed 
3 over thee, although thou art the elder and Jacob the younger?’ And he said unto them ‘Because 
I sold my birthright to Jacob for a small mess of lentils; and on the day my father sent me to hunt 
and catch and bring him something that he should eat and bless me, he came with guile and brought 
4 my father food and drink, and my father blessed him and put me under his hand. And now our 
father has caused us to swear, meand him, that we shall not mutually devise evil, either against his 
brother, and that we shall continue in love and in peace each with his brother and not make our ways 
5 corrupt.’ And they said unto him, ‘We shall not hearken unto thee to make peace with him; for 
our strength is greater than his strength, and we are more powerful than he; we shall go against 
him and slay him, and destroy him and his sons. And if thou wilt not go with us, we shall do hurt 
6 to thee also. And now hearken unto us: Let us send to Aram and Philistia and Moab and 
Ammon, and let us choose for ourselves chosen men who are ardent for battle, and let us go against 
him and do battle with him, and let us exterminate him from the earth before he grows strong.’ 
7 And their father said unto them, ‘Do not go and do not make war with him lest ye fall before him.’ 
8 And they said unto him, ‘ This too, is exactly thy mode of action from thy youth until this day, and 
g thou art putting thy neck under his yoke. We shall not hearken to these words.’ And they sent to 
Aram, and to ‘Aduram to the friend of their father, and they hired along with them one thousand 
10 fighting men, chosen men of war. And there came to them from Moab and from the children of 
Ammon, those who were hired, one thousand chosen men, and from Philistia, one thousand chosen 
men of war, and from Edom and from the Horites one thousand chosen fighting men, and from the 
11 Kittim mighty men of war. And they said unto their father: ‘Go forth with them and lead them, 
12 else we shall slay thee.’ And he was filled with wrath and indignation on seeing that his sons were 
forcing him to go before (them) to lead them against Jacob his brother. But afterward he remem- 
13 bered all the evil which lay hidden in his heart against Jacob his brother; and he remembered not 
the oath which he had sworn to his father and to his mother that he would devise no evil all his days 
14 against Jacob his brother. And notwithstanding all this, Jacob knew not that they were coming 
against him to battle, and he was mourning for Leah, his wife, until they approached very near to the 
15 tower with four thousand warriors and chosen men of war. And the men of Hebron sent to him 
saying, ‘ Behold thy brother has come against thee, to fight thee, with four thousand girt with the sword, 
and they carry shields and weapons’ ; for they loved Jacob more than Esau. So they told him ; for 
16 Jacob wasa more liberal and merciful man than Esau. But Jacob would not believe until they came 
17 very near to the tower. And he closed the gates of the tower ; and he stood on the battlements and 
spake to his brother Esau and said, ‘Noble is the comfort wherewith thou hast come to comfort me 
for my wife who has died. Is this the oath that thou didst swear to thy father and again to thy 
mother before they died? Thou hast broken the oath, and on the moment that thou didst swear to 
18 thy father wast thou condemned.’ And then Esau answered and said unto him, ‘ Neither the chil- 
dren of men nor the beasts of the earth have any oath of righteousness which in swearing they have 
sworn (an oath valid) for ever; but every day they devise evil one against another, and how each 
19 may slay his adversary and foe. And thou dost hate me and my children for ever. And there is 
20 no observing the tie of brotherhood with thee. Hear these words which I declare unto thee, 


XXXVII. Wars of Jacob and Esau. Cf. Test. Judah ix; Jalkut Shimeoni i. 132 ; Chronicles of Jerahmeel 80-7. 
Latter two adapt the legend to the Herodian situation, and turn Adora into ‘ Arodin’ (= Herodion). Jashar ii. 1236-8 
adapts it further. 

1-12. Differs from later accounts in putting more of the blame on the sons of Esau, Cf. Chron. Jerahmeel xxxvii. 1. 

5- him and his sons: so Lat. ‘him his sons’ a ; ‘his sons’ dcd. 

g-Io, Enumerates peoples actually allied against Judah under the Maccabees: Ammonites (1 Macc. v. 6-8). 
Philistines (cf. xxiv. 28), Syrians (1 Macc. iv. 29, 61); Edomites (1 Macc. v. 3, 65). 

68 





THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 387. 20—88. 15 

If the boar can change its skin and make its bristles as soft as wool, 

Or if it can cause horns to sprout forth on its head like the horns of a stag or of a sheep. 

Then will I observe the tie of brotherhood with thee. 

tAnd if the breasts separated themselves from their mother, for thou hast not been a brother to mef. 
21 And if the wolves make peace with the lambs so as not to devour or do them violence, 

And if their hearts are towards them for good, 

Then there shall be peace in my. heart towards thee. 


22 And if the lion becomes the friend of the ox and makes peace with him. 
And if he is bound under one yoke with him and ploughs with him, 
Then will I make peace with thee. 
23 And when the raven becomes white as the raza, 
Then know that I have loved thee 
And shall make peace with thee. 
Thou shalt be rooted out, 
And thy sons shall be rooted out, 
And there shall be no peace for thee.’ 
24 And when Jacob saw that he was (so) evilly disposed towards him with his heart, and with 
all his soul as to slay him, and that he had come springing like the wild boar which comes upon 
25 the spear that pierces and kills it, and recoils not from it; then he spake to his own and to his 
servants that they should attack him and all his companions. 


—_—-_ 


War between Facob and Esau. Death of Esau and overthrow of his forces, 1-10, Edom reduced 
to servitude ‘till this day’, 11-14. Kings of Edom, 15-24. (Cf. Gen. xxxvi. 31-9.) 


881 And after that Judah spake to Jacob, his father, and said unto him: ‘ Bend thy bow, father, and 
send forth thy arrows and cast down the adversary and slay the enemy ; and mayst thou have the 
power, for we shall not slay thy brother, for he is such as thou, and he is like thee: let us give him 

2 (this) honour.’ Then Jacob bent his bow and sent forth the arrow and struck Esau, his brother (on 
3 his right breast) and slew him. And again he sent forth an arrow and struck ’Adéran the Aramaean, 
4 on the left breast, and drove him backward and slew him. And then went forth the sons of Jacob, 
gs they and their servants, dividing themselves into companies on the four sides of the tower. And 
Judah went forth in front, and Naphtali and Gad with him and fifty servants with him on the south 
side of the tower, and they slew all they found before them, and not one individual of them escaped. 

6 And Levi and Dan and Asher went forth on the east side of the tower, and fifty (men) with them, 
and they slew the fighting men of Moab and Ammon. And Reuben and Issachar and Zebulon went 
forth on the north side of the tower, and fifty men with them, and they slew the fighting men of the 

g Philistines. And Simeon and Benjamin and Enoch, Reuben’s son, went forth on the west side of the 
tower, and fifty (men) with them, and they slew of Edom and of the Horites four hundred men, stout 
warriors ; and six hundred fled, and four of the sons of Esau fled with them, and left their father 

9 lying slain, as he had fallen on the hill which is in’Adtraém., And the sons of Jacob pursued after 
them to the mountains of Seir. And Jacob buried his brother on the hill which is in *Adtrdm, and 
ro he returned to his house. And the sons of Jacob pressed hard upon the sons of Esau in the moun- 
ri tains of Seir, and bowed their necks so that they became servants of the sons of Jacob. And they 
12 sent to their father (to inquire) whether they should make peace with them or slay them. And Jacob 
sent word to his sons that they should make peace, and they made peace with them, and placed the 
13 yoke of servitude upon them, so that they paid tribute to Jacob and to his sons always. And they 
14 continued to pay tribute to Jacob until the day that he went down into Egypt. And the sons of 
Edom have not got quit of the yoke of servitude which the twelve sons of Jacob had imposed on 
1g them until this day. And these are the kings that reigned in Edom before there reigned any king 


20. boar: symbol for Zdom in I En. Ixxxix. 12, 42, 49, 69. Cf. Ps. xxx. 13. vin Out of place ; | possibly also 
corrupt ; read after 19 a (‘for ever’) these two clauses in reverse order and substitute ‘since’ for ‘and if’ and ‘ twins 
‘b tsi. ’ ab 
en TAZA: ‘a large white bird that eats grasshoppers’ (Isenberg, Amharic Dictionary, p. 48, cf. Mandean 
Adam-Book). 


XXXVIII. 1. let us give him Lat. Eth, ‘ with us’, i.e. Jahkabéna for nahabe. ; 
2-3. Others aeused' Esau’s death to Chushim, son of Dan. Cf. Sotah 13. @; Jashar 1235; Pirke R. Eliezer 39; 
Ps.-Jon. on Gen. 1. 13. Our author agrees with Test. rei ix, but expands. 
is right breast). Supplied from Latin and Jalkut. Pp i 
aanonren Bo pee Heceuh: Ant. xiii. 15. 4; Bell. i. 2.65 1 Macc. xiii. 20). Horites: cf. xxxvii. Io. 
14. until this day: Edom was finally made tributary to Israel by John Hyrcanus. 
15-24. Gen. xxXxvl. 31-9. 


69 


THE’ BOOK OF JUBILEES:38. 16—89. 18 


16 over the children of Israel [until this day] in the land of Edom. And Balaq, the son of Beor, reigned 
17 in Edom, and the name of his city was Danaba. And Balaq died, and Jobab, the son of Zara of 
18 Bosér, reigned in his stead. And Jobab died, and’Asdm, of the land of Téman, reigned in his stead. 
19 And ’Asdm died, and ’Adath, the son of Barad, who slew Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his 
20 stead, and the name of his city was Avith. And ’Adath died, and Salman, from “Amaséqa, reigned 
21,22 in his stead. And Salman died,and Saul of Ra’abéth (by the) river, reigned in his stead. And Saul 
23 died, and Ba’éltinan, the son of Achbor, reigned in his stead. And Ba’élinan, the son of Achbor, 
died, and ’Adath reigned in his stead, and the name of his wife was Maitabith, the daughter of 

24 Matarat, the daughter of Métabédza’ab. These are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom. 


Foseph set over Potiphar’s house, 1-4. His purity and imprisonment, 5-13. Imprisonment of 
Pharaoh's chief butler and chief baker whose dreams Foseph interprets,14-18. (Cf. Gen. xxxvii. 
23 XXxix, 9+8, 12=15, 17-23 xl.1—5, 21-3 xli. 1.) 


39 1,2 And Jacob dwelt in the land of his father’s sojournings in the land of Canaan. These are 
the generations of Jacob. And Joseph was seventeen years old when they took him down into 
3 the Jand of Egypt, and Potiphar, an eunuch of Pharaoh, the chief cook bought him. And he 
set Joseph over all his house, and the blessing of the Lord came upon the house of the Egyptian on 
4 account of Joseph, and the Lord prospered him in all that he did. And the Egyptian committed 
everything into the hands of Joseph; for he saw that the Lord was with him, and that the 
5 Lord prospered him in all that he did. And Joseph’s appearance was comely [and very beautiful 
was his appearance], and his master’s wife lifted up her eyes and saw Joseph, and she loved him, 
6and besought him to lie with her. But he did not surrender his soul, and he remembered the 
Lord and the words which Jacob, his father, used to read from amongst the words of Abraham, 
that no man should commit fornication with a woman who has a husband; that for him the 
punishment of death has been ordained in the heavens before the Most High God, and the sin 
7 will be recorded against him im the eternal books continually before the Lord. And Joseph 
g remembered these words and refused to lie with her. And she besought him for a year, but he 
g refused and would not listen. But she embraced him and held him fast in the house in order 
to force him to lie with her, and closed the doors of the house and held him fast; but he left 
to his garment in her hands and broke through the door and fled without from her presence. And 
the woman saw that he would not lie with her, and she calumniated him in the presence of his 
lord, saying : ‘Thy Hebrew servant, whom thou lovest, sought to force me so that he might lie 
with me; and it came to pass when I lifted up my voice that he fled and left his garment in 
ir my hands when I held him, and he brake through the door. And the Egyptian saw the gar- 
ment of Joseph and the broken door, and heard the words of his wife, and cast Joseph into 
12 prison into the place where the prisoners were kept whom the king imprisoned. And he was 
there in the prison; and the Lord gave Joseph favour in the sight of the chief of the prison 
guards and compassion before him, for he saw that the Lord was with him, and that the Lord 
13 made all that he did to prosper. And he committed all things into his hands, and the chief of 
the prison guards knew of nothing that was with him, for Joseph did every thing, and the 
14 Lord perfected it. And he remained there two years. And in those days Pharaoh, king of Egypt, 
was wroth against his two eunuchs, against the chief butler, and against the chief baker, and he put 
15 them in ward in the house of the chief cook, in the prison where Joseph was kept. And the chief of 
16 the prison guards appointed Joseph to serve them; and he served before them. And they both 
17 dreamed a dream, the chief butler and the chief baker, and they told it to Joseph. And as he inter- 
preted to them so it befell them, and Pharaoh restored the chief butler to his office, and the 
18 (chief) baker he slew, as Joseph had interpreted to them. But the chief butler forgot Joseph in the 
prison, although he had informed him what would befall him, and did not remember to inform 
Pharaoh how Joseph had told him, for he forgot. 





XXXIX. 2. seventeen years old: cf. Gen. xxxvii. 2. 
chief cook. See xxxiv. II, xxxix. 14. 
2-5. Cf. Gen. xxxix. 3-7. 
4. into the hands: emended with Latin in ver. 13. Cf. Gen. xxxix. 6. Eth. = ‘before him’. 
6. Cf. xx. 4, xxv. 7; Test. Jos. iii. 3; Soteh 364, 
9-13. Cf. Gen. xxxix. 12-15, 17-23. 
13. into his hands. See ver. 4; Eth.‘ before him’. 
14-18. Cf. Gen. xl. 1-5, 21-3. 
14. two years: Gen. xli. 1. 


7° 





THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 40. 1—41. 5 


Pharaoh's dreams and their interpretation, 1-4. Elevation and marriage of Foseph, 5-13. 
(Cf. Gen. xli. I-5, 7-9, 14 seqq., 25; 29-30, 34, 36, 38-43, 45-6, 49.) 


And in those days Pharaoh dreamed two dreams in one night concerning a famine which was to 


40: 


be in all the land, and he awoke from his sleep and called all the interpreters of dreams that were 


in Egypt, and magicians, and told them his two dreams, and they were not able to declare (them). 

2 And then the chief butler remembered Joseph and spake of him to the king, and he brought him 
3 forth from the prison, and he told his two dreams before him. And he said before Pharaoh ‘that his 
two dreams were one, and he said unto him: ‘ Seven years shall come (in which there shall be) plenty 
over all the land of Egypt, and after that seven years of famine, such a famine as has not been in all 
4the land. And now let Pharaoh appoint overseers in all the land of Egypt, and let them store up 
food in every city throughout the days of the years of plenty, and there will be food for the seven 

5 years of famine, and the land will not perish through the famine, for it will be very severe.’ And the 
Lord gave Joseph favour and mercy in the eyes of Pharaoh, and Pharaoh said unto his servants : 
‘We shall not find such a wise and discreet man as this man, for the spirit of the Lord is with 
6him.” And he appointed him the second in all his kingdom and gave him authority over all 
7 Egypt, and caused him to ride in the second chariot of Pharaoh. And he clothed him with byssus 
garments, and he put a gold chain upon his neck, and (a herald) proclaimed before him OF] EL wa 
"Abirér,’ and placed a ring on his hand and made him ruler over all his house, and magnified him, and 

8 said unto him: ‘ Only on the throne shail I be greater than thou.’ And Joseph ruled over all the 
land of Egypt, and all the princes of Pharaoh, and all his servants, and all who did the king’s business 
loved him, for he walked in uprightness, for he was without pride and arrogance, and he had no 
respect of persons, and did not accept gifts, but he judged in uprightness all the people of the land. 

9 And the land of Egypt was at peace before Pharaoh because of Joseph, for the Lord was with him, 
and gave him favour and mercy for all his generations before all those who knew him and those who 
heard concerning him, and Pharaoh’s kingdom was well ordered, and there was no Satan and no. evil 
ro person (therein). And the king called Joseph’s name Sephantiphans, and gave Joseph to wife the 
11 daughter of Potiphar, the daughter of the priest of Heliopolis, the chief cook. And on the day that 
12 Joseph stood before Pharach he was thirty years old [when he stood before Pharaoh]. And in that 
year Isaac died. And it came to pass as Joseph had said in the interpretation of his two dreams, 
according as he had said it, there were seven years of plenty over all the land of Egypt, and the 
13 land of Egypt abundantly produced, one measure (producing) eighteen hundred measures. And 


Joseph gathered food into every city until they were full of corn until they could no longer count 
and measure it for its multitude. 


Fudals sons and Tamar, 1-7. Yudah’s incest with Tamar 8-18. Tamar bears twins, 21-2. 
Fudah forgiven, because he sinned ignorantly and repented when convicted, and because Tamar's 
marriage with his sons had not been consummated, 23-8. (Cf. Gen. xxxviii. 6-18, 20-6, 
29-30 ; xli. 13.) 


Al*= And in the forty-fifth jubilee, in the second week, (and) in the second year, Judah took for his 
2 first-born Er, a wife from the daughters of Aram, named Tamar. But he hated, and did not lie with 
her, because his mother was of the daughters of Canaan, and he wished to take him a wife of the 

3 kinsfolk of his mother, but Judah, his father, would not permit him. And this Er,the first-born of Judah, 

4 was wicked, and the Lord slew him. And Judah said unto Onan, his brother : ‘Go in unto thy brother’s 
wife and perform the duty of a husband's brother unto her, and raise up seed unto thy brother.’ And 

s Onan knew that the seed would not be his, (but) his brother's only, and he went into the house of his 
brother’s wife, and spilt the seed on the ground, and he was wicked in the eyes of the Lord, and He slew 


ete. -Cfr. Gen. xii, : Rah? 
4. overseers: Latin sfeculatores ; cd read ‘threshing floors’. Possibly corrupt in Gk. otrapxias for otrapxas 
(Rénsch). ; 
7. (herald): plural praeconaverunt, only in Latin. ‘ 
£1 £1 wa’Abirér : ‘God, God, the Mighty One of God’, the title of a great magician. Cf. Acts viii, 10 (Simon 
Magus) ; Fabric. Cod. Pseudepig. Vet. Test. i. 774-84; ii. 85 (Joseph) 5 cf. Deissmann, Bible Studies, 336 note. 
g. no Satan. Cf. xxili. 29. ; te 
10. SéphAntiphans = Zaphnath-paaneah, Gen. xli. 45 = ‘ Revealer of secrets “acc. to later Judaism. _ 
priest of Heliopolis. Origen, Cat. Niceph. i. 463, refers to this function of Potiphar. Later Rabbis, e.g. Pirke 
R. Eliezer 36, &c., tried to explain this marriage with a heathen priest's daughter. Ps.-Jon. on Gen. xli, 45 makes 
her Dinah’s daughter. 


XLI. Cf. Gen. xxxviii. 6-7, 9-18, 20-6; Test. Judah x, xii, xiv; also xix (Judah saved by prayers). 
4. Cf. Deut. xxv. 5. : 
Tes 


2165 AM. 


THE -BOOK OF JUBILEES 41. 6—42. 2 


6 him. And Judah said unto Tamar, his daughter-in-law : ‘Remain in thy father’s house as a widow till 
7 Shelah my son be grown up, and I shall give thee to him to wife.’ And he grew up ; but Bédsd’él, the 
wife of Judah, did not permit her son Shelah to marry. And Bédsi’él, the wife of Judah, died 2168 a.m. 
8 in the fifth year of this week. And in the sixth year Judah went up to shear his sheep at Timnah, 2169 A.M. 
g And they told Tamar: ‘ Behold thy father-in-law goeth up to Timnah to shear his sheep.’ And she 
put off her widow’s clothes, and put on a veil, and adorned herself, and sat in the gate adjoining the 
1o way to Timnah. And as Judah was going along he found her, and thought her to be an harlot, 
and he said unto her: ‘Let me come in unto thee’; and she said unto him: ‘Come in, and he went 
‘rin. And she said unto him: ‘Give me my hire’; and he said unto her: ‘I have nothing in my 
12 hand save my ring that is on my finger, and my necklace, and my staff which is in my hand.’ And 
she said unto him: ‘ Give them to me until thou dost send me my hire’; and he said unto her: 
‘I will send unto thee a kid of the goats’ ; and he gave them to her, (and he went in unto her), and 
13, 14 she conceived by him. And Judah went unto his sheep, and she went to her father’s house. And 
Judah sent a kid of the goats by the hand of his shepherd, an Adullamite, and he found her not ; 
and he asked the people of the place, saying: ‘Where is the harlot who was here?’ And they said 
™5 unto him ; ‘ There is no harlot here with us.’ And he returned and informed him, and said unto | 
him that he had not found her; ‘I asked the people of the place, and they said unto me: “ There 
16 is no harlot here.”’ And he said: ‘ Let her keep (them) lest we become a cause of derision. And 
when she had completed three months, it was manifest that she was with child, and they told Judah, 
17 saying: ‘Behold Tamar, thy daughter-in-law, is with child by whoredom.’ And Judah went to the 
house of her father, and said unto her father and her brothers: ‘Bring her forth, and let them burn 
18 her, for she hath wrought uncleanness in Israel.’ And it came to pass when they brought her forth 
to burn her that she sent to her father-in-law the ring and the necklace, and the staff, saying: 
19 ‘ Discern whose are these, for by him am I with child.’ And Judah acknowledged, and said : ‘Tamar 
20 is more righteous than Iam. And therefore let them burn her not. And for that reason she was 
21 not given to Shelah, and he did not again approach her. And after that she bare two sons, Perez 2170 A.M. 
22 and Zerah, in the seventh year of this second week. And thereupon the seven years of fruitfulness | 
23 were accomplished, of which Joseph spake to Pharaoh. And Judah acknowledged that the deed 
which he had done was evil, for he had lain with his daughter-in-law, and he esteemed it hateful in 
his eyes, and he acknowledged that he had transgressed and gone astray, for he had uncovered the | 
skirt of his son, and he began to lament and to supplicate before the Lord because of his transgression. | 
24 And we told him in a dream that it was forgiven him because he supplicated earnestly, and lamented, | 
25 and did not again commit it. And he received forgiveness because he turned from his sin and from 
his ignorance, for he transgressed greatly before our God; and every one that acts thus, every one 
who lies with his mother-in-law, let them burn him with fire that he may burn therein, for there is 
26 uncleanness and pollution upon them; with fire let them burn them. And do thou command the 
children of Israel that there be no uncleanness amongst them, for every one who lies with his 
daughter-in-law or with his mother-in-law hath wrought uncleanness ; with fire let them burn the 
man who has lain with her, and likewise the woman, and He will turn away wrath and punishment 
27 from Israel. And unto Judah we said that his two sons had not lain with her, and for this reason 
28 his seed was established for a second generation, and would not be rooted out. For in singleness of 
eye he had gone and sought for punishment, namely, according to the judgment of Abraham, 
which he had commanded his sons, Judah had sought to burn her with fire. 








Owing to the famine Facob sends his sons to Egypt for corn, t-4. Foseph recognizes them and retains 
Simeon, and requires them to bring Benjamin when they returned, 5-12. Notwithstanding 
Facob's reluctance his sons take Benjamin with them on their second journey and are entertained 
by Foseph, 13-25. (Cf. Gen. xli. 54, 50; xii. 7-9, 13, 17, 20, 24-5, 29-30, 34-8; xliii. 1-2, 4-5, 
8-9, II, 15, 23, 26, 29, 343 xliv. I-2.) 
42: And in the first year of the third week of the forty-fifth jubilee the famine began to come into the 2171 A.M. 
2 land, and the rain refused to be given to the earth, for none whatever fell. And the earth grew . 


12. { ) Restored from Lat. 
15. keep Lat. Eth. ‘arise’, one letter different. 
17. Cf. xxx. 7 note. 
22. Cf. Gen, xi. 53. 
ae eS pauee of et » + » Ignorance : best to transpose these two clauses and read ‘ because of his ignorance 
25, 26. Enforce laws of Lev. xx. 143 xviii. 1 8 piste, Ay 
28. Judah commended for his severity. 
singleness of eye: favourite expression in Test. XII Patriarchs. 


XLII. Cf. Gen. xli, 54-xliv. 2. 





72 


THE BOOK OF |JUBILEES 42; 2—43. 2 


barren, but in the land of Egypt there was food, for Joseph had gathered the seed of the land in the 
3 seven years of plenty and had preserved it. And the Egyptians came to Joseph that he might give 
them food, and he opened the store-houses where was the grain of the first year, and he sold it to 
4 the people of the land for gold. (Now the famine was very sorc in the land of Canaan), and Jacob 
heard that there was food in Egypt, and he sent his ten sons that they should procure food for him 
in Egypt; but Benjamin he did not send, and (the ten sons of Jacob) arrived (in Egypt) among those 
5 that went (there). And Joseph recognised them, but they did not recognise him, and he spake unto 
them and questioned them, and he said unto them; ‘Are ye not spies, and have ye not come to 
6 explore the approaches of the land?’ And he put them in ward. And after that he set them free 
7 again, and detained Simeon alone and sent off his nine brothers. And he filled their sacks with corn, 
8 and he put their gold in their sacks, and they did not know. And he commanded them to bring 
9 their younger brother, for they had told him their father was living and their younger brother. And 
they went up from the land of Egypt and they came to the land of Canaan; and they told their 
father all that had befallen them, and how the lord of the country had spoken roughly to them, and 
10 had seized Simeon till they should bring Benjamint And Jacob said: ‘ Me have ye bereaved of my 
children! Joseph is not and Simeon also is not, and ye will take Benjamin away. On me has your 
11 wickedness come.’ And he said: ‘My son will not go down with you lest perchance he fall sick ; 
for their mother gave birth to two sons, and one has perished, and this one also ye will take from me. 
If perchance he took a fever on the road, ye would bring down my old age with sorrow unto death.’ 
12 For he saw that their money had been returned to every man in his sack, and for this reason he 
13 feared to send him. And the famine increased and became sore in the land of Canaan, and in all 
lands save in the land of Egypt, for many of the children of the Egyptians had stored up their seed 
for food from the time when they saw Joseph gathering seed together and putting it in storehouses 
14 and preserving it for the years of famine. And the people of Egypt fed themselves thereon during 
15 the first year of their famine. But when Israel saw that the famine was very sore in the land, and 
that there was no deliverance, he said unto his sons: ‘Go again, and procure food for us that we die 
16 not.’ And they said: ‘We shall not go; unless our youngest brother go with us, we shall not go.’ 
17 And Israel saw that if he did not send him with them, they should all perish by reason of the famine. 
18 And Reuben said: ‘Give him into my hand, and if I do not bring him back to thee, slay my two 
19 sons instead of his soul.’ And he said unto him: ‘ He shall not go with thee.’ And Judah came near 
and said: ‘Send him with me, and if I do not bring him back to thee, let me bear the blame before 
20 thee all the days of my life.’ And he sent him with them in the second year of this week on the 2172 A.M. 
first day of the month, and they came to the land of Egypt with all those who went, and (they had) 
21 presents in their hands, stacte and almonds and terebinth nuts and pure honey. And they went and 
stood before Joseph, and he saw Benjamin his brother, and he knew him, and said unto them: -‘Is 
this your youngest brother?’ And they said unto him: ‘It is he.’ And he said: ‘The Lord be 
22 eracious to thee, my son!’ And he sent him into his house and he brought forth Simeon unto them 
and he made a feast for them, and they presented to him the gift which they had brought in their 
23 hands. And they eat before him and he gave them all a portion, but the portion of Benjamin was 
24 seven times larger than that of any of theirs. And they eat and drank and arose and remained with 
25 their asses. And Joseph devised a plan whereby he might learn their thoughts as to whether thoughts 
of peace prevailed amongst them, and he said to the steward who was over his house: ‘ Fill all their 
sacks with food, and return their money unto them into their vessels, and my cup, the silver cup out 
of which I drink, put it in the sack of the youngest, and send them away. 


Foseph’s plan to stay his brethren, 1-10, Fudah's supplication, 11-13. Foseph makes himself known 
to his brethren and sends them back for his father, 14-24. (Cf. Gen. xliv. 3-10, 12-18, 27-8, 
30-2 ; xlv. 1-2, 5-9, 12, 18, 20-1, 23, 25-8.) 
431 And he did as Joseph had told him, and filled all their sacks for them with food and put their 
2 money in their sacks, and put the cup in Benjamin’s sack. And early in the morning they departed, 
and it came to pass that, when they had gone from thence, Joseph said unto the steward of his 
house : ‘Pursue them, run and seize them, saying, “ For good ye have requited me with evil; you 
have stolen from me the silver cup out of which my lord drinks.” And bring back to me their 


4. { ) supplied from Latin, with Gen. xli. 5. 
5. questioned them: Latin has ‘appellavit eos dure’. 


é. Latin varies : ‘ et mittens arcessivit illos et accipiens Symeonem ab ipsis ligavit eum’. 
12. to every man: emended by prefixing la to kuélli. 


XLUI. Cf. Gen. xliv. 3-zlv. 28. ee ae ee 
2. seize = ta’ahazémi emended with Gen. xliv. 4 from taga azomu = upbraid ’. 


ties: 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 438. 3—44. 3 


3 youngest brother, and fetch (him) quickly before I go forth to my seat of judgment.’ And he ran 
4 after them and said unto them according to these words. And they said unto him: ‘God forbid 
that thy servants should do this thing, and steal from the house of thy lord any utensil, and the money 
also which we found in our sacks the first time, we thy servants brought back from the land of 
5 Canaan. How then should we steal any utensil? Behold here are we and our sacks ; search, and 
wherever thou findest the cup in the sack of any man amongst us, let him be slain, and we and our 
6 asses will serve thy lord.’ And he said unto them: ‘ Not so, the man with whom I find, him only 
7 shall I take as a servant, and ye shall return in peace unto your house.’ And as he was searching in 
their vessels, beginning with the eldest and ending with the youngest, it was found in Benjamin’s 
8 sack. And they rent their garments, and laded their asses, and returned to the city and came to the 
9 house of Joseph, and they all bowed themselves on their faces to the ground before him. And 
Joseph said unto them: ‘ Ye have done evil.’ And they said: ‘ What shall we say and how shall 
we defend ourselves? Our lord hath discovered the transgression of his servants; behold we are the 
10 servants of our lord, and our asses also. And Joseph said unto them: ‘I too fear the Lord ; as for 
you, go ye to your homes and let your brother be my servant, for ye have done evil. ; Know ye not 
11 that a man delights in his cup as I with thiscup? And yet ye have stolen it from me.’ And Judah 
said: ‘O my lord, let thy servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my lord’s ear; two brothers did thy 
servant's mother bear to our father; one went away and was lost, and hath not been found, and he 
alone is left of his mother, and thy servant our father loves him, and his life also is bound up with 
12 the life of this (lad). And it will come to pass, when we go to thy servant our father, and the lad is 
13 not with us, that he will die, and we shall bring down our father with sorrow unto death. Now 
rather let me, thy servant, abide instead of the boy as a bondsman unto my lord, and let the lad go 
with his brethren, for I became surety for him at the hand of thy servant our father, and if I do not 
14 bring him back, thy servant will bear the blame to our father for ever.’ And Joseph saw that they 
were all accordant in goodness one with another, and he could not refrain himself, and he told them 
15 that he was Joseph. And he conversed with them in the Hebrew tongue and fell on their neck and 
16 wept. But they knew him not and they began to weep. And he said unto them: ‘ Weep not over 
me, but hasten and bring my father to me; and ye see that it is my mouth that speaketh, and the 
17 eyes of my brother Benjamin see. For behold this is the second year of the famine, and there are 
18 still five years without harvest or fruit of trees or ploughing. Come down quickly ye and your 
households, so that ye perish not through the famine, and do not be grieved for your possessions, for 
t9 the Lord sent me before you to set things in order that many people might live. And tell my 
father that I am still alive, and ye, behold, ye see that the Lord has made me asa father to Pharaoh, 
20 and ruler over his house and over all the land of Egypt. And tell my father of all my glory, and 
zt all the riches and glory that the Lord hath given me.’ And by the command of the mouth of 
Pharaoh he gave them chariots and provisions for the way, and he gave them all many-coloured 
22 raiment and silver. And to their father he sent raiment and silver and ten asses which carried corn, 
23 and he sent them away. And they went up and told their father that Joseph was alive, and was 
measuring out corn to all the nations of the earth, and that he was ruler over all the land of Egypt. 
24 And their father did not believe it, for he was beside himself in his mind; but when he saw the 
wagons which Joseph had sent, the life of his spirit revived, and he said: ‘It is enough for me if 
Joseph lives ; I will go down and see him before I die,’ 


Facob celebrates the feast of firstfruits, and encouraged by a vision goes down to Egypt, 1-10. 
Names of his descendants, 11-34. (Cf. Gen. xlvi. 1-28.) 


44; And Israel took his journey from +Haran} from his house on the new moon of the third month, 


and he went on the way of the Well of the Oath, and he offered a sacrifice to the God of his 
2 father Isaac on the seventh of this month. And Jacob remembered the dream that he had seen 
3 at Bethel, and he feared to go down into Egypt. And while he was thinking of sending word 
to Joseph to come to him, and that he would not go down, he remained there seven days, if 


5. thy : for ‘my’ (Gen. xliv. 9). 

Io. delights in his cup: a change of jdsta’adém into jdstagasém (‘divines’) would bring text into line with. Gen. 
xliv. 15 ; but the change may be deliberate. 

11. I pray thee: MSS. ‘on me’, mistranslation of ‘2 in Gen. xliy. 18. 

15. Hebrew tongue: so Ber. rabb. 93. 

16. ye see .. . Benjamin see, emended in text. See my Eth, text, p:-157. 


XLIV. 1. tHarant} for ‘Hebron’ (cp. Gen. xxxvii. 14). 
74 








“ 


26, 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 44. 4-28 


4 perchance he should see a vision as to whether he should remain or go down. And _ he cele- 
brated the harvest festival of the first-fruits with old grain, for in all the land of Canaan there 
was not a handful of seed [in the land], for the famine was over all the beasts and cattle and 

5 birds, and also over man. And on the sixteenth the Lord appeared unto him, and said unto him 
‘Jacob, Jacob’; and he said,‘ Here am I’ And He said unto him: ‘Iam the God of thy fathers, 
the God of Abraham and Isaac; fear not to go down into Egypt, for I will there make of thee 

6a great nation. I will go down with thee, and I will bring thee up (again), and in this land 
shalt thou be buried, and Joseph shall put his hands upon thy eyes. Fear not; go down into Egypt.’ 

7 And his sons rose up, and his sons’ sons, and they placed their father and their possessions upon 

8 wagons. And Israel rose up from the Well of the Oath on the sixteenth of this third month, and he 

9 went to the land of Egypt. And Israel sent Judah before him to his son Joseph to examine the 
Land of Goshen, for Joseph had told his brothers that they should come and dwell there that they 

10 might be near him. And this was the goodliest (land) in the land of Egypt, and near to him, for all 

11 (of them) and also for the cattle. And these are the names of the sons of Jacob who went into 

12 Egypt with Jacob their father. Reuben, the first-born of Israel; and these are the names of his 

13 sons: Enoch, and Pallu, and Hezron and Carmi—five. Simeon and his sons; and these are the 
names of his sons: Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul, the son 

14 of the Zephathite woman—seven. Levi and his sons; and these are the names of his sons: 

15 Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari—four. Judah and his sons; and these are the names of his sons : 

16 Shela, and Perez, and Zerah—-four. Issachar and his sons ; and these are the names of his sons: 

17 Tola, and Phia, and Jastib, and Shimron—five. Zebulon and his sons ; and these are the names of 

18 his sons: Sered,and Elon, and Jahleel—four. And these are the sons of Jacob, and their sons whom 
Leah bore to Jacob in Mesopotamia, six, and their one sister, Dinah : and all the souls of the sons of 
Leah, and their sons, who went with Jacob their father into Egypt, were twenty-nine, and Jacob their 

rg father being with them, they were thirty. And the sons of Zilpah, Leah’s handmaid, the wife of 

20 Jacob, who bore unto Jacob Gad and Asher. And.these are the names of their sons who went with 
him into Egypt: The sons of Gad: Ziphion,and Haggi, and Shuni, and Ezbon, (and Eri), and Areli, 

21 and Arodi—eight. And the sons of Asher: Imnah, and Ishvah, (and Ishvi), and Beriah, and Serah, 

23 their one sister—six. All the souls were fourteen, and all those of Leah were forty-four. And the 

24 sons of Rachel, the wife of Jacob: Joseph and Benjamin. And there were born to Joseph in Egypt 
before his father came into Egypt, those whom Asenath, daughter of Potiphar priest of Heliopolis 

2s bare unto him, Manasseh, and Ephraim—three. And the sons of Benjamin: Bela and Becher, 
and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, and Ehi, and Rosh, and Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard—eleven. 

27 And all the souls of Rachel were fourteen. And the sons of Bilhah, the handmaid of Rachel, the 

28 wife of Jacob, whom she bare to Jacob, were Dan and Naphtali. And these are the names of their 


4-8. Cf. Gen. xlvi. 1-6. Jacob’s vision is on the day after the Feast of ‘Weeks’. 

4. [in the land]: a dittography. 

g. Gen. xlvi. 28. For readings see p. 6. ‘ he: : 

12-33. Our text makes the number of Jacob’s descendants together with himself seventy. This was the view of the 
writer of Gen. xlvi. 27. On the other hand in Gen. xlvi. 15, 18, 22, 25 and Joseph. Awd. 11. 7. 4 Jacob is expressly 
not included in the number seventy. Cf. Exod. i. 5. That chapter has admittedly undergone revision. Our text 
makes up the number seventy by a method somewhat different from that in Gen. xlvi. Thus whereas Dan and 
Naphtali have respectively one and four sons in Gen., our text assigns them five each. On the other hand Gen. 
includes in its reckoning two grandchildren of Asher, Er, Onan, two sons of Perez, and Dinah, against Jubilees. The 
numbers in our text may be represented as follows :— 


Reuben and 4 sons 5 : : (Joseph and 2 sons . ; “28 

: Simeon and é sons 7 Maer children) Benjamin and iosons . = DE 

: : Levi and 3 sons . : eA — 

Leah’s children Judah, 1 son, 2 grandsons . 4 14 

Issachar and 4 sons eG ie : : 

Seen Nakiska Si Bilhah’s 2? 1N shea ear aan Oy: 

29 oy, 
: j Gad and 7 sons . . eS 
Zilpah’s Asher, 4sonsandtdaughter 6 
14 


i i ] , that the LXX reads 75 in Gen. 

29 +14+14+12=69. Thus the number 70 includes Jacob. It is noteworthy t i 
ea ssa ieouise in Exod. i. 5, while in Deut. x. 22 most MSS. give 70, but some give 75. The number 75 in Acts 
vii. 14 is of course due to the LXX. ih athe : 

13. Zephathite, i.e. of Zephath, a Canaanite city (Judges. i. 17). ; 

20, 21. ¢ ) names required to complete numbers ‘eight’ and ‘six’. 

28. Cf. Gen. xlvi. 23 which gives Hushim only. 

fo 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 44, 2845. 16 


sons who went with them into Egypt. And the sons of Dan were Hushim, and Samon, and Asidi, 

29 and ‘Ijaka, and Salomén—six. And they died the year in which they entered into Egypt, and there 
30 was left to Dan Hushim alone. And these are the names of the sons of Naphtali : Jahziel, and Guni, 
31 and Jezer, and Shallum, and Iv. And ’Iv, who was born after the years of famine, died in Egypt. 
2, 33 And all the souls of Rachel were twenty-six. And all the souls of Jacob which went into Egypt 
were seventy souls. These are his children and his children’s children, in all seventy ; but five died 

34 in Egypt before Joseph, and had no children. And in the land of Canaan two sons of Judah died, 


Er and Onan, and they had no children, and the children of Israel buried those who perished, and 
they were reckoned among the seventy Gentile nations. 


Foseph receives Facob, and gives him Goshen, 1-7.  Foseph acquires all the land and its enhabt- 
tants for Pharaoh, 8-12. Facob dies and ts buried in Hebron, 13-15. His books given to 
Levi, 16. (Cf. Gen. xlvi. 28-30; xlvil- 11-73; 19, 20235248 enn) 


45 And Israel went into the country of Egypt, into the land of Goshen, on the new moon of the fourth 2172 A.M 
month, in the second year of the third week of the forty-fifth jubilee. And Joseph went to meet his 
father Jacob, to the land of Goshen, and he fell on his father’s neck and wept. And Israel said unto 
Joseph: ‘ Now let me die since I have seen thee, and now may the Lord God of Israel be blessed, 
the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac who hath not withheld His mercy and His grace from 
4 His servant Jacob, It is enough for me that I have seen thy face whilst +I amf yet alive ; yea, true 
is the vision which I saw at Bethel. Blessed be the Lord my God for ever and ever, and blessed be : 
5 His name. And Joseph and his brothers eat bread before their father and drank wine, and Jacob | 
rejoiced with exceeding great joy because he saw Joseph eating with his brothers and drinking before | 
him, and he blessed the Creator of all things who had preserved him, and had preserved for him his | 
6 twelve sons. And Joseph had given to his father and to his brothers as a gift the right of dwelling | 
in the land of Goshen and in Rameses and all the region round about, which he ruled over before 
Pharaoh. And Israel and his sons dwelt in the land of Goshen, the best part of the land of Egypt ; | 

7 and Israel was one hundred and thirty years old when he came into Egypt. And Joseph nourished : 
his father and his brethren and also their possessions with bread as much as sufficed them for the 
8 seven years of the famine. And the land of Egypt suffered by reason of the famine, and Joseph : 
| 


W Woe 


acquired all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh in return for food, and he got possession of the people 
9 and their cattle and everything for Pharaoh. And the years of the famine were accomplished, and 
Joseph gave to the people in the land seed and food that they might sow (the land) in the eighth 
10 year, for the river had overflowed all the land of Egypt. For in the seven years of the famine it had 
(not) overflowed and had irrigated only a few places on the banks of the river, but now it overflowed 
11 and the Egyptians sowed the land, and it bore much corn that year. And this was the first year of 2178 A.M 
12 the fourth week of the forty-fifth jubilee. And Joseph took of the corn of the harvest the fifth part 
for the king and left four parts for them for food and for seed, and Joseph made it an ordinance for 
13 the land of Egypt until this day. And Israel lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years, and all the 
days which he lived were three jubilees, one hundred and forty-seven years, and he died in the fourth 2188 A.M 
14 year of the fifth week of the forty-fifth jubilee. And Israel blessed his sons before he died and told 
them everything that would befall them in the land of Egypt ; and he. made known to them what 
would come upon them in the last days, and blessed them and gave to Joseph two portions in 
15 the land. And he slept with his fathers, and he was buried in the double cave in the land of 
Canaan, near Abraham his father in the grave which he dug for himself in the double cave in 
16 the land of Hebron. And he gave all his books and the books of his fathers to Levi his son 
that he might preserve them and renew them for his children until this day. 


33. before Joseph (4c); ‘ before they married’ (a) ; ‘who did not marry’ (@). 


XLV. 1-4 a. Gen. xlvi. 28-30. 
4. whilst tI amt yet alive: change wva to anta = ‘ thou’ and read ‘ that’ for ‘ whilst ’, then = Gen, xlvi. 30. 
6. Gen. xvii. 11. 

one hundred and thirty years: from Gen. xlvii. 9. 
7- as much as sufficed: emend ya’ak/émi to ’akdlémit = ‘ according to their persons *, as LXX, Gen. xlvii. 12. 
8. for Pharaoh: with Latin 4 reads ‘and Pharaoh’. 


9, 10. Gen, xlvii. 23. Restore (the land) and (not) from Latin and emend ‘it bore’ to ‘they harvested’ (Latin 
collegerunt). 


12. Cf. Gen. xlvii. 24. 
the corn of. Read with Lat. ‘all the’. 
13. Cf. Gen. xlvii. 28. Date conflicts with that in xix. Tos ee xckve 4. 
14. told them, &c. Cf. Gen. xlix. 1; Jub. xxx. 21. 
15. Cf. Gen. 1. 13. 
16. Cf. x. 14. Our author, who published these traditions, was probably himself a priest. 


76 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 46. 1-13 


Prosperity of Israel in Egypt, 1-2. Death of Foseph, 3-5. War between Egypt and Canaan during 
which the bones of all the sons of Facob except Foseph are buried at Hebron, 6-11. Egypt 
oppresses Israel, 12-16. (Cf. Gen. 1. 22, 25-6; Exod. i. 6-14.) 


46: And it came to pass that after Jacob died the children of Israel multiplied in the land of Egypt, 

and they became a great nation, and they were of one accord in heart, so that brother loved brother 

and every man helped his brother, and they increased abundantly and multiplied exceedingly, ten 

2 weeks of years, all the days of the life of Joseph. And there was no Satan nor any evil all the days 

of the life of Joseph which he lived after his father Jacob, for all the Egyptians honoured the children 

3 of Israel all the days of the life of Joseph. And Joseph died being a hundred and ten years old; 

seventeen years he lived in the land of Canaan, and ten years he was a servant, and three years in 

4 prison, and eighty years he was under the king, ruling all the land of Egypt. And he died and all 

5 his brethren and all that generation. And he commanded the children of Israel before he died that 

6 they should carry his bones with them when they went forth from the land of Egypt. And he made 

them swear regarding his bones, for he knew that the Egyptians would not again bring forth and 

bury him in the land of Canaan, for Makamaron, king of Canaan, while dwelling in the land of 

Assyria, fought in the valley with the king of Egypt and slew him there, and pursued after the 

, Egyptians to the gates of ’Ermon. But he was not able to enter, for another, a new king, had become 

king of Egypt, and he was stronger than he, and he returned to the land of Canaan, and the gates of 

g Egypt were closed, and none went out and none came into Egypt. And Joseph died in the forty- 

sixth jubilee, in the sixth week, in the second year, and they buried him in the land of Egypt, and 2242 a.m. 

all his brethren died after him. And the king of Egypt went forth to war with the king of Canaan 2263 a.m. 
in the forty-seventh jubilee, in the second week in the second year, and the children of Israel brought 
forth all the bones of the children of Jacob save the bones of Joseph, and they buried them in the 
ro field in the double cave in the mountain. And the most (of them) returned to Egypt, but a few of 
11 them remained in the mountains of Hebron, and Amram thy father remained with them. And the 
,2 king of Canaan was victorious over the king of Egypt, and he closed the gates of Egypt. And he 
devised an evil device against the children of Israel of afflicting them and he said unto the people of 
13 Egypt: ‘Behold the people of the children of Israel have increased and multiplied more than we. 
Come and let us deal wisely with them before they become too many, and let us afflict them with 
slavery before war come upon us and before they too fight against us; else they will join themselves 


2242 A.M. 


Wily tan Cle Exod. 1572 

3. Cf. Gen. 1. 22, 26 (Joseph’s death at 110). ; / 

6-9. This war between the Egyptians and the Canaanites is referred to in the T. Sim. vill. 2 and T. Benj. xii. 3 as 
being waged when the bodies of these patriarchs were buried at Hebron. Thus in Sim. vin. 2 Onxay aitoy ev Onky Erhov 
donntey Tod dvayayetv ra dora aitovey XeBpov. Kat dynveykay avTa év TOKELO Alyuntiov xpupy : and Ben). xil. 2, 3 Kat €6nKay 
avrov év mapadnkn Kal... avyyayov Ta dora Tay maTépay aitay év Kpupy, &v TOELO Xavady (Arm. = Gre joav €v Todepep 
of Xavavaior), If we could trust the date in T. Gad viii. 5 which says that the body of Gad was buried in Hebron five 
years after his death : exoupnon év cipyyp. Kal pera mévte ETH aviyyayov avrov kat €OnKav aitéy eis XeBpov, we could arrive 
at the date to which the authors of Jubilees and the Testaments assigned this war between Egypt and Canaan. Since 
Gad died at the age of 125 (T. Gad I. 1; Midrash Tadshe and Book of Jashar, of. cé¢. ii. 1246) and was 40 when 
he went down into Egypt (see note on xxviii. 11-24), his burial in Hebron took place 90 years after the descent 
into Egypt in the year of the world 2262. But this date would be too early for Levi and Benjamin. The statement in 
Benj. xii. 3 that this expedition to Hebron was in the g1st year (Greek MSS.) before the exodus, is not supported by the 
Armenian version. Our text fixes it at 2263. Notwithstanding it seems clearly to have been the view of the author 
of the Testaments that the bones of all the patriarchs save those of Joseph were buried in Hebron on the occasion of 
a war between Egypt and Canaan. Thus, in addition to the statements in Simeon, Gad and Benjamin, observe that after 
mentioning the death of Levi, Zebulon and Dan, the Testaments (Lev. xix. 5 ; Zeb. x.7; Dan vil. 2) add that ‘afterwards 
(vorepov) they were buried in Hebron. Josephus (Azz. ii. 8. 2) appears to have held the same view, though he makes 
po mention of the war. He states: ‘ His (Joseph’s) brethren also died . . - and their posterity and sons carried their 
bodies after some time (xopioavres pera xpdvov) and buried them in Hebron.’ St. Stephen is beholden to this tradition 
for the statement in Acts vii. 15-16. : : au : 

Merenptah (about this a: waged war against Palestine. See Articles on Egypt in Evcyc. Bib. ii and Bible 
Dictionary i. 662, 665. But our text, which emphasizes the weakness of Egypt, points rather to the period of the 
successors of Rameses III when Egypt lost her Syrian dependencies. i ; 

In Josephus (Azz. ii. 10) there is an account of a war between Cush and Egypt in which the latter prevails under 
the generalship of Moses. An enlarged form of this legend having many details in common with that in Josephus is 
given in the Chronicles of Jerahmeel xlv. Here the war Is between Cush and Syria and the people of the East. 
Another form appears in the Palaca Historica (Vassiliev. Anecdota Graeco-Byzantina, 1. 228), where Egypt is at 
strife with India. A later and still more elaborate and still more grotesque edition is found in the Book of Jashar 
(of. cit. 11. 1244-5 3). The oldest form of the tradition is that in our text where the war is between Egypt and Canaan. 
The account in the Chronicles of Jerahmeel comes nearest to this in representing Cush and Canaan as the opposing 
countries. 

6. ‘Erm6én = Heroénpolis, near the desert on the canal of Ramses. . 

to. No other mention of this stay of Amram in Palestine; but cf. Joseph. Avz. il. 8. 2. 

13-15. Cf. Exod. i, 10-12, 14. ; 

7 


THE ‘BOOK OF JUBILEES *46, ‘13—48. 2 


unto our enemies and get them up out of our land, for their hearts and faces are towards the land 
14 of Canaan.’ And he set over them taskmasters to afflict them with slavery ; and they built strong 
cities for Pharaoh, Pithom, and Raamses and they built all the walls and all the fortifications which 
,- had fallen in the cities of Egypt. And they made them serve with rigour, and the more they dealt 
16 evilly with them, the more they increased and multiplied. And the people of Egypt abominated the 
children of Israel. 


Birth of Moses, 1-4. Adopted by Pharaoh's daughter, 5-9. Slays an Egyptian and flees (into 
Midian), 10-12.. (Cf. Exod. i. 22; ii. 2-15.) 


And in the seventh week, in the seventh year, in the forty-seventh jubilee, thy father went forth 
from the land of Canaan, and thou wast born in the fourth week, in the sixth year thereof, in the 

, forty-eighth jubilee ; this was the time of tribulation on the children of Israel. And Pharaoh, king 
~ of Egypt, issued a command regarding them that they should cast all their male children which were 
born into the river. And they cast them in for seven months until the day that thou wast born. 

, And thy mother hid thee for three months, and they told regarding her. And she made an ark for 
thee, and covered it with pitch and asphalt, and placed it in the flags on the bank of the river, and 
she placed thee in it seven days, and thy mother came by night and suckled thee, and by day 

~ Miriam, thy sister, guarded thee from the birds. And in those days Tharmuth, the daughter of 
° Pharaoh, came to bathe in the river, and she heard thy voice crying, and she told her maidens to 
« bring thee forth, and they brought thee unto her. And she took thee out of the ark, and she had 
compassion on thee. And thy sister said unto her: ‘Shall I go and call unto thee one of the 

g Hebrew women to nurse and suckle this babe for thee?’ And she said (unto her): ‘Go.’ And she 
9 went and called thy mother Jochebed, and she gave her wages, and she nursed thee. And afterwards, 
when thou wast grown up, they brought thee unto the daughter of Pharaoh, and thou didst become 
her son, and Amram thy father taught thee writing, and after thou hadst completed three weeks 
ro they brought thee into the royal court. And thou wast three weeks of years at court until the time 
when thou didst go forth from the royal court and didst see an Egyptian smiting thy friend who was 

rx Of the children of Israel, and thou didst slay him and hide him in the sand. And on the second day 
thou didst find two of the children of Israel striving together, and thou didst say to him who was 
,, doing the wrong: ‘Why dost thou smite thy brother?’ And he was angry and indignant, and said : 
~ ‘Who made thee a prince and a judge over us? Thinkest thou to kill me as thou killedst the 
Egyptian yesterday?’ And thou didst fear and flee on account of these words. 


Moses returns from Midian to Egypt. Mastémd seeks to slay him on the way, 1-3. The ten plagues, 
4-11. Israel goes forth out of Egypt: the destruction of the Egyptians on the Red Sea, 12-19. 
(Ciabiscod. i.1.5* IV 10, 20s. vil, seqq.) 


48 , . ‘nd in the sixth year of the third week of the forty-ninth jubilee thou didst depart and dwell (in 
the land of Midian) five weeks and one year. And thou didst return into Egypt in the second week 
in the second year in the fiftieth jubilee. And thou thyself knowest what He spake unto thee on 
Mount Sinai, and what prince Mastémé desired to do with thee when thou wast returning into Egypt 


13. our enemies: so Lat.; Eth. ‘the enemy’. 
their hearts, &c. Rénsch compares Ezek. xxi. 2. 

14. strong cities: with LXX. Heb. = n5DD “y. 
Raamses : Latin adds ‘et Oon’ from LXX, Exod. i. 11. 


EWAN 2-45 CLOExod) 1 22. 2=4- 

seven months: Cedren. i. 85, quotes it as ‘ten months’. 

- Greek form ‘Thermuthis’ in Syr. Frag. ; Joseph. Azz. ii. 9.5; Syneell. i. 227. 

her maidens: plural only in Syr. of Exod. ii. 5. 

- (unto her) restored from Latin and Exod. ii. 8 

. Jochebed: Exod. vi. 20; Num. xxvi. 59. 

9-12. Exod. ii. 10-14. 

g. daughter = Exod. i. 10. Eth. and Lat. =“ house’. 
"Amram... taught thee writing : not the view of Acts vii. 22 ; Philo, Vet. Mosés, ii. 83. 
three weeks: cf. Joseph. Azz. ii. 9. 6. 


1 Oo 


om 


XLVIII. 1. in the land of Midian: restored from Latin with Exod. iiuse 
one year: read ‘three years’. 
return into Egypt, as Exod. iv. 19. 
2. Author avoids offence by ascribing God’s deed to Mastéma. Cf r Chron, xxi. 1; Jubil il 
text corrupt ; emended from Latin. ee Se (2 Ete 
78 


2303 A.W 
2330A.M 


2351- 
2372 A.M 


2372 AM 


2410 AM 





THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 48, 3—49, 1 
3 (on the way when thou didst meet him at the lodging-place). Did he not with all his power seek to 
slay thee and deliver the Egyptians out of thy hand when he saw that thou wast sent to execute 
4 judgment and vengeance on the Egyptians? And I delivered thee out of his hand, and thou didst 
perform the signs and wonders which thou wast sent to perform in Egypt against Pharaoh, and 
5 against all his house, and against his servants and his people. And the Lord executed a creat 
vengeance on them for Israel’s sake, and smote them through (the plagues of) blood and frogs, lice 
and dog-flies, and malignant boils breaking forth in blains; and their cattle by death; and by hail- 
' stones, thereby He destroyed everything that grew for them; and by locusts which devoured the 
residue which had been left by the hail, and by darkness; and (by the death) of the first-born of 
6 men and animals, and on all their idols the Lord took vengeance and burned them with fire. And 
everything was sent through thy hand, that thou shouldst declare (these things) before they were 
done, and thou didst speak with the king of Egypt before all his servants and before his people. 
7 And everything took place according to thy words; ten great and terrible judgments came on the 
8 land of Egypt that thou mightest execute vengeance on it for Israel. And the Lord did everything 
for Israel’s sake, and according to His covenant, which He had ordained with Abraham that He 
9 would take vengeance on them as they had brought them by force into bondage. And the prince 
Mastéma stood up against thee, and sought to cast thee into the hands of Pharaoh, and he helped 
1° the Egyptian sorcerers, and they stood up and wrought before thee. The evils indeed we permitted 
11 them to work, but the remedies we did not allow to be wrought by their hands. And the Lord 
smote them with malignant ulcers, and they were not able to stand, for we destroyed them so that 
12 they could not perform a single sign. And notwithstanding all (these) signs and wonders the prince 
Mastéma was not put to shame because he took courage and cried to the Egyptians to pursue after 
thee with all the powers of the Egyptians, with their chariots, and with their horses, and with all the 
13 hosts of the peoples of Egypt. And I stood between the, Egyptians and Israel, and we delivered 
Israel out of his hand, and out of the hand of his people, and the Lord brought them through the 
14 midst of the sea as if it were dryland. And all the peoples whom he brought to pursue after Israel, 
the Lord our God cast them into the midst of the sea, into the depths of the abyss beneath the 
children of Israel, even as the people of Egypt had cast their children into the river. He took 
vengeance on 1,000,000 of them, and one thousand strong and energetic men were destroyed on 
15 account of one suckling of the children of thy people which they had thrown into the river. And 
on the fourteenth day and on the fifteenth and on the sixteenth and on the seventeenth and on the 
eighteenth the prince Mastéma was bound and imprisoned behind the children of Israel that he 
16 might not accuse them. And on the nineteenth we let them loose that they might help the 
17 Egyptians and pursue the children of Israel. And he hardened their hearts and made them 
stubborn, and the device was devised by the Lord our God that He might smite the Egyptians and 
18 cast them into the sea. And on the fourteenth we bound him that he might not accuse the children 
of Israel on the day when they asked the Egyptians for vessels and garments, vessels of silver, and 
vessels of gold, and vessels of bronze, in order to despoil the Egyptians in return for the bondage in 
19 which they had forced them to serve. And we did not lead forth the children of Israel from Egypt 
empty handed. 


The Passover: vegulations regarding tts celebration. (CE, fixod 7x! 6,°0,10, 0222-3, 
30, 46; XV. 22.) 


-49; Remember the commandment which the Lord commanded thee concerning the passover, that 
thou shouldst celebrate it in its season on the fourteenth of the first month, that thou shouldst kill 


3. Author explains away meaning of Exod. iv. 24, unlike Jerahmeel xlvii. 1, 2, where the angel seeks to slay Moses 
for not circumcising his son. : 

5. (by the death): Lat. and Eth. omit. 

6. declare (¢enger) emended from ‘ shouldest do’ (Zegéar). 

8. Gen. xv. 13, 14. fe | ene 

g. prince Mastéma : ab here and in verses 12 and 15, and xviii. 9, 12 read ‘prince of the Mastema’. 

Tie exod. 1x. IL. 7 

12. Exod. xiv. 8,9. because. So I read for ‘ until’. 

took courage: @ has ‘took thought’. ‘ : 

13. ad read ‘ between thee and’ before ‘between’; cd add these words after ‘Egyptians and’. ey 

14. Lex talionis: cf. iv. 315 Wisd. xi. 1, 7, 8, xii. 23, xvi. I, xviii. 45 5 Philo, adv. Flacc. xx ; Joseph. contra Ap. i. 13 5 
Exod. xviii. 11; Gen. ix. 6. 

17. Cf. xvii. 16, xlvill. 2. ! 

18. fourteenth: with d and Cedren. i. 87; ad read seventeenth ’. 


MLK. I-21. Exod. xii. 6, 13, 22, 23, 28. 
72 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 49. 1-15 


it before it is evening, and that they should eat it by night on the evening of the fifteenth from the 

2 time of the setting of the sun. For on this night—the beginning of the festival and the beginning 
of the joy—ye were eating the passover in Egypt, when all the powers of Mastéma had been let 
loose to slay all the first-born in the land of Egypt, from the first-born of Pharaoh to the first-born 

3 of the captive maid-servant in the mill, and to the cattle. And this is the sign which the Lord gave 
them: Into every house on the lintels of which they saw the blood of a lamb of the first year, into 
(that) house they should not enter to slay, but should pass by (it), that all those should be saved that 

4 were in the house because the sign of the blood was on its lintels. And the powers of the Lord did 
everything according as the Lord commanded them, and they passed by all the children of Israel, 
and the plague came not upon them to destroy from amongst them any soul either of cattle, or 

5 man, or dog. And the plague was very grievous in Egypt, and there was no house in Egypt 
6 where there was not one dead, and weeping and lamentation. And all Israel was eating the flesh 
of the paschal lamb, and drinking the wine, and was lauding and blessing, and giving thanks to 
the Lord God of their fathers, and was ready to go forth from under the yoke of Egypt, and from 

7 the evil bondage. And remember thou this day all the days of thy life, and observe it from year to 
year all the days of thy life, once a year, on its day, according to all the law thereof, and do not 

8 adjourn (it) from day to day, or from month to month. For it is an eternal ordinance, and engraven 
on the heavenly tablets regarding all the children of Israel that they should observe it every year on 
its day once a year, throughout all their generations ; and there is no limit of days, for this is ordained 

9 for ever. And the man who is free from uncleanness, and does not come to observe it on occasion 
of its day, so as to bring an acceptable offering before the Lord, and to eat and to drink before the 
Lord on the day of its festival, that man who is clean and close at hand shall be cut off: because 
he offered not the oblation of the Lord in its appointed season, he shall take the guilt upon himself. 
10 Let the children of Israel come and observe the passover on the day ofits fixed time, on the fourteenth 
day of the first month, between the evenings, from the third part of the day to the third part of 
11 the night, for two portions of the day are given to the light, and a third part to the evening. This 
12 is that which the Lord commanded thee that thou shouldst observe it between the evenings. And 
it is not permissible to slay it during any period of the light, but during the period bordering on the 
evening, and let them eat it at the time of the evening until the third part of the night, and 
whatever is left over of all its flesh from the third part of the night and onwards, let them burn 
13 it with fire. And they shall not cook it with water, nor shall they eat it raw, but roast on the 
fire: they shall eat it with diligence, its head with the inwards thereof and its feet they shall roast 
with fire, and not break any bone thereof; for tof the children of Israel no bone shall be crushedf. 
™4 For this reason the Lord commanded the children of Israel to observe the passover on the day of its 
fixed time, and they shall not break a bone thereof; for it is a festival day, and a day commanded, 
and there may be no passing over from day to day, and month to month, but on the day of its 
‘5 festival let it be observed. And do thou command the children of Israel to observe the passover 


2. See notes on xlvili. 17, x. 8, &c. 

Bet. Exod, xii:-30; 

6. drinking the wine: first mention of this practice at the Passover. 

7-8. Cf. vi. 20, 22. 

8. regarding all = /akuécl/émié emended with Lat. from /a‘c/a. 

g. Cf. Numb. ix. 13. Explained in Pesach. ix. 4. 

10, Exod. xii. 6. 

12. Slay it . . . during the period (or ‘time’) bordering on the evening. According to our text the Passover 
victim might be slain ‘ during the period bordering on the evening’. This is the meaning it attaches to the phrase 
‘between the evenings’ (D2Y P32). It corresponds well with Deut. xvi. 6, which gives directions for the sacrificing 
of the passover ‘at even, at the going down of the sun’. But in ver. 10 of our text, a wider definition is given— from 
the third part of the day to the third part of the night.’—The Pharisees and the Sadducees differed in the interpretation 
of the phrase ‘ between the evenings’. The former said it meant from the time when the sun inclined towards his 
setting till his final disappearance, i.e. from 3 to 6 p.m., but according to the latter it was the time between actual 
sunset and darkness, i.e. 6 and 7 p.m. (Pesachim v. 1). The hours (the 9th to the 11th) assigned by Josephus (Be//. 
Lud. vi. 9. 3) agree with the Pharisaic determination (@sovow pév dd evdrns Spas péxpis evdexdtns). If then we combine 
the statements in verses Io and 12 of our text we may infer that the slaughtering of the victim might take place any 
time during ‘the third part of the day’ before sunset ; and this harmonizes on the whole with the rabbinic tradition. 
The Samaritans and Karaite Jews support the usage of the Sadducees in limiting the act of sacrificing to the hour 
between sunset and complete darkness. 

eat it at the time of the evening until the third part of the night. Night was divided into three parts : 6 to 
10 p.m., IO p.m. to 2 a.m., and 2 to6a.m. Hence the time for eating seems to be from 6 to Io p.m. The rabbinic 
rule fixed midnight as the hour when the eating must be concluded (Berachoth i. 1; Pesach. x. 9). 
13. they shall eat it: emended with Lat. 
tof the children ... +. The Latin seems better : ‘non erit tribulatio in filiis Istrahel in die hac.’ 
15. No evil will come in the year of a Passover rightly performed. 


80 








| 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 49. rs—50. 8 


throughout their days, every year, once a year on the day of its fixed time, and it shall come for 
a memorial well pleasing before the Lord, and no plague shall come upon them to slay or to smite 
in that year in which they celebrate the passover in its season in every respect according to His 
16 command, And they shall not eat it outside the sanctuary of the Lord, but before the sanctuary of 
the Lord, and all the people of the congregation of Israel shall celebrate it in its appointed season. 
17 And every man who has come upon its day shall eat it in the sanctuary of your God before the Lord 
from twenty years old and upward ; for thus is it’ written and ordained that they should eat it 
18 in the sanctuary of the Lord. And when the children of Israel come into the land which they 
are to possess, into the land of Canaan, and set up the tabernacle of the Lord in the midst of 
the land in one of their tribes until the sanctuary of the Lord has been built in the land, let them 
come and celebrate the passover in the midst of the tabernacle of the Lord, and let them slay it 
19 before the Lord from year to year. And in the days when the house has been built in the name of 
the Lord in the land of their inheritance, they shall go there and slay the passover in the evening, at 
20 sunset, at the third part of the day. And they shall offer its blood on the threshold of the altar, 
and shall place its fat on the fire which is upon the altar, and they shall eat its flesh roasted 
>1 with fire in the court of the house which has been sanctified in the name of the Lord. And 
they may not celebrate the passover in their cities, nor in any place save before the tabernacle of the 
Lord, or before His house where His name hath dwelt; and they shall not go astray from the Lord. 
22 And do thou, Moses, command the children of Israel to observe the ordinances of the passover, as it 
was commanded unto thee; declare thou unto them every year tand the day of its days, and} the 
festival of unleavened bread, that they should eat unleavened bread seven days, (and) that they 
should observe its festival, and that they bring an oblation every day during those seven days of 
23 joy before the Lord on the altar of your God. For ye celebrated this festival with haste when 
ye went forth from Egypt till ye entered into the wilderness of Shur ; for on the shore of the sea ye 
completed it. 


Laws regarding the jubilees, 1-5, and the Sabbath, 6-13. 


5Q 1: And after this law I made known to thee the days of the Sabbaths in the desert of Sin[ai], which 
2 


is between Elim and Sinai. And I told thee of the Sabbaths of the land on Mount Sinai, and I told 
thee of the jubilee years in the sabbaths of years: but the year thereof have I not told thee till ye 
enter the land which ye are to possess. And the land also shall keep its sabbaths while they dwell 
upon it, and they shall know the jubilee year. Wherefore I have ordained for thee the year-weeks 
and the years and the jubilees: there are forty-nine jubilees from the days of Adam until this day, 
and one week and two years: and there are yet forty years to come (lit. ‘ distant’) for learning the 
commandments of the Lord, until they pass over into the land of Canaan, crossing the Jordan to the 
west. And the jubilees shall pass by, until Israel is cleansed from all guilt of fornication, and 
uncleanness, and pollution, and sin, and error, and dwells with confidence in all the land, and there 
shall be no more a Satan or any evil one, and the land shall be clean from that time for evermore. 
6 And behold the commandment regarding the Sabbaths—I have written (them) down for thee— 
7 and all the judgments of its laws. Six days shalt thou labour, but on the seventh day is the Sabbath 
of the Lord your God. In it ye shall do no manner of work, ye and your sons, and your men- 
8 servants and your maid-servants, and all your cattle and the sojourner also who is with you. And 
the man that does any work on it shall die: whoever desecrates that day, whoever lies with (his) 


-& oO 


or 


17. from twenty years old (Exod. xxx. 14, Numb. i. 32). Rabbis said fourteen. 

20. Eat its flesh : . . in the court of the house, &c. This direction can be justified by an appeal to Deut. xvi. 7 
(cf. 6) ‘thou shalt eat it in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose’. But the Mishnah extended this privilege 
to Jerusalem at large (Sebach. v. 8; Makkoth iii. 3). This extension was necessitated by the vast multitudes which 
came up to this feast (cf. Joseph. Be//, Tita, Vie 9» 3, iis 14+ 3)- 

21. Based on Deut. xvi. 5 (LXX). 

nor. Eth. reads ‘and’ but Latin omits. 

go astray from the Lord; Zeph. 1. 6. ig | : 
22. tand the day of its days, andt—Latin 7 tempore dierum suorum, ‘ during its days. 
23. Cf. Exod. xii. 11. 

Shur: from Exod. xv. 22. 


1. Cf. Exod. xvi. 3. Sinai, corrupt for Sin. 

. Cf, Lev. xxv. 8. 

. Cf. Lev. xxvi. 34. é ; LP ; ; : 

‘Jubilees’ are periods of forty-nine years in our author's opinion ; of fifty in most Jewish writers. 

Cf. xxiii. 26-3. 

. Exod, xx. 9; 10. h 

' The man that does any work on it shall die. 
Ity fe d every breach of the Sabbath. k : F 

Seta hoewer ties with (his) wife. This law sprang probably from the fanatical period referred to in Sanh. 46 @, 


1105-2 8r G 


This statement found in Exod. xxxv. 2 makes death the 


SONA BWD 


2410 A.M. 
2450 A.M. 


THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 50. 8-13 


wife, or whoever says he will do something on it, that he will set out on a journey thereon in regard 
to any buying or selling: and whoever draws water thereon which he had not prepared for himself 
on the sixth day, and whoever takes up any burden to carry it out of his tent or out of his house 
9 shall die. Ye shall do no work whatever on the Sabbath day save what ye have prepared for your- 
selves on the sixth day, so as to eat, and drink, and rest, and keep Sabbath from all work on that 
day, and to bless the Lord your God, who has given you a day of festival and a holy day: and 
10 a day of the holy kingdom for all Israel is this day among their days for ever. For great is the 
honour which the Lord has given to Israel that they should eat and drink and be satisfied on this 
festival day, and rest thereon from all labour which belongs to the labour of the children of men, 
save burning frankincense and bringing oblations and sacrifices before the Lord for days and for 
11 Sabbaths. This work alone shall be done on the Sabbath-days in the sanctuary of the Lord your 
God; that they may atone for Israel with sacrifice continually from day to day for a memorial well- 
pleasing before the Lord, and that He may receive them always from day to day according as thou 
12 hast been commanded. And every man who does any work thereon, or goes a journey, or tills (his) 
farm, whether in his house or any other place, and whoever lights a fire, or rides on any beast, or 
travels by ship on the sea, and whoever strikes or kills anything, or slaughters a beast or a bird, or 
13 whoever catches an animal or a bird or a fish, or whoever fasts or makes war on the Sabbaths: The 
man who does any of these things on the Sabbath shall die, so that the children of Israel shall 
observe the Sabbaths according to the commandments regarding the Sabbaths of the land, as it is 
written in the tablets, which He gave into my hands that I should write out for thee the laws of the 
seasons, and the seasons according to the division of their days. 


Herewith is completed the account of the division of the days. 


the period of the Syro-Grecian domination, when a man was put to death for riding a horse. That certain regulations 
of this nature existed we must infer from our text, as well as from the Talmudic treatise Nidda 38a. Early Chasids 
refrained from cohabitation with their wives from the close of the Sabbath to the fourth day of the week, in order that 
their wives might not desecrate the Sabbath 271 to 273 days later by child-bearing. Against this ascetic attitude towards 
marriage a reaction set in which resulted in the laws of the Mishnah on this subject. Thus the cohabitation of husband 
and wife is enjoined on the Sabbath in Nedar iii. 10, viii. 6, while in Baba kamma 82a it is stated that one of the 
ordinances instituted by Ezra directed that a man should ‘eat garlic’ (i.e. cohabit) on the eve of the Sabbath. The 
severer usage. is followed by the modern Samaritans (Eichhorn’s Repertorium, xiii. 257, 282; de Sacy, WVotices et 
extraits de la Bible, xii. 175: also by the Abyssinian Falashas (Univ. Jsr. 1851, p. 482) and the Karaite Jews (see 
Singer, pp. 198-9 note). The Karaite Jews inferred the unlawfulness of cohabitation on the Sabbath from a literal 
interpretation of Exod. xxxiv. 21. As regards the usage of the ancient Samaritans there has been some diversity of 
opinion. Karo (Beer, Buch der Jubilien, p. 54) argues that the text in Nedar iii. 10 speaks for the existence of the 
strict law having existed among the Samaritans at a date anterior to the time of the Karaite Jews, but this is disputed 
by Frankel (Aznjfluss d. pal. Exeg. 252 seq.). 

That he will set out on a journey thereon (4¢). ac omit ‘thereon’. This command was derived from Exod. 
xvi. 29, where the people are bidden to ‘abide every man in his place . . . on the seventh day’ and not to go in quest 
of manna. Permission was given to goa distance of 2,000 cubits (Erubin iv. 3,1,v. 7), which was called the ‘Sabbath 
limit’ (NAwWN DINN) or simply ‘limit’ (01), or Sabbath-day’s journey (ca8Bdrov 68ds, Acts i. 12). See Lightfoot, 
Exercitations on the Acts, i. 12; Buxtorf and Levy’s Lexicons on DINN; Schiirer, Westory of the New Testament 
Ti eater 2. 102-3. Josephus (Azz. xiii. 8. 4) speaks of this halacha: ov« @£eore 8 jpiv ovre ois oaBBarots ovr’ ev rH 
€optH Odevev. 

In regard to any buying or selling. All the MSS. prefix ‘and’. The true text is uncertain and probably 
transposed. Buying and selling are prohibited in Neh. x. 31, xiii. 16, 17. 

whoever draws water. This was forbidden by the Karaite Jews (Jost, Gesch. d. Judenth. ii. 304, quoted by 
Singer, p. 199 note). 

which he had not prepared on the sixth day. This clause comes in awkwardly.. A command against 
“ eating or drinking anything’ may have originally preceded this clause in our text. Cf. ii. 30, note. 

takes up any burden to carry it, &c. See note on ii. 29. This is the thirty-ninth form of work forbidden in 
the treatise Shabbath. Ifa man dropped his false teeth it would be unlawful to lift and carry them; for they would 
constitute a ‘burden’. Similarly as much ink as would suffice for writing two letters (Edersheim, Life and Times of 
Jesus the Messiah,* ii. 782, 784). : 

12. tills (his) farm: cf. Exod. xxxiv. 21; Shabb. vii. 2. 

lights a fire: forbidden in Exod. xxxv. 3 ; Numb. xv. 32, 33. 

rides on any beast: cf. Sanh. 46a; Beza v. 2. 

strikes or kills anything: cf. Shabb. vii. 2. 

fasts: cf. Judith, viii. 6. 

makes war: cf. Shabb. vi. 2,4; 1 Macc. ii. 31-8; 2 Macc. vi. 11, xv. 1 ; Joseph. A xz. xiii, 12. 4, xiv. 4. 2. Partially 
superseded in 1 Macc. ii. 41. It was a constant hindrance to the Jews, especially at Pompey’s siege of Jerusalem 
(Joseph. Anz. xiv. 4. 2), but was once abandoned with success in the final war (Joseph. Bell. ii. 19. 2). 2 


82 





ited LER Ob VARISTEAS 


INTRODUCTION 


§1. THE CHARACTER OF THE EPISTLE. 


THE Epistle claims to be a contemporary record, written with the personal knowledge of an 
eye-witness, by Aristeas, an officer at the court of Ptolemy Philadelphus (285-247 B.C.), to his 
brother Philocrates, giving an account of the circumstances which led up to the composition of the 
LXX version of the Jewish law.. The events with which it deals are supposed to take place during 
the lifetime of Queen Arsinoe (§ 41). As Arsinoe became Queen about 278 B.C. and died in 
270 B.C., these dates provide us with the time limits within which the story must be placed. If the 
allusion to the royal children in § 41 is not an anachronism, but contains a reference to the fact that 
Arsinoe, finding herself childless, adopted the offspring of her predecessor, the date must be fixed 
towards the end of this period.! The writer strives to give us the impression that the Epistle was 
composed almost immediately after the occurrence of the events which it records. 

This claim, however, cannot be sustained. There are many reasons which make it quite 
certain that the Epistle could not have been written by a Greek Court-official in the time of 
Ptolemy Philadelphus. 

1. On two occasions the writer makes statements which betray the fact that he belongs to a later 
age. In § 28 he speaks of the manner in which ‘the affairs of state used to be carried out by these 
Egyptian kings’ and in § 182, after referring to the arrangement which was made for the entertain- 
ment of guests at court in the time of Philadelphus, he adds the significant words, ‘it is an arrange- 
ment which is still maintained to-day’. 

2. The writer is guilty of several serious historical anachronisms. 

(2) He represents Demetrius of Phalerum as head of the library of Alexandria and ascribes 
the translation of the law to his influence and initiative (§§ 9-11 ct passim). The evidence, however, 
proves quite conclusively that Demetrius was banished by Philadelphus at the commencement of 
his reign (c. 283 B.C.) for supporting the claim of Keraunos to the throne, and died shortly afterwards 
(see note on § 9). 

(5) In § 180 Aristeas makes Philadelphus allude to a ‘naval victory over Antigonus’. If the 
reference is to the battle of Kos (258 B.C.), he is guilty not only of turning a defeat into a victory, 
but also of antedating the event by some twenty years or so. If, as many scholars suppose, the 
reference is to the battle of Andros, the former objection is removed (for Egypt was victorious at 
Andros) but the latter difficulty is intensified, for the battle was not fought till at any rate the last 
year of the reign of Philadelphus (247 B. c.) and possibly not till the beginning of the reign of his 
successor. 

(c) In § 201 Menedemus the philosopher is represented as being present at the banquet and 
taking part in the discussion. Menedemus lived at Eretria and we have no evidence that he ever 
visited Alexandria. Moreover, he probably died in 277 B.C.,a year or two before the time when 
Aristeas introduces him into the narrative. The references to Theopompus (§ 314) and Theodektes 
(§ 316) seem to be equally impossible, and the stories which are told about them must be regarded 
as purely fictitious. 

(d) At times the Epistle assumes the existence of the LXX before the translation was made. 
In §&§ 57-8 the specifications of the table which Philadelphus sent as a present to Eleazar are taken 
from the LXX, which differs very considerably from the Hebrew. In § 228 a phrase from the LXX 
of Deut. xiii. 6 is put into the mouth of one of the Jewish envoys. In the description of the dress 
of the High Priest ($$ 96-9) many terms are used from the LXX of Exodus xxviii and xxix. 


1 Epiphanius gives the date as the 7th year of Philadelphus ‘more or less’; other ecclesiastical writers give the 
2nd 17th, 19th, or 20th year. ; 
: 83 G 2 


THE LETEER OF ARTISTES 


In § 155 there is a conflate quotation made up of phrases taken from the LXX of two different 
passages in Deuteronomy. And—most important of all—the law is spoken of as Scripture (§$ 155 
168). : cdr 
a 3. he writer of the Epistle could not have been a Greek courtier, as he claims to be in § 16. 
To write under a Greek mask was a favourite literary device of Jewish apologists. We have 
examples of it in the Sibylline books, in pseudo-Hecataeus, and in the forged additions which were 
made to the Greek poets (Schiirer, ET ii. 3, p. 294 ff.). The whole tone of the letter from 
beginning to end proves conclusively that its author was a Jew and that the Greek réle was assumed 

to strengthen the force of the argument and commend it to non-Jewish readers. — 

The Epistle of Aristeas therefore must not, in spite of its author's asseverations, be regarded as 
a historical document. It is really a piece of apologetic—‘a panegyric’ as Schiirer describes it— 
‘upon Jewish law, Jewish wisdom, and the Jewish name in general’. We may compare it to 
a modern historical novel written with a purpose. It is only valuable because it indicates the 
views which were held at the time when it was written with regard to the origin of the LXX. 

It may be added that the genuineness and authenticity of the letter were first questioned by 
Ludovicus de Vives in his commentary on Aug. de Civ. Det xviii. 4 (1522), and subsequently by 
Scaliger. Ussher and Voss defended the letter, but its claim to belong to the period of Philadelphus 
was finally destroyed by Humphry Hody (1684-1705), though unsuccessful attempts were made 
later on by Grinfield in his Apology for the LXX (1850) and by Oeconomus in his mept rav o 
épunvevtay (Athens, 1844-9) to resuscitate its reputation, 


§ 2.. THE CONTENTS AND PURPOSE OF THE EPISTLE. 


The contents of the Epistle may be analysed as follows :— 
I, Introduction, dedicating the book to Philocrates, $$ 1-8. 


II. Preliminary proceedings, $$ 9-51. 
(a) The proposal of Demetrius, $$ 9-12. 
(4) The emancipation of the Jewish captives, $$ 13-28. 
(c) The letter of Philadelphus to Eleazar, $$ 29-40. 
(d) The reply of Eleazar, §§ 41-6. 
(e) The names of the translators, $$ 47-50. 

III. The description of the royal presents to Eleazar, §§ 52-82. 

(2) The sacred table, $§ 52-72. 
(0) The other presents, §$ 73-82. 


IV. The description of Jerusalem, §$ 83-120. 
(2) The temple, including the arrangements for the water supply, §$ 83-91. 
(0) The ministration of the priests and of Eleazar in particular, §§ 92-9. 
(c) The Akra or citadel, §§ 100-4. 
(dz) A brief description of the city itself, §§ 105-6. 
(e) A description of the country districts of Palestine, §$ 107-20. 

V. Eleazar’s farewell to the translators, §§ 120-7. 
VI. Eleazar’s defence of the Jewish law, §§ 128-71. 
VII. The reception of the translators at Alexandria, §§ 172-86. 


VIII. The banquet, and the table-talk of the translators. The 72 questions and answers, 
§$ 187-300. 


IX. The translation and reception of the law, §§ 301-22, 
The apologetic interest of the Epistle reveals itself in the following directions :— 


1. The account of the liberation of the Jewish captives by Ptolemy Philadelphus indicates that 
one of the aims of the author was to vindicate the right of the Jewish people to political liberty. 
The writer holds up the magnanimity of the king as a mirror to his own age and cites it as an 
illustration of the attitude which ought to be adopted by rulers towards the Jewish race. The 
appeal of Aristeas and Sosibius to Philadelphus is really directed to the authorities of the writer’s 
own day. 

2, The vindication of the purpose and function of the Jewish law forms the theme of one of the 
most important sections of the book (§§ 128-71). The writer admits that there were many enact- 

e3) 84 





® 


INTRODUCTION 


ments in the Mosaic code which seemed incomprehensible to the ordinary mind, e.g. the distinction 
between clean and unclean meats. The method by which he justifies these injunctions is ingenious 
and interesting. For the first time in the history of Jewish apologetic he resorts to the allegorical 


method for which Alexandria in later times became so famous. He rejects ‘the degrading notion’ 


that the regulations were made in the interests of the animals themselves (§ 144) and insists that they 
are merely ‘symbols’, drawn up to teach men lessons of righteousness (§ 151). 

_ 3. The long section, which relates the table-talk between Philadelphus and his guests, is intro- 
duced to exemplify the wisdom, moral insight, intellectual ability, and philosophical acumen of the 
leaders of the Jewish people. The high commendation which is given to the answers by the 
philosophers at the court and especially by Menedemus (§§ 200, 201) serves to exalt the endowments 
of the Jewish translators at the expense of other teachers. The writer, however, is aware that he has 
overdone the encomium on Jewish wisdom, for he adds: ‘I suppose it will seem incredible to those 
who will read my narrative’, § 296. The writer’s argument is in line with the theory commonly 
adopted by Jewish apologists, that the philosophers of Greece derived their wisdom from the 
teaching of Moses. 

4. There are other signs, too, that the Epistle was intended by its author to advocate the Jewish 
propaganda :— 

(2) In § 16 an attempt is made to show that the God of the Jews is to be identified with the 
being ‘ whom all men worship ’, though they call him by other names. 

(0) The idealized picture of Eleazar and the Jewish priests in §§ 92-9 is obviously intended to 
affect the mind of the reader. ‘I am convinced’, writes Aristeas, ‘that any man who takes part in the 
spectacle . . . will be filled with indescribable wonder and be profoundly affected in his mind’, § 99. 

(c) The stamp of approval which is given to the LXX in § 310 is intended to vindicate it against 
the attacks of critics and secure appreciation for it in the minds of Greek readers. 

It is not too much to say that the writer’s one object is to demonstrate the supremacy of the 
Jewish people—the Jewish priesthood, the Jewish law, the Jewish philosophy, and the Jewish Bible. 


013. DHE DATE OF THE, EPISTLE. 


The date of the Epistle constitutes an almost insoluble problem. There are three main 
theories—(1) Schiirer holds that it was written about 200 B.C.; (2) Wendland places it between 
96-93 B.C.; (3) Graetz and Willrich assign it to the age of Caligula (later than 33 A.D.) 

The arguments upon which Schiirer relies are as follows:—(1) The reference to the translation 
of the LXX in Aristobulus (170-150 B.C.). The words of Aristobulus as reported by Eusebius 
(Praep. Evang. xiii. 12. 2) are as follows :—7 5€ Gdn Epynveta tGv d1a Tod vopov TdvTwy ent Tod Tpocayo- 
pevdévtos Didadérgov Baciréas. ... Anuntpiov ro§ Padnpéws Tpaypatevoapévov Ta epi ToUTwy. * The com- 
plete translation of the whole of the Jewish law was made in the time of the king who was surnamed 
Philadelphus, and was due to the efforts of Demetrius of Phalerum.’ Schiirer argues that the 
introduction of the anachronism with regard to Demetrius makes it certain that Aristobulus is 
dependent upon Aristeas, and as Aristobulus is dated about 170-150 B.C., Aristeas must be written 
some years earlier. The argument of Schiirer is corroborated to some extent by the interesting 
parallel between Aristeas § 306 and a passage of Aristobulus quoted in Eusebius, Praep. 
Evang. Vili. 10. 377 a 


Aristeas. Aristobulus. 


an an lal 4 t ‘ n > ‘\ lat ~ , ‘\ Q 
TAQ yap evepyela Oud TOV KELPWV YLVETAL. whi doe © 2 + THV aoa lo XUV TOV avOporrev Kal TAS 
> a 
EVEPYELas €V TALS KEPOLV ELL. 


Unfortunately for Schiirer, however, the genuineness of these quotations, and indeed of the whole 
work attributed to Aristobulus, has been seriously questioned by some modern scholars, e.g. 
Kuenen, Graetz, Joel, L. Cohn, and Wendland. And even if their authenticity be admitted, there 
is nothing to prove that Aristeas must be the earlier of the two writers. It is quite possible that, 
instead of Aristobulus using Aristeas as Schiirer supposes, it may have been Aristeas who used 
Aristobulus. . : : ; : 
(2) Schiirer lays great stress on the political condition of Palestine as described in the Epistle: 
‘A period when the Jewish people were leading a peaceful and prosperous existence under the 
conduct of their high priest and in a relation of very slight dependence upon Egypt, ice. the perzod 
before the conquest of Palestine by the Seleucidae, evidently from the background of the book. There 
is nowhere any allusion to the complications which begin with the Seleucidian conquest. The 


iad 


Jo 


Jovy : ay Slides J qo7 LENO Ory iva Ree © 250 


THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


Jewish people and their high priest appear as almost politically independent. Especially is it 
worthy of remark that the fortress of Jerusalem is in the possession of the Jews (ET ii. 3: 309 f.). 
There would be additional force in Schiirer’s argument if we could rely upon the statement of 
Josephus that during the Maccabean war the Jews razed the Akra to the ground (see note on § 100). 
In view of the fact, however, that Josephus is in conflict with 1 Maccabees and the possibility, which 
G. A. Smith suggests, that Aristeas may not be referring to the original Akra.but to the later Baris, 
the point cannot be pressed. Beh i 5 

The argument would possess considerable weight if it could be proved that the section which 
deals with Palestine was written from the author’s own observations. But if, as Wendland has made 
extremely probable, Aristeas obtained his information second-hand from the writings of Hecataeus, 
the data cannot be used as Schiirer uses them and the ground is cut from underneath his position. 

It is extremely difficult to maintain so early a date as 200 B.C. in view of the internal evidence 
supplied by the Epistle itself. There are a number of points—none of them conclusive in itself, but 
possessing cumulative effect when they are taken together—which seem to render it extremely 
probable that the document belongs to the post-Maccabean period :— 

1. In the list of the seventy-two translators, which is due to the writer's imagination, there are 
many names which are particularly associated with the Maccabean age, e.g. Mattathias, Judas (three 
times), Simon (three times), Jonathan (three times). Moreover, the high priest in Aristeas bears the 
same name as the famous Eleazar who is the hero of 2 Maccabees. The unusual names Chelchias 
(among the 42), Sosibius, and Dositheus are found among the courtiers of the later Ptolemies, 
and possibly the author himself, as Wendland suggests, assumes the name of the later historian 
Aristeas (see note on § 6). : 

2. The evidence of the Papyri affords a clear presumption in favour of the later date. Three 
points seem to have been made out :— 

(2) The omission of the pronoun in the formula éav ¢atvnra: does not occur on the Papyri till 
163 B.C. (see note on § 32). . 

(6) Strack has proved that while the title dpyicwparopdAa€g is often found in the singular in the 
Papyri of the third cent. B.c., the plural form which is used in § 40 of Aristeas does not occur till 
about 145 B.C. 

(c) The use of the word ‘friends’ as a court title is not found till the Papyri of the period of 
Ptolemy V (205-182 B.C.), see note on § 45.1 

3. Certain statements of the Epistle seem to bear out the same point. To quote Thackeray: 
‘The alleged widespread interest in the Jewish law ($128) and the false views which were in 
circulation about it (§ 144), the pointed reference to a difference between the Greek text and the 
Hebrew in a passage of Exodus (§ 57), and the probable allusion to attempts which had been made 
to improve on the rendering of the translators—all these appear to indicate a date further removed 
from the age of Philadelphus than that which Schiirer would adopt. 

If Schiirer’s view is too early, the date assigned to the Epistle by ? Graetz and Willrich is too 
late. It is difficult to see how the document could have sufficiently established its reputation to be 
used by Philo and Josephus, if it had been composed as late as 33 B.C. Moreover, the description of 
Palestine, even though it is borrowed from Hecataeus, could scarcely have been written in its present 
form after the Roman occupation of Palestine. The island of Pharos, too, is described as inhabited. 
The conquest of Egypt by Julius Caesar rendered it desolate (Strabo xvii. 6). 

The evidence seems to suggest a date between 130 and 70 B.c. May we go further with 
Wendland and fix upon a definite point within this period? The grounds upon which Wendland 
decides for 96-93 B.C. are as follows :—In § 115 the ports of Ascalon, Joppa, Gaza, and Ptolemais 
are said to be in possession of the Jews. Joppa was conquered about 146 B.C., but Gaza was not 
captured till 96 B.c., and Ascalon and Ptolemais never became Jewish territory. It is of course the 
capture of Gaza which is the determining point with Wendland. It is quite conceivable, however, 
that the author, writing at an earlier time, may have made the same mistake about Gaza as he did 
about Ptolemais and Ascalon. 

There are one or two facts, however, which it seems difficult to reconcile with a date within the 
period 130-70 B.C. Twice in the Epistle the law is spoken of as Scripture. There seems to be no 
trace of the application of the term Scripture to the Old Testament before the commencement of the 
Christian era. _ We have no other instance either of the application of the allegorical method in the 
manner in which it is used in Aristeas before that date. 


* Too much stress should not perhaps be laid on this point as th I in- i 
rE area p p p as the term may possibly be used in- the technical 


* For the arguments of Graetz see notes on §§ 28, 167. Drummond, Philo, 233 ff. 
86 


INTRODUCTION 


We seem to have therefore one set of facts, 


{ e.g. the Ptolemaic background and the absence of 
any reference to the Roman occupation of Pal 


estine, which compel us to date the Epistle before 
7° B.C.,and another set of facts which suggest that it could not have Originated till the Christian era. 


The solution of the problem will probably be found in some such hypothesis as the following. 
The Epistle was issued in its present form at the commencement of the Christian era, possibly as 
late as the date suggested by Graetz and Willrich—but a large part of it—possibly the whole 
except the law section, §§ 128-71—was in existence before and belongs to the period 130-70 B.C. 


The law section is quite separate from the rest of the book and might easily have been inserted. It — 


may also be found, when a detailed comparison has been made between Aristeas and 2 and 
3 Maccabees, that other sections or at any rate sentences are the work of the later editor. Nothing 
except some form of the partition theory seems likely to provide the key for the riddle. 


§-4.. THE AUTHOR. 


Nothing is known with regard to the author of the Epistle. We may, however, draw some 
inferences from the book with regard to his personality. We may conclude that (1) he was a Yew, 
This is obvious from the tone and purpose of the book; (2) ke belonged to Alexandria. Lumbroso 
has proved that the acquaintance which the book shows with the technicalities of the Court life of 
the later Ptolemies clearly indicates that it was of Alexandrian origin. The employment of the 
allegorical method of interpreting the law points to the same conclusion. (3) He was a propagandist, 
as is evidenced by the apologetic interest of the book. (4) He belonged to what may be termed 
‘the common sense school of philosophy’. There are no flights of speculation in the book. No 
problems trouble the mind of the author, who is simple and conventional in his treatment of the 
ethical and religious questions which emerge. (5) His attachment and devotion to the Jewish law 
indicate that the author had leanings towards Pharisaism, though it: must be admitted that his 
Pharisaism is not of a pronounced type, except in the section dealing with the Jewish law. 
(6) He was interested (a) in psychology ($$ 155-6) and especially in the psychology of sleep 
($§ 160, 213-16); (0) in political and social problems (passim, see Introduction, § 6), (7) Swete 
has an interesting suggestion that he was a native of Cyprus, based on the fact that his brother 
came from that island, and that the name Aristeas frequently occurs on the Inscriptions found in the 
islands of the Aegean (/ztrod. to L XX. 10). 


§ 5. SOURCES. 


The author claims to write as an eyewitness and consequently gives little indication of the 
sources from which his information was derived. The only indications which he affords us of having 
used other authorities are (1) the quotation from Hecataeus in § 31; (2) his reference to the 
Minutes of Court Proceedings in § 298. We may dismiss the latter at once as an attempt on the part 
of the author to secure credence for his narrative. The allusion to Hecataeus, however, is more 
important, and if Wendland is right, reveals the real source which lies behind the Epistle. The 
quotations which Josephus gives from Hecataeus, though they may be coloured by later tradition 
or even by Josephus himself, indicate that he covered pretty much the same ground as Aristeas in 
his description of Palestine. Similar resemblances are pointed out between Diodorus Siculus, who 
embodied a great deal of Hecataeus in his writings, and our Epistle. Among the points of similarity 
between the statements of Aristeas and what may be assumed to have been said by Hecataeus, 
Wendland mentions the following—(a) the account of the Jewish Diaspora in Egypt, S$ 1 2, 13); (6) 
the comparison between the God of the Jews and Zeus (§ 16); (c) the high praise which is bestowed 
upon agriculture (§ 107 ff.); (d) the description of the Temple and the priesthood at Jerusalem 
(S$ 83 f., 92 f.) ; (e) the description of the produce and agriculture of Palestine (§§ 107-20). 

There are, however, some points of discrepancy between Hecataeus and Aristeas which weaken 
the force of Wendland’s argument ; (a) in § 105 Aristeas describes the extent of the city as 
40 furlongs, while Hecataeus says 50; (2) in § 95 Aristeas estimates the number of Jewish priests at 
700, while Hecataeus puts the figure at 1,500. We may conclude therefore that while it is certain 
that Aristeas made use of Hecataeus, very possibly Wendland has exaggerated the extent of his 
eet table-talk section it is possible that Aristeas made use of a collection of oe 
Sayings’, though whether they were Jewish or Greek cannot be determined. The theologica 
conclusion, which the writer adds, is sometimes forced and fails to fit on to the previous statement. 


87 


THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 


§ 6, THEOLOGY AND ETHICAL TEACHING. 


The Epistle is not directly interested in theological problems. The most interesting features 
are its doctrine of God and its view with regard to the significance of the Jewish law. eed 

1. The conception of God is in many ways quite modern. The most noteworthy point is the 
identification of the God of the Hebrews with Zeus (§ 16). Stress is laid upon Monotheism ($§ 132, 
139). It is through God that ‘all things are endowed with life and come into being (§ 16). ‘His 
power is manifested throughout the Universe and every place is filled with His sovereignty ($ 132). 
He is the source of all the endowments and blessings of life (§ 190). Evil as well as good comes 
from His hand (§ 197). We are dependent upon him for success (§ 196) and for virtue ($ 226 et 
passim). He is the ‘ruler and lord of the Universe’ (§$ 16, 201, 210), 6 Kupietoy amdvtov Oeds 
(§§ 18, 45), the most High God (ueytotos Beds § 19), the great godhead (ueyadn Besrns § 95)s the 
Almighty (6 zavroxpdrop Oeés § 185). Nothing can be hid from Him. ‘None of the things which 
are wrought in secret by men upon the earth escapes His knowledge (§ 132). He sways the lives 
of men (§ 17) and grants answers to their prayers (§ 192). The utmost emphasis is laid upon the 
benignity, the forbearance, and the forgiveness of God, who is described as xwpls dpyijs amdons (§ 254). 
Though there is a general reference to the punishments which He inflicts upon the guilty in § 131, 
yet it is elsewhere asserted that these punishments are mild and that ‘ God instils fear into the minds 
of men by granting reprieves and makes merely a display of the greatness of his power’ (§ 194). 
There is a vigorous attack upon idolatry in §§ 134-7 which is remarkable for its Euhemeristic 
explanation of the origin of idol-worship. ; 

2. The section on the Jewish law is the outstanding feature of the book. The law is described 
as ‘ Scripture’ (§ 168, cf. § 155) and as the ‘Oracles of God’ (§§ 158,177). Its divine origin is 
continually emphasized (§§ 31, 240, 313). It is entirely free from blemish (§ 31), and the utmost 
sanctity attaches to it (§§ 31,171). It is the peculiar protection of Israel, ‘It has fenced us round 
with impregnable ramparts and walls of iron that we might not mingle with the other nations’ 
(§ 139). It contains the moral ideal. ‘The good life consists in keeping the enactments of the 
law’ (§ 127). ‘All its ordinances have been drawn up to assist the quest for virtue and the perfecting 
of character’ (§ 144, cf. §§ 168, 169). Some of its regulations may seem trivial but there is a hidden 
meaning attached to them, and they are all intended to teach a moral lesson (§ 150). By a novel 
application of the allegorical method, Aristeas endeavours to show the real significance of the law 
with regard to unclean food, and he is specially ingenious in his interpretation of the ‘ cloven hoof’ 
and ‘ chewing the cud’ (§§ 150-6). 

3. Aristeas has no doctrine of sin. The word only occurs once and then it is used in quite 
a general sense (§ 192). On more than one occasion, however, he refers to the natural bias toward 
evil in human nature. ‘Every man has a natural tendency towards the pursuit of pleasure ’ ($ 108, 
cf. §§ 222-3). ‘All men are by nature intemperate and inclined to pleasure. Hence injustice 
springs up and a flood of avarice’ (§ 277). 

4. Ethical Teaching. A great part of the book is devoted to ethical teaching but it is very 
largely conventional and possesses very little originality. The utmost emphasis is laid on the con- 
nexion between morality and religion. God is ‘the starting point’ (karapxy) of ethics ($$ 189, 200, 
235). The moral ideal is embodied in the law (§ 127), and it is through the power of God that its 
realization becomes possible. The latter point is brought out clearly in § 236, ‘The soul is so 
constituted that it is able by the divine power alone to receive the good and reject the opposite’ ; 
and again, in § 231, ‘It is the gift of God to be able to do good actions’ (see also §§ 226, 238, 248). 
Virtue is spoken of as a general principle which is ‘the source of good deeds’ (§ 272). The 
Aristotelian virtue of ‘the middle course’ or moderation comes into prominence on several occasions 
(S$ 122, 223, 256). Aversion of ‘the Golden Rule’ in its negative form appears in § 207. There 
is no trace of dualism—in fact the divine origin of the body, and the manifestation of the wisdom of 
God in its various organs and functions are clearly enunciated in §§ 155-6. Stress is’ sometimes 
laid on outward observances and etiquette (§ 246). The teaching shows no sign of asceticism though 
men are constantly warned not to allow themselves to be carried away by passion and impulse and 
urged to a life of self-discipline and self-control (§§ 209, 216, 221, 238, 248, 256). The other virtues 
emphasized are justice and righteousness (‘injustice is equivalent to the deprivation of life’, § 212), 
sobriety, temperance, kindness, duty to parents and children, truthfulness, forbearance, sympathy, 
and forgiveness. Among the vices to be avoided are injustice, pride, intemperance, lying, pleasure- 
seeking, churlishness, anger, and malice. The general teaching of the book may be summed up in 
the words of § 195: ‘The highest good in life is to know that God is the Lord of the Universe and 
that in our finest achievements it is not we who attain success but God who by his power brings all 
things to fulfilment and leads us to the goal’. 

88 





INTRODUCTION 


5. Political Philosophy. Aristeas incidentally draws a picture of the ideal monarch who is 
portrayed as a benevolent despot and a philosopher-king. No other form of government is discussed 
at all. The question is indeed raised as to whether a man born to the purple or a private citizen 
makes the best ruler, but it is left unanswered ($$ 288-90). The absoluteness of the monarchy is 
taken for granted. He has power of life and death over his subjects (§ 253). But he is urged to 
remember that only justice and benevolence, and clemency, and a real desire to promote the welfare 
of his subjects can render his throne secure (§§ 205, 225, and 283). The ideal condition is reached 
‘when subjects continually dwell in a state of peace and justice is speedily administered ’ ($ 291). 
In order to secure this end, the king must study the part he has to play, as actors do (§ 219), and 
strict rules of etiquette must be maintained at Court (§ 246). He must pay careful attention to the 
official reports which are sent up from the provinces, with a view to the correction of abuses and the 
removal of grievances (§ 283). He must take special precautions to see that his subordinates are 
not guilty of injustice or oppression (§ 271), and he must put down informers with a strong hand 
($$ 166, 167). Moreover, he must see to it that his employés are paid a fair wage (§ 258). Above 
all he must remember that he owes his throne to God and only the power of God can keep it secure 
(§ 224). 

the interest which Aristeas takes zz social problems is seen in his views on the following 
points—(a) He advocates mz/d forms of punishment for offenders. ‘If you exhibit clemency,... 
you will turn men from evil and lead them to repentance’ (§ 188, see also § 208). (6) He gives an 
account of the measures which were adopted at Alexandria to prevent the depopulation of the rural 
districts by influx into the towns (§§ 107-11), and his words seem to suggest that the question was 
as acute in his day as it is in modern times. (c) He is impressed with the difficulties that arise 
from the mingling of different races in the big centres, and is opposed to ‘ residence abroad ’ whether 
for rich or poor (§ 249). (ad) He is emphatic in demanding fair wages for artisans (§$ 258-9). 
(e) He holds pronounced views on the inferiority of women, ‘Women are by nature headstrong and 
energetic in the pursuit of their own desires, and subject to sudden changes of opinion through 
fallacious reasoning, and they are essentially weak’ (§ 250). 


§ 7, THE MANUSCRIPTS. 


The two chief authorities on the textual criticism of Aristeas are Wendland and Thackeray, 
both of whom have constructed a modern text of the Epistle. Thackeray’s text was published in 
1900 as an appendix to Swete’s ‘ Introduction to the Old Testament in Greek’, and Wendland’s 
appeared the same year. 

The two texts are not made entirely out of the same materials and unfortunately the Editors 
use a different system of denominating the MSS. in their apparatus criticus. ; 

I propose to state first the MSS. which have been used by both Editors, and then those which 
have been used by one of them, and finally those which do not seem as yet to have been used at all. 


I. The MSS. which have been used by both editors. For the purpose of convenience I give both 
systems of notation. aaa) naa 
Vaticanus 383 
Venice 534 
Palat. 203 
Flor. Laur. 44. 
Barberini iv. 56 
Vaticanus 747 
II. In addition to these Wendland has used 
Monacensis 9 


III. The additional MSS. used by Thackeray are 
Paris 128. ; ; 
Paris 129 
Paris 5 
Paris 950 . : 
Ziirich (Omont 169) : 2 | 
We may include also three MSS. which are the descendants of Paris 128 (A.) 


ORR Us > 
ror 


OOP 


N 


Paris 730° 3 : : : : Dy 
Brit. Mus. Burney 34 . : y ; F. 
Vatican 746 ‘ i ; : ; i: 


89 


THE CLETWER OM ARISTEAS 


and one MS. which is a transcript of Vaticanus 383 (K.) 


Basileensis O. iv. 10. E : : R. 
Partial use has also been made of 
Vaticanus 1668 . ; 3 5 S) 


Mention is made too in the introduction of a MS. which does not appear to be cited in the apparatus 
criticus. ; 
Ottobonianus 32 . 5 : : M. 
IV. Certain other MSS. are known to exist but do not appear to have been collated. 


Atheniensis 389. 
Scorialensis >. 1. 6. 
Monacensis 82. 


V. In addition to the MSS., we have (a) the paraphrase of Josephus which covers the ground of §§ 9-81, 
&c.; (4) the citations in Eusebius, of §§ 9-11, §§ 28-46, §§ 88-90, §§ 128-71. Eusebius is the more valuable 
of the two, because Josephus has taken the trouble to rewrite every sentence, and though he still employs the 
characteristic words and phrases of Aristeas, it is very often impossible to reconstruct the text which he was 
using. The citations in Eusebius are on the whole accurate and reliable; he sometimes abbreviates a little 
and sometimes misquotes, but as Freudenthal says, ‘it is only in extremely rare cases that he inserts additions 
of his own, and the cases in which we meet with fundamental alterations of the text are still more uncommon.’ 
(Quoted by Thackeray, Swete, Zntrod. to LXX, p. 576.) 


Classification of MSS. With regard to the classification of the MSS. Wendland and Thackeray 
are on the whole in agreement, though there is some difference as to details. For the sake of com- 
parison I append a table, giving the two classifications, using the notation of Thackeray in order to 
make the agreements and differences obvious : 


Thackeray. Wendland. 
(2) TB TBPSZ 
Gionbst 1%) CPSZ 
((2) GIM (eae 
srogpell \() HA(DFL)K(R) (0) HKADF 
Group III wanting Cod. Monacensis 9 


It will be seen that the only essential differences are (2) Thackeray puts C (Paris 5) in group I, 
Wendland in group II ; (4) Wendland uses Cod. Monacensis 9 and places it in a group by itself. 

But though the two editors are in general agreement. with regard to Classification, they differ 
with regard to the comparative value of the groups. Wendland holds that the purest text is found 
in Cod. Monacensis 9 which Thackeray does not use at all, the next most important MSS. being T, 
P, and the MSS. of the first group, while the second group is ‘ minoris pretii’. Thackeray, on the 
other hand, maintains that the first group ‘ while presenting a specious text is in reality based upon 
a recension, though in a few passages it has kept the original readings’. In the second group ‘no 
correction has taken place, and though the text which has been handed down is not altogether free 
from corruption, yet the true reading is in most cases to be looked for here’. 

A full account of the different MSS. will be found in Swete (Lutrod. to LX X, 504-16). 

It remains to add the names of scholars who have worked on the emendation of the text. 


C. L. Struve, Opuscula Selecta I, PP- 195-7, 270, 277, 310, 311, 329. Lipsiae, 1854. 
C. G. Cobet, Adyios “Epyijs, vol. i, pp. 177-81. Leyden, 1866. 
Lumbroso, Del? uso delle iscrizioni e det papyri per la critica del libro di Aristea: Atti della R. Accad. 
delle Scienze di Torino, vol. iv, 1868-9, pp. 229-54. 
L. Mendelssohn, Zum Aristeasbriefe: Rhein. Mus. xxx. 187 5, Pp. 631, 632. 
Aristeae quae fertur ad Philocratem Epistulae initium.  Jurievi, 1897. 
Kuiper, De Aristeae ad Philocratem fratrem epistola, Mnemosyne, xx. 1892, pp. 2 52-72. 


§ 8. EDITIONS. 


The earliest edition of Aristeas appeared in the form of a Latin translation by Matthias 
Palmerius which was published at Rome in 1471 in the famous Roman Bible of Suueynheym and 
Pannartz, reprinted at Niirnberg 1475, and issued separately at Erfurt 148 3. The Editio princeps in 
Greek was issued by Simon Schard at Basle in 1 561. Upon what MSS. Schard’s edition rested, is 


go 


INTRODUCTION 


a matter of dispute. We know that Codex Basileensis O. iv. 10 (R) was presented to the library 
at Basle by Schard, but we may be certain that he did not use it as the basis of his text. R is 
a transcript of Vaticanus 383 (K), and it is from this MSS. that Schard’s variae lectiones were taken. 
Wendland thinks that the text was derived from Codex Monacensis 9. 

Up till 1870 all editions were simply reprints of Schard, e.g. the text prefixed by Hody to his 
De Bibliorum Textibus in 1705, or the text in Havercamp’s Yosephus, or in Gallandi’s Bibliotheca 
Patrum (ii. 773-804). 

The modern study of Aristeas began with the publication of Schmidt’s new text, which was 
published in Merx’ Archiv fiir wissenschaftl. Erforschung des Alten Testamentes, vol. i (1870), 
pp. 241-312. Schmidt collated and used the two Paris MSS. known as Band C. In the same 
year a valuable contribution was made to the subject by Prof. Lumbroso, who examined the text of 
Aristeas in the light of the Papyri and published his results in his Recherches sur [ économie politique 
de LEgypte sous les Lagides (Turin, 1870). His critical study and his emendations have already 
been mentioned (Introduction, § 7). Some twenty-five years later Mendelssohn of Dorpat under- 
took the task of examining and collating the MSS. with a view to the construction of a scientific 
text. He only lived, however, to complete the text of $§ 1-51, which was published in 1897 under 
the title Aristeae quae fertur ad Philocratem epistulae initium. The work which he left unfinished 
was taken up by Wendland in Germany and Thackeray in England, whose texts were published 
in 1900 (see Introduction, $ 7). 

Little has been done at present in the way of commentary. The Epistle is still very largely virgin 
soil. The absence of a proper text, and the difficulty of looking up references, since the text was 
not broken up into sections till Wendland’s edition, together with the general neglect of the study 
of non-canonical Jewish literature until the recent revival, have left, what is from many points of 
view a most valuable document, in obscurity. 

The only good translations are Wendland’s in German (Kautzsch ii. 1-30) and Thackeray's in 
English (J Q R xv. 337-91). I regret that I did not discover the latter till my own translation was 
complete, but I have found it extremely helpful in revision, and I have made very considerable use 
of the footnotes, which are more extensive than those in Kautzsch. 

With regard to the general literature on the Epistle, there is not very much to be said. The 
best account of the book (apart from the introductions in Kautzsch and Thackeray) is in Schiirer, 
ET ii. 3. 306-17, where a full account is given of the older literature, and in Drummond, 
Philo, i. pp. 230-42. The only important monographs are Kurz, Aristeae epistula ad Philocraten, 
Bern, 1872; Graetz, Die Abfassungszeit des Pseudo-Aristeas (Monatsschr. fiir Gesch. und Wossensch. 
des F$udenthums, 1876, pp. 289 f., 337 f.); Papageorgios, Ueber den Aristeasbrief, Miinchen, 1880. 
References are found in many Jewish Histories and Introductions to the Old Testament, e. g. 
Noldeke, Freudenthal, Ewald, Hitzig. Amongst the more recent discussions may be mentioned, 
the articles by L. Cohn on the relation between Aristeas and Philo in ewe Sahrbiicher fiir das 
hlass. Alterth, i (1898), 521 ff.,and H. Willrich on the date in Fudaicu, Gottingen, 1900, Ppp. I11-30, 
and the references in Nestle’s article on the ‘Septuagint’, DBH iv. 438 f., and in Swete’s Intro- 
duction to LXX, pp. 10-20, 500-74, and Nestle’s article on Aristeas in Realencyclopadte. 


_ §9. THE INFLUENCE OF ARISTEAS ON LATER LITERATURE. 


A complete catena of ‘Testimonia’ is printed in full in Wendland’s edition of the text of 
Aristeas (pp. 87-166), to which some few addenda have been made by Nestle, DBH iv. 439. It 
will only be possible to mention the more important facts here. 


A. Fewish Literature. 


The earliest authority generally cited is Aristobulus. The relevant passages have already 
been quoted in Introduction § 3. See also note on § 30. The grounds for rejecting the genuineness 
of the fragments ascribed to Aristobulus by Eusebius are given by L. Cohn (Neue Fahrbiicher f. a. 
hlass. Alterthum, i. 8 (1895)) and Wendland (Byzantinische Zeitschrift, vii (1898), 447-9). 

The use of Aristeas by Philo (De Vita Moszs, ii. 5-7) seems clearer, though this too has been 
denied by Cohn (ib. 1898, i. 521). Philo states that Philadelphus, ‘the greatest of the Ptolemies, 
in his anxiety to obtain a translation of the Jewish law, sent ambassadors to the Jewish High Priest, 
and requested him to select men to carry out his wish. The High Priest, thinking that Ptolemy s 
desire was due to divine inspiration, sent some of his most distinguished men to Alexandria. Upon 
their arrival the king féted them, and put questions to them to test their wisdom. Owing to the 
unhealthiness of the town, they were located on the island of Pharos, where the translation was 


gl 


THE LETTER GF ARISTEAS 


made. The principle which governed it was that the translators regarded themselves as pyr’ adedeiv 
TL MnTE TMpocOelvar 1 peTadeivar Svvayevovs, GAAG THy e€ dpyis id€ay Kal Tov TUTOY adTay dvapvAdrrovras 
(cf. Aristeas, $ 311). There is no specific reference to the Epistle, and many of its salient features 
are omitted, but on the whole it seems probable that it formed the basis of Philo’s statement. 

With regard to Josephus there is no possibility of doubt. In Aztig. xii. 2 he gives us a running 
paraphrase of (a) §§ 9-81, (4) §§ 172-87, (c) §§ 201, 293, 294, (2) §§ 301-21. There is a specific 
reference to the book itself—os r@ Bovdopév@ Ta Kata pepos yuOvat TOY ev TO oupTOslw CyTnOEvT@Y civat 
pabeiv dvayvdvte Td ’Apictatov BiBAtov, 6 ovvéypae 51a Tadra (§ TOO in the edition of Niese). It should 
be noted that Josephus always spells the name ’Apioraios, instead of "Aporéas. There are further 
references to the subject matter of the Epistle in Avzzg. i. 10; c. Apion.ii. 44. 


B. Christian. 


There is no clear proof that Aristeas directly influenced the language of the New Testament, 
though there are a few interesting parallels. 


(1) Aristeas § 177 (cf. § 158). Romans iii. 2. 
> a a “~ eo , > ‘\ , lel > 1) \ 4 lal lol 
edyapioT® .. . . TO GEG odds eote TA Adyra TadTa. eriatevOnoav Ta AGyia TOD Geod. 


Hebrews v. 12. 
Td TTOLXELA THS Gpxns TOV Aoyiwv Tod Geod. 
(2) § 280. 2 Tim. iv. 8. 
Geod cot orépavov Sixaocvvyns dedwxoros. 6 THs Sukaoovvys Tépavos. 


This phrase also occurs in the Testaments of the Patriarchs (T. Levi viii. 2). 


(3) §§ 140-1. Matt. vi. 31-3. 
- 0 tots Aourois ov rpdcectW,. . . GAN cioly fi) obv pepysvnonte déyovtes Ti Paywuev; 7 Ti 
avOpwrot Bpwrdv kal wotav Kal oxérys....Tois d¢ map Tiwmev; ... TavTa yap TadTa Ta eOvn emi€ynrovow. . . 


npov év ovdevi tadta AeAdyorar, wept Sé THS Tod Geod  Lyreire d€ tpArov Thy Bacrreiay ; . : 
dvvacreias dv ddov Tod Civ 7 oKéeWs adirois eoriy. 


(4) Compare also the argument of with 
§ 144. 1, Con ined: 
You must not fall into the degrading idea that it Is it for the oxen that God careth, or saith he it 


was for the sake of mice and weasels that Moses altogether for our sake? Yea for our sake it was 
drew up his laws. These ordinances were made for written. 
the sake of righteousness. 


The earliest reference to the translation of the LXX in Patristic literature is found in JUSTIN 
MARTYR (Afol.i. 31), who states that Philadelphus, wishing to obtain a copy of the Hebrew prophets, 
sent to King Herod for the Book. When it arrived, it was found to be unintelligible owing to the 
language, and Philadelphus sent a second request to the King to send translators. 

In the anonymous Cokortatio ad Graecos 13 we find what is probably the first attempt to 
embellish the story. The seventy translators were separated, and placed in cells or huts and 
not allowed to have any communication with each other. Their translations, when compared, 
were found to be in complete agreement, without the slightest variation even of language. The 
writer adds that during a visit to Alexandria, he had been shown the tracks (ré tyvn) of the cells in 
which the translators worked. 

The same legendary element is repeated in almost the same form by IRENAEUS (iii. 21, 2, quoted 
by Eusebius, HZ v. 8. 11) and CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA, Stromatezts i. § 148. . . 

TERTULLIAN (Afolog. c. 18) is the first writer to mention Aristaeus, as he calls him, by name, 

and his version is more sober, but he adds ‘hodie apud Serapeum Ptolomaei bibliothecae cum ipsis 
Hebraicis litteris exhibentur ’. 
The long quotations from the Epistle in the Praeparatio Evangelica of Eusebius have already 
been mentioned (Introduction, § 7). Aristeas (’Apioratos) is described as dvyp Adyios pev ddAws, od 
pay adAd Kat maparvxdy Tols mpaxGetor Kata. tov dedrEpov LroAeuaton (viii. 1. 8), and on one occasion the 
title of the book is given as Ilept rijs ‘Epynvetas 703 rv “lovdalwv vduov (ix. 38), 

EPIPHANIUS (De Mensuris et Ponderibus, 3, p. 155) has a long account of the translation of the 
Hebrew Bible. Though he quotes Aristeas as his authority (as e€€dmxey "Apictaios év ro adrod 
ovvtdyyartt) there are many discrepancies. (1) He gives the number of the books in the Alexandrian 


92 


INTRODUCTION 


library as 54,800 tAciw 7 Adoow. (2) He says that the 72 translators were placed in 36 cells, 
and that their translations were found to be in absolute verbal agreement even in their additions 
and omissions. (3) He inserts two letters from Philadelphus to the teachers in Jerusalem, neither 
of which agrees with the letter to Eleazar in Aristeas, §§ 35 ff., and the second of which contains 
a quotation from Sirach xx. 30 = xli. 14 Onoavpod Kexpyypévov . . . . tls dpédrca ev ayporépors ; 
(4) He adds the information that it was ‘the seventh year of Philadelphus more or less’ when the 
translation was made. Draeseke maintains that Epiphanius drew his information from the lost 
chronicle of Justus of Tiberias. 

JEROME (Praef. in Pentateuch. xxxviii, p. 181) takes a more sober view and rejects the story of 
the separate cells as being incompatible with the accounts of Aristeas and Josephus, ‘nescio quis 
primus auctor septuaginta cellulas Alexandriae mendacio suo exstruxerit ...cum Aristeas... et 
multo post tempore Iosephus nihil tale retulerint, sed in una basilica congregatos contulisse 
~scribant.’ 

The embellishments, however, appear again in the account which is given by Augustine of the 
origin of the LXX, de Civ. Dez, xviii. 42. For other ‘ Testimonia’ see Wendland. 


93 


'FHE “EB PTR ROO Fei ee ee 


1 SINCE I have collected material for a memorable history of my visit to Eleazar the High priest of 
the Jews, and because you, Philocrates, as you lose no opportunity of reminding me, have set great 
store upon receiving an account of the motives and object of my mission, I have attempted to draw 
up a clear exposition of the matter for you, for I perceive that you possess a natural love of learning, 

2 a quality which is the highest possession of man—to be constantly attempting ‘ to add to his stock 
of knowledge and acquirements’ whether through the study of history or by actually participating 
in the events themselves. It is by this means, by taking up into itself the noblest elements, that 
the soul is established in purity, and having fixed its aim on piety, the noblest goal of all, it 
uses this as its infallible guide and so acquires a definite purpose. 

3. It was my devotion to the pursuit of religious knowledge that led me to undertake the embassy to 
the man I have mentioned, who was held in the highest esteem by his own citizens and by others 
both for his virtue and his majesty and who had in his possession documents of the highest value to the 
Jews in his own country and in foreign lands for the interpretation of the divine law, for their 

4 laws are written on leather parchments in Jewish characters. This embassy then I undertook with 
enthusiasm, having first of all found an opportunity of pleading with the king on behalf of the 
Jewish captives who had been transported from Judea to Egypt by the king’s father, when he first 
obtained possession of this city and conquered the land of Egypt. It is worth while that I should tell 

5 you this story, too, since I am convinced that you, with your disposition towards holiness and your 
sympathy with men who are living in accordance with the holy law, will all the more readily listen 
to the account which I purpose to set forth, since you yourself have lately come to us from the 

6 island and are anxious to hear everything that tends to build up the soul. On a former occasion, 


1. Since I have collected. ’A£iAdyou Sinynoews . . . ovverrapérns. Thackeray renders ‘As the story of our 

interview ... is a remarkable one’ —but this does not bring out the full force of cvveorapévys. 
as you lose no opportunity, &c. This translation is based on an emendation of Wendland, who reads zap’ 
éxaota vroutuynoKew for the MSS. map’ éxaora tropipyyoKor which is untranslatable. 

2. to add to his stock of knowledge. As Thackeray points out, ‘these words form an iambic line in Greek and 
are probably a quotation from a lost tragedy.’ He quotes two fragments from Sophocles which convey a similar idea : 
‘And we must ever be daily acquiring knowledge while it is possible to learn better things,’ and ‘ Ever desire to add 
something useful to thy knowledge’, (Frag. 779 and 662 in Dindorf, Poetae Scenict Graeci) JQR xv, p. 341. 

and so acquires a definite purpose. This rendering follows the text of Thackeray. Wendland connects 
Thy mpoaipeow with the following sentence. The translation in this case would be, ‘ Having fixed its aim on pletyaaers 
Say its course by an infallible rule. It was my determination to make a careful study of things divine that 
ed me,’ &c. 

3. Documents of the highest value. There is no word for ‘ documents’ in the Greek, which reads KATAKEKTHILEVOY 
peyiorny @pédrecav. I have adopted the rendering of Wendland and Thackeray though with some hesitation. Possibly 
we should translate more simply ‘who had acquired the power of rendering the greatest benefits to the Jews by his 
interpretation of the divine law.’ 

for the interpretation. Thackeray disagreeing with Wendland connects this phrase with the following clause 
which he translates ‘ the object of our mission was the translation of the law of God’. ss 

4. This embassy then I undertook, jv 8) cai eromnoducda nets orovdn. Mendelssohn emends by reading omovdnv 
on the ground that it is difficult to supply zpeaBetav as an antecedent, owing to the distance which separates it from 
the relative, and Thackeray following this suggestion translates ‘And the interest which we displayed when an 
opportunity offered itself, in bringing before the king the case of the men... this also is worth while my telling thee’. 

transported ... by the king’s father. Ptolemy I (Lagus) 322-285 B.c. ‘ When Ptolemy had succeeded to the 
throne of Egypt and had beaten off the attack of Perdikkas, he forthwith made an invasion into Palestine and Syria 
and annexed all the country. When driven out of it by Antigonus, we hear that he carried off to Egypt a large 
number of the inhabitants either as slaves or as compulsory settlers. And this happened apparently four times. He 
always retreated in time to carry his booty with him. But in spite of these repeated raids or temporary occupations 
andi this repeated carrying off of plunder from Palestine, we are persistently informed that the house of Ptolemy was 
most popular with the Jews.’ (Mahaffy, EP, p. 87.) 

5. from the island. This is generally supposed to refer to Pharos, but it is difficult to see how Philocrates could 
have been in ignorance of the events recorded in the Epistle if he had been living so near to Alexandria as Pharos 
especially as the translation of the LXX was made on the island, § 301. Possibly Cyprus is meant ; cf. Swete (Introd. 
to LXX, p. 10, footnote), who draws an inference that Aristeas himself may have been a Cypriote. 


94 


THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 6-12 


too, I sent you a record of the facts which I thought worth relating about the Jewish race,—the record 

7 which I had obtained from the most learned high priests of the + most learned} land of Egypt. As you 
are so eager to acquire the knowledge of those things which can benefit the mind, I feel it incumbent 
upon me to impart to you all the information in my power. I should feel the same duty towards all 
who possessed the same disposition but I feel it especially towards you since you have aspirations 
which are so noble, and since you are not only my brother in character no less than in blood 

8 but are one with me as well in the pursuit of goodness. For neither the pleasure derived from gold 
nor any other of the possessions which are prized by shallow minds confers the same benefit as the 
pursuit of culture and the study which we expend in securing it. But that I may not weary you by 
a too lengthy introduction, I will proceed at once to the substance of my narrative. 

9 Demetrius of Phalerum, the president of the king’s library, received vast sums of money, for the 
purpose of collecting together, as far as he possibly could, all the books in the world. By means of 
purchase and transcription, he carried out, to the best of his ability, the purpose of the king. On 
one occasion when I was present he was asked, How many thousand books are there zz the library? 

1o and he replied, ‘ More than two hundred thousand, O king, and I shall make endeavour in the 

immediate future Zo gather together the remainder also, so that the total of five hundred thousand 

may be reached. Iam told that the laws of the Jews are worth transcribing and deserve a place in 
your library.’ ‘What is to prevent you from doing this?’ replied the king. ‘ Everything that is 
necessary has been placed at your disposal.’ ‘They need to be translated, answered Demetrius, 

‘for in the country of the Jews they use a peculiar alphabet (just as the Egyptians, too, have 

a special form of letters) and speak a peculiar dialect. They are supposed to use the Syriac 

tongue, but this is not the case; their language is quite different. And the king when he under- 

stood all the facts of the case ordered a letter to be written to the Jewish High Priest that his 
purpose (which has already been described) might be accomplished. 

12. Thinking that the time had come to press the demand, which I had often laid before Sosibius 
of Tarentum and Andreas, the chief of the bodyguard, for the emancipation of the Jews who had 
been transported from Judea by the king’s father—for when by a combination of good fortune and 
courage he had brought his attack on the whole district of Coele-Syria and Phoenicia to a successful 


I 


ra 


6. Isent you a record. This seems to bean attempt on the part of the author to identify himself with the historian 
Aristeas, the writer of a book called Iepi Iovdaiwv referred to in Eusebius, Praepar. Evang. ix.25. The fragment of 
this Aristeas quoted by Eusebius is taken from the treatise of Alexander Polyhistor, who is dated c. 50 B.C. Aristeas 
himself belongs probably to the second century B.c. If there is any reference to this Aristeas here, this date would 
constitute a zerminus a guo for our Epistle. It is quite: possible, however, that the Author of the Epistle is 
referring to another book written by himself which has been lost. : 

the most learned land, Aoywrirny probably a textual corruption accidentally introduced from the following 
phrase Aoy:wrdrev dp yepeav. : 

9. Demetrius of Phalerum. The facts known about Demetrius are as follows :—About the year 307 B.C. he was 
driven out of Athens, where he had ruled for ten years as deputy for Cassander, by Demetrius the Besieger. He was 
persuaded by Ptolemy I, who happened to be visiting Greece at the time, to migrate to Alexandria, where he was 
afterwards associated with the Museum. At the end of the reign of Ptolemy I he fell into disfavour because he 
opposed the king’s desire to make his youngest son Philadelphus successor to the throne, and advocated the claims 
of the eldest son Keraunos, who possessed the right of primogeniture. As a result Demetrius was sent into exile and 
died soon afterwards from the bite of an asp (c. 283 B.C.). The fact and date of the exile seem to be substantiated by 
the statements of Plutarch (de Evil. p. 602), Diogenes Laertius (v. 78), and Cicero (gro Rabir. Post. 9), which have 
behind them the authority of Hermippus Callimachus, who lived under the third and fourth Ptolemies. The statements 
of Aristeas must therefore be regarded as an anachronism, since Demetrius could not possibly have exercised any 
influence over Philadelphus. Moreover, we know from the investigations of Busch (de bibliothecarits Alexandrinis, 
p. 1 ff.) that the office of librarian under Philadelphus was held first by Zenodotus of Ephesus and then by Erastosthenes. 
It is possible, however, as Swete suggests, that the project of translating the Jewish law may have been mooted by 
Demetrius in the time of Ptolemy I, though it was not carried out till the reign of his successor (see Swete, Introd. to 
LXX, p.19; /QR, Jan. 1902, p. 338, Ostermann, de Demetrii Ph, vita (1857), Susemihl, Geschichte der griechischen 
Litteratur in der Alexandrinerzeit |, p. 6, 1 38). : / : siesta 

io. above two hundred thousand. Epiphanius gives the number of the books as 54,800 mhelw 7) eAaooo. 

iar dialect, i.e. Aramaic. ; . 

a his tapes Coele-Syria. The reference is probably to Ptolemy I’s second campaign against Syria and 
Palestine which culminated in the battle of Gaza (312 B.c.). The fragments of Hecataeus in Josephus (com. Af. i. wt 
which though disputed are probably genuine, confirm the statements of Aristeas and may have been the source ae 
which they were taken. Hecataeus (see Note on § 31) says, ‘ Ptolemy got possession of many places in Syria after the 
battle of Gaza, and many, when they heard of Ptolemy’s moderation and humanity, they went along with him to Egypt 
and were willing to assist him in his affairs.’ The impression given by this fragment is that the action of ee s 
army was much less drastic than is represented in Aristeas. The presence of large settlements of Jews es gypt at 
this time, though denied by Willrich, seems to be abundantly proved by the Papyri. A village nenes Late 
in the F ayyum is mentioned more than once in the Petrie collection of Papyri. There was a Jewish colony at pias 
(cf. P.P. 1. 43. mapa Tov IovSatwy Kat Tov EdAnvey, in which mention is also made of Jewish slaves). For further evidence 


see Mahaffy, The Ptolemaic Dynasty, p. 93. 
95 


THE LETTERJOF ARISTEAS (12420 


issue, in the process of terrorising the country into subjection, he transported some of his foes and 
others he reduced to captivity. The number of those whom he transported from the country of the 

13 Jews to Egypt amounted to no less than a hundred thousand. Of these he armed thirty thousand 
picked men and settled them in garrisons in the country districts. (And even before this time large 
numbers of Jews had come into Egypt with the Persian, and in an earlier period still others had 
been sent zo Egypt to help Psammetichus in his campaign against the king of the Ethiopians. But 
these were nothing like so numerous as the captives whom Ptolemy the son of Lagus transported.) 

14 As I have already said Ptolemy picked out the best of these, the men who were in the prime of 
life and distinguished for their courage, and armed them, but the great mass of the others, those 
who were too old or too young for this purpose, and the women too, he reduced to slavery, not 
that he wished to do this of his own free will, but he was compelled by his soldiers who claimed 
them as a reward for the services which they had rendered in war. 

Having, as has already been stated, obtained an opportunity for securing their emancipation, 
I addressed the king with the following arguments. ‘Let us not be so unreasonable as to allow 

15 our deeds to give the lie to our words. Since the law which we wish not only to transcribe but 
also to translate belongs to the whole Jewish race, what justification shall we be able to find for 
our embassy while such vast numbers of them remain in a state of slavery in your kingdom? In 
the perfection and wealth of your clemency release those who are held in such miserable bondage, 
since as I have been at pains to discover, the God who gave them their law is the God who 
maintains your kingdom. They worship the same God—the Lord and Creator of the Universe, 
as all other men, as we ourselves, O king, though we call him by different names, such as Zeus or 

16 Dis. This name was very appropriately bestowed upon him by our first ancestors, in order to 
signify that He through whom all things are endowed with life and come into being, is necessarily 
the ruler and lord of the Universe. Set all mankind an example of magnanimity by releasing 
those who are held in bondage.’ 

17 After a brief interval, while I was offering up an earnest prayer to God that He would so dispose 
the mind of the king that all the captives might be set at liberty—(for the human race, being 
the creation of God, is swayed and influenced by Him. Therefore with many divers prayers I called 
upon Him who ruleth the heart that the king might be constrained to grant my request. For I had 

1g great hopes with regard to the salvation of the men since I was assured that God would grant a 

fulfilment of my prayer. For when men from pure motives plan some action in the interest of 

righteousness and the performance of noble deeds, Almighty God brings their efforts and purposes 
to a successful issue)—zhe king raised his head and looking up at me with a cheerful countenance 
asked, ‘ How many thousands do you think they will number?’ Andreas, who was standing near, 
replied, ‘A little more than a hundred thousand.’ ‘It is a small boon indeed,’ said the king, ‘ that 

Aristeas asks of us!’ Then Sosibius and some others who were present said, ‘ Yes, but it will be a fit 

tribute to your magnanimity for you to offer the enfranchisement of these men as an act of devotion 

to the supreme God, You have been greatly honoured by Almighty God and exalted above all your 
forefathers in glory and it is only fitting that you should render to Him the greatest thankoffering 
in your power. Extremely pleased with these arguments he gave orders that an addition should be 

20 made to the wages of the soldiers by the amount of the redemption money, that twenty drachmae should 
be paid to the owners for every slave, that a public order should be issued and that registers of the 
captives should be attached to it. He showed the greatest enthusiasm in the business, for it was God 
who had brought our purpose to fulfilment in its entirety and constrained him to redeem not only those 
who had come into Egypt with the army of his father but any who had come before that time 


I 


Ko) 


13. The Persian. The reference seems to be to Cambyses who conquered Egypt in 525 B.c. Wendland thinks that 
this statement is due to a misunderstanding of Hecataeus who says, ‘the Persians formerly carried away many ten 
thousands of our people to Babylon as also not a few ten thousands were removed after Alexander’s death into Egypt 
and Phoenicia’. 

Psammetichus. We know from Herodotus (11. 151, fol.) that Psammetichus I (c. 671-617 B.C.) was the first 
Egyptian king to employ Greek mercenaries and that Psammetichus II, who became king in 595 B.C., carried on 
a campaign against the Aethiopians (Her. 11. 159-61), but we have no evidence to connect the Jewish people with 
either. Wendland thinks the allusion a pure fiction. 

16. Zeus or Dis. The two accusative forms of Zevs, viz. Ziva and Aia, are here used, and it is difficult to translate them 
as the nominative of the second form is obsolete. They are derived by Aristeas, as by the Stoics and Orphic writers 
from ¢7jv (to live) and &4 (through) respectively. Compare the statement of Aristobulus (quoted by Eusebius Praep. 
Evang, Xiil. 12. 7) kabads d€ det ceonudykayer meprarpodvres rov dia TOY mounudtey Aia kai Zyva. For a similar comparison 
between Jehovah and Zeus see Diodor. Sic. i. 12. 2, who probably derived the idea from Hecataeus. 

18. I had great hopes, &c. This rendering follows the suggestion of Mendelssohn who supplies rév before 
avOponov. Otherwise we must translate with Thackeray, ‘I had a good hope in bringing forward a proposal 
concerning the deliverance of men.’ The phrase mpotiOéuevos Méyov may mean either ‘brineine forward a proposal’ 
or ‘ giving a reason to oneself ’—‘ assuring oneself’. es 
96 


THE EETTER OF ARISTEAS 40-29 


or had been subsequently brought into the kingdom. It was pointed out to him that the ransom 
money would exceed four hundred talents. 

21 sc think it will be useful to insert a copy of the decree, for in this way the magnanimity of the 

ing, who was empowered by God to save such vast multitudes, will be made clearer and more 

22 manifest. _The decree of the king ran as follows : ‘All who served in the army of our father in 
the campaign against Syria and Phoenicia and in the attack upon the country of the Jews and became 

possessed of Jewish captives and brought them back to the city of Alexandria and the land of 
Lgypt or sold them to others—and in the same way any captives who were in our land before 
that time or were brought hither afterwards—all who possess such captives are required to set them 
at liberty at once, receiving twenty drachmae per head as ransom money. The soldiers will receive 
this money as a gift added to their wages, the others from the king’s treasury. We think that it 
was against our father’s will and against all propriety that they should have been made captives and 
that the devastation of their land and the transportation of the Jews to Egypt was an act of 
military wantonness. The spoil which fell to the soldiers on the field of battle was all the booty 
which they should have claimed. To reduce the people to slavery in addition was an act of 
absolute injustice. Wherefore since it is acknowledged that we are accustomed to render justice to 
all men and especially to those who are unfairly in a condition of servitude, and since we strive to 
deal fairly with all men according to the demands of justice and piety, we have decreed, in reference 
to the persons of the Jews who are in any condition of bondage in any part of our dominion, that 
those who possess them shall receive the stipulated sum of money and set them at liberty and that no 
man shall show any tardiness in discharging his obligations. Within three days after the publication 
of this decree, they must make lists of slaves for the officers appointed to carry out our will, 
and immediately produce the persons of the captives. For we consider that it will be advantageous 
to us and to our affairs that the matter should be brought to a conclusion. Any one who likes may 
give information about any who disobey the decree, on condition that if the man is proved guilty 
he will become his slave ; his property, however, will be handed over to the royal treasury.’ 

26 When the decree was brought to be read over to the king for his approval, it contained all the 
other provisions except the phrase ‘ any captives who were in the land before that time or were brought 
hither afterwards,’ and in his-magnanimity and the largeness of his heart the king inserted this 
clause and gave orders that the grant of money required for the redemption should be deposited in 
full with the paymasters of the forces and the royal bankers, and so the matter was decided and the 

24 decree ratified within seven days. The grant for the redemption amounted to more than six 
hundred and sixty talents; for many infants at the breast were emancipated together with their 
mothers. When the question was raised whether the sum of twenty talents was to be paid for 
these, the king ordered that it should be done, and thus he carried out his decision in the 
most comprehensive way. 

28 When this had been done, he ordered Demetrius to draw up a memorial with regard to the 
transcription of the Jewish books. For all affairs of state used to be carried out by means of 
decrees and with the most painstaking accuracy by these Egyptéan kings, and nothing was done in 
a slipshod or haphazard fashion. And so I have inserted copies of the memorial and the letters, 
the number of the presents sent and the nature of each, since every one of them excelled in 

29 magnificence and technical skill. The following is a copy of the memorial. The Memorial of 
Demetrius to the great king. ‘Since you have given me instructions, O king, that the books which 
are needed to complete your library should be collected together, and that those which are defective 
should be repaired, I have devoted myself with the utmost care to the fulfilment of your wishes, 


1S) 


2 


ase 


LS} 
on 


20. four hundred talents. In § 19 the number of captives is given asa ‘ little more than 100,000’. The redemption 
money at 20 drachmae a piece comes to 2,000,000 drachmae or 333% talents. Thus 66% talents are allowed for the 
redemption of the captives, whose release was provided for by the additional clause. The number was therefore 
estimated at 20,000, making a total of 120,000 slaves to be emancipated. This estimate was greatly exceeded, see § 27. 

27. six hundred and sixty talents. The estimate of 4oo talents (§ 20) was found to be considerably below the 
mark; 660 talents provided ransom for 198,000 captives. It is difficult to account for the additional 78,000. The 
children could not possibly have reached that number. We must either assume that the mothers had been omitted in 
the previous estimate or follow Wendland in supposing that Aristeas has grossly exaggerated the total. The estimate 
of Josephus, i. e. 460 talents, is much more probable. This makes the total number of captives 138,000, and the number 
of children therefore 18,000, a much more reasonable figure. | Possibly, however, the difference between the 460 of 
Josephus and the 660 of Aristeas is due to a copyist’s blunder in the case of the latter. ‘ 

28. used to be carried out. This phrase indicates that the Epistle belongs to a later date than the time of Ptolemy 
Philadelphus. Cp. also § 182. Graetz thinks that it proves that the Epistle was written after the fall of the Ptolemaic 
i aeres are defective. The Greek words iva... ra dStament@xréra TOXN TIS mpoonkovans emuarKevijs might mean ‘ that 
those which have been lost shall be duly replaced’ (Thackeray). The translation given above is supported by Gifford, 
Eusebius, Praep. Evang. viii. 3. ‘ as 

1105-2 97 


THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 30-36 


30 and I now have the following proposal to lay before you. The books of the law of the Jews (with 
some few others) are absent from the library. They are written in the Hebrew characters and 
language and have been carelessly interpreted, and do not represent the original text as I am 

31 informed by those who know; for they have never had a king’s care to protect them, It is 
necessary that these should be made accurate for your library since the law which they contain, in 
as much as it is of divine origin, is full of wisdom and free from all blemish. For this reason 
literary men and poets and the mass of historical writers have held aloof from referring to these 
books and the men who have lived tand are living} in accordance with them, because their 

32 conception of life is so sacred and religious, as Hecataeus of Abdera says. If it please you, O king, 
a letter shall be written to the High Priest in Jerusalem, asking him to send six elders out of every 
tribe—-men who have lived the noblest life and are most skilled in their law—that we may find out 
the points in which the majority of them are in agreement, and so having obtained an accurate 
translation may place it in a conspicuous place in a manner worthy of the work itself and your 
purpose. May continual prosperity be yours ! ’ 

33. When this memorial had been presented, the king ordered a letter to be written to Eleazar on the 
matter, giving also an account of the emancipation of the Yew7sh captives. And he gave fifty 
talents weight of gold and seventy talents of silver and a large quantity of precious stones to make 
bowls and vials and a table and libation cups. He also gave orders to those who had the custody 
of his coffers to allow the artificers to make a selection of any materials they might require for the 
purpose, and that a hundred talents in money should be sent to provide sacrifices for the temple and 

34 for other needs. I shall give you a full account of the workmanship after I have set before you 
copies of the letters. The letter of the king ran as follows: | : 

35 ‘King Ptolemy sends greeting and salutation to the High Priest Eleazar. Since there are many 
Jews settled in our realm who were carried off from Jerusalem by the Persians at the time of their 

36 power and many more who came with my father into Egypt as captives—large numbers of these he 
placed in the army and paid them higher wages than usual, and when he had proved the loyalty of 
their leaders he built fortresses and placed them in their charge that the native Egyptians might be 


30. The books of the law. There is no article before ‘ books’ in the MSS., though most editors insert or supply 
it. Thackeray omits and translates ‘ certain books of the Jewish law’, 

carelessly interpreted. The exact force of ceojpayta: is uncertain. If we translate ‘interpreted’ it involves the 
supposition that an earlier, though imperfect, translation of the law into Greek was in existence. This hypothesis 
is supported by the statement of Aristobulus, Sunppjvevra: d€ mpd Anyntpiov if’ érépov [v. 2. b0 érépwy] mpd rns "ANeEavdpov — 
kal [lepoGy émixparnoews, Ta Te kata Thy e€ Aiyumrou eLaywyny TOY ‘EBpaloy rev nperépwy moAtToy Kal 7 TOY yeyovudTt@y andvToY 
aitois emupdvera Kal Kpdrnois THs Xopas Kal rhs bAns vopobecias eneEHynors. (Swete, Introd. to LXX, 1, 2), cp. also the 
reference to earlier and unreliable translations in § 314. The term ceonjpayra: need not, however, imply transiation. 
It may simply mean ‘ copied’ or ‘committed to writing’ (cp. Plutarch, oral. 204 E ra pév mpdra téy dvopatov ypaynpacw 
éonpavev), or as Diels suggests ‘ vocalized’. 

31. have lived and tare livingt: trav kar’ abra remoXtrevpévar Kal modttevopevay aySpoy. Wendland and Thackeray 
obelise the words cat moXtrevopévov as a later addition, since they are omitted in Eusebius and Josephus. The 
eae even here of the absence of any reference to the Jewish Scriptures in Greek literature is further elaborated 
in §§ 312-316. 

Hecataeus of Abdera lived in the time of Alexander the Great and Ptolemy I, and wrote a history of Egypt, 
which probably contained many references to Jewish History. He is credited by Josephus (c. Agzon. 22) with being 
the author of a special history of the Jews, which most modern authorities regard as a later forgery, worked up from 
the material obtained from the History of Egypt (see Schiirer, ii, 3, p. 302 £7). Wendland holds that Aristeas 
used not the later Pseudo-Hecataeus but the genuine ‘History of Egypt’. His conclusion is based on numerous 
resemblances which he finds between Aristeas and the statements of Didorus Siculus, who used Hecataeus as his main 
authority in his first book. Whether the quotations in Josephus (c. Apion.) came from the genuine or the pseudo- 
Hecataeus is more difficult to decide. 

32. If it please you: édv ody daivnta, a later formula as Thackeray has shown by*an examination of the Papyri 
(JOR xv, 348). In the early Ptolemaic period we find the classical formula ei cou doxet or edv oor Soxy in general use. 
Between 252 B.C. and 163 B.C. éay oor haivnra is generally substituted for the earlier form. From 163 B.C. to 70 B.C. 
the pronoun is generally omitted and the phrase is used as in Aristeas. There is no instance, however, of the 
omission of the pronoun in the Papyri before 163 B.c. These facts seem to indicate that our book must be later 
than this date. 

in a conspicuous place. The meaning of the Greek OSpyev evonuwws is uncertain. The rendering given above 
is that of Thackeray and Gifford (Eusebius, Praep. Evang. viii. 3) and refers of course to the library at Alexandria, 
though it is difficult to see why the idea is not conveyed in plainer terms. The words might mean ‘that we may place 
it on record in seemly fashion’ or ‘make the meaning plain’. 

continual prosperity, edrvye, the regular salutation used by a subordinate to his superior. The formula for 
addressing an equal or a subordinate is ¢ppwao (see Mahaffy, Petrie Papyri, 1891, 80), which is the word used by 
Ptolemy and Eleazar in their correspondence with each other, §$§ 40, 46. 

36. when he had proved the loyalty, &c.: duriws dé kal rods mpodvtas. This rendering is supported by Gifford, 
Eusebius, Praep. Evang. vii. 3. Thackeray, however, takes tovs mpodvras to mean ‘those who were already in the 
country ’—‘in like manner from his confidence in those who were already in the country he placed under their charge’ 
[i.e. under the charge of the newly imported Jews], &c. 

_ might be intimidated. The MSS. of Aristeas read drs 76 rév Aiyuntioy ebvos pdBov mi Exn, ‘that native Egyptians 
might be free from fear.’ Both Josephus and Eusebius, however, omit uj, and most modern editors follow them.’ 

4 


98 


38 


39 


40 


Lal 


4 


aN 
to 


43 


44 


re ee ThE R OF ARISTEAS 36-44 


intimidated by them. And I, when I ascended the throne, adopted a kindly attitude towards all 
my subjects, and more particularly to those who were citizens of yours—I have set at liberty more 
than a hundred thousand captives, paying their owners the appropriate market price for them, and 
if ever evil has been done to your people through the passions of the mob, I have made them 
reparation. The motive which prompted my action has been the desire to act piously and render 
unto the supreme God a thankoffering for maintaining my kingdom in peace and great glory in all 
the world. Moreover those of your people who were in the prime of life I have drafted into my 
army, and those who were fit to be attached to my person and worthy of the confidence of the 
court, I have established in official positions. Now since I am anxious to show my gratitude to 
these men and to the Jews throughout the world and to the generations yet to come, I have 
determined that your law shall be translated from the Hebrew tongue which is in use amongst you 
into the Greek language, that these books may be added to the other royal books in my library. It 
will be a kindness on your part and a reward for my zeal if you will select six elders from each of 
your tribes, men of noble life and skilled in your law and able to interpret it, that 2 guestions of 
dispute we may be able to discover the verdict in which the majority agree, for the investigation is 
of the highest possible importance. I hope to win great renown by the accomplishment of this 
work. I have sent Andreas, the chief of my bodyguard, and Aristeas—men whom I hold in high 
esteem—to lay the matter before you and present you with a hundred talents of silver, the firstfruits 
of my offering for the temple and the sacrifices and other religious rites. If you will write to me 
concerning your wishes in these matters, you will confer a great favour upon me and afford me 
a new pledge of friendship, for all your wishes shall be carried out as speedily as possible. Farewell.’ 

To this letter Eleazar replied appropriately as follows: ‘ Eleazar the High priest sends greetings 
to King Ptolemy his true friend. My highest wishes are for your welfare and the welfare of Queen 
Arsinoe your sister and your children. I also am well. I have received your letter and am greatly 
rejoiced by your purpose and your noble counsel. I summoned together the whole people and 
read it to them that they might know of your devotion to our God. I showed them too the cups 
which you sent, twenty of gold and thirty of silver, the five bowls and the table of dedication, and 
the hundred talents of silver for the offering of the sacrifices and providing the things of which the 
temple stands in need. These gifts were brought to me by Andreas, one of your most honoured 
servants, and by Aristeas, both good men and true, distinguished by their learning, and worthy in 
every way to be the representatives of your high principles and righteous purposes. These men 
imparted to me your message and received from me an answer in agreement with your letter. 
I will consent to everything which is advantageous to you even though your request is very 


4o. Andreas chief of the bodyguard. ’Avdpéav rav dpyiowparopvAdkey. Strack has proved that the plural form of 
apxicwpatopvAag does not occur in the Papyri till 145 B.c. Jerome describes Aristeas as Ptolemaei tmepacmotys 
(Praef. in Pent. xxviii, p. 181). 

41. replied appropriately. There is some question as to the meaning of évdexouevws which I have rendered ‘appro- 
priately ’ (so too Gifford), cp. ai évdeyduevar riwwpia, Lycurg. 164. 38. The adverb, however, seems to be generally used 
as the equivalent of dcop éevdéxerat, ‘as far as possible’, Wendland suggests ‘so far as he could write Greek’. Diels 
would substitute éxdeyouéves = straightway. Josephus paraphrases ws évyny padiora didotivos, Thackeray renders 
‘Eleazar wrote much as follows’. , 

Queen Arsinoe your sister. On the famous Mendes stele Arsinoe is described as ‘the daughter, sister and great 
wife of a king who loves him, the divine Arsinoe Philadelphos’. Arsinoe was the daughter of Ptolemy I. She was 
first married about 301 B.C. to Lysimachus King of Thrace to whom she bore at least three children. After the death 
of Lysimachus, who was killed at the battle of Korupedion 281 B.C., she married Ptolemy Keraunos her half-brother 
who was endeavouring to secure the throne of Thrace. No sooner, however, had Keraunos got Arsinoe into his power 
than he murdered her children whom he regarded as his rivals, and banished her to Samothrace, Arsinoe was not 
content to remain quietly in exile but made her way to Egypt, where she succeeded in inducing Ptolemy Philadelphus 
to abandon his wife, her namesake and stepdaughter Arsinoe I, and marry her instead. Arsinoe’s third marriage took 
place about 278 B.c. With regard to this type of Marriage Mahaffy remarks ‘ It is only in the researches of our own 
day that the Egyptian dogmas and sentiment in this matter have been duly examined and it is now clear that far from 
being a licence or an outrage, the marriage of full brother and sister was in the royal family of Egypt, the purest and 
most excellent of all marriages and the highest security that the sacred blood of kings was not polluted by inferior 
strains’ (Zhe Ptolemaic Dynasty, p. 77). Compare the statement of Maspero. ‘ The marriage of brother and sister 
was the marriage far excellence, and it contracted an unspeakable sanctity when this brother and sister were born of 
parents who stood in the same relation’ (Annuaire del Ecole des Hautes tudes for 1896, p. 19, quoted by. Mahaffy, 
p. 77). From the time of her marriage to her death in 270 B.c. Arsinoe held the: highest possible place in popular 
esteem. ‘She became a great figure not only in the Egyptian but in the Hellenistic world. Of no other queen do we 
find so many memorials in various parts of the Greek world.’ (Mahaffy, p. 7O3)2 0S £ : 

your children, Ptolemy Philadelphus and Arsinoe II had no children of their own, and this statement is often 
supposed to be another instance of Aristeas’ mistakes. We know, however, that Arsinoe II adopted the children of her 
predecessor and the reference may be to these. Compare the statement of Theocritus in the scholia on the Encomium 
of Ptolemy II (Idyll. xviii) kai eicerouncato airy rovs ek rhs mporépas "Apouvdns yevynOevtas maidas* avr yap 7 Apowon 
drexvos améeOavev, 

99 H 2 


THE LETTER OF ARISTERS 44557 


unusual. For you have bestowed upon our citizens great and never to be forgotten benefits in many 
45 (ways). Immediately therefore I offered sacrifices on behalf of you, your sister, your children, and 

your friends, and all the people prayed that your plans might prosper continually, and that 

Almighty God might preserve your kingdom in peace with honour, and that the translation of the 
46 holy law might prove advantageous to you and be carried out successfully. In the presence of all 

the people I selected six elders from each tribe, good men and true, and I have sent them to you 

with @ copy of our law. It will be a kindness, O righteous king, if you will give instruction that 
as soon as the translation of the law is completed, the men shall be restored again to us in safety. 

Farewell.’ 

47 The following are the names of the elders: Of the first tribe, Joseph, Ezekiah, Zachariah, John, 
Ezekiah, Elisha. Of the second tribe, Judas, Simon, Samuel, Adaeus, Mattathias, Eschlemias. Of 
48 the third tribe, Nehemiah, Joseph, Theodosius, Baseas, Ornias, Dakis. Of the fourth tribe, 

Jonathan, Abraeus, Elisha, Ananias, Chabrias.... Of the fifth tribe, Isaac, Jacob, Jesus, Sab- 
49 bataeus, Simon, Levi. Of the sixth tribe, Judas, Joseph, Simon, Zacharias, Samuel, Selemias. Of 

the seventh tribe, Sabbataeus, Zedekiah, Jacob, Isaac, Jesias, Natthaeus. Of the eighth tribe, 

Theodosius, Jason, Jesus, Theodotus, John, Jonathan. Of the ninth tribe, Theophilus, Abraham, 
50 Arsamos, Jason, Endemias, Daniel. Of the tenth tribe, Jeremiah, Eleazar, Zachariah, Baneas, 
Elisha, Dathaeus. Of the eleventh tribe, Samuel, Joseph, Judas, Jonathes, Chabu, Dositheus. Of 
the twelfth tribe, Isaelus, John, Theodosius, Arsamos, Abietes, Ezekiel. They were seventy-two in 
all. Such was the answer which Eleazar and his friends gave to the king’s letter. 

I will now proceed to redeem my promise and give a description of the works of art. They were 
wrought with exceptional skill, for the king spared no expense and personally superintended the 
workmen individually. They could not therefore scamp any part of the work or finish it off negli- 
gently. First of all I will give you a description of the table. The king was anxious that this piece 
of work should be of exceptionally large dimensions, and he caused enquiries to be made of the Jews 
3 in the locality with regard to the size of the table already in the temple at Jerusalem. And when 

they described the measurements, he proceeded to ask whether he might make a larger structure. 
And some of the priests and the other Jews replied that there was nothing to prevent him. And he 
said that he was anxious to make it five times the size, but he hesitated lest it should prove useless 
54 for the temple services. He was desirous that his gift should not merely be stationed in the temple, 
for it would afford him much greater pleasure if the men whose duty it was to offer the fitting 
55 sacrifices were able to do so appropriately on the table which he had made. He did not suppose 
that it was owing to lack of gold that the former table had been made of small size, but there seems 
to have been, he said, some reason why it was made of this dimension. +For had the order been given, 
there would have been no lack of meanst. Wherefore we must not transgress or go beyond the proper 
56 measure. At thesame time he ordered them to press into service all the manifold forms of art, for 
he was a man of the most lofty conceptions and nature had endowed him with a keen imagination 
which enabled him to picture the appearance which would be presented dy the finished work. He 
gave orders too, that where there were no instructions laid down in the Fewzsh Scriptures, everything 
should be made as beautiful as possible. When such instructions were laid down, they were to be 
carried out to the letter. 


57 They made the table two cubits long (one cubit broad) one and a half cubits high, fashioning it of 


_ 


5 


wn 
i) 


Or 
ro) 


44. unusual, lit. contrary to nature, rapa @vow. The translation of the Jewish law into a foreign language was 
regarded as contrary to nature. 


in many ways. In the MSS. of Aristeas we read simply kara roAdovs. Eusebius, however, adds rpémovus, which is 
the justification for the translation given above. P 
45. friends, a special court title, which came into prominence in the time of Ptolemy V. (205-182 B.C,): “Tt-occurs 
frequently on the Papyri of this period but is not found at an earlier date, though Strack thinks it may have occurred 
in some of the /acunae of the Papyri of Ptolemy IV (222-205 B.c.). We seem to have here another anachronism 
(Mahafty, Ptolemaic Dynasty, p. 161), though as the title is apparently used in the O.T. (1 Kings, iv. 5) too much 
stress must not be laid upon this point. 
48. The fifth and sixth names of the fourth tribe are given by Epiphanius, who uses Aristeas in his De mens. ef pond. 
as Zacharias and Chelkias. Probably the Chabrias of Aristeas is a corruption. 
50. For Chabu (XaSed) Epiphanius reads Caleb, which seems obviously to be correct. 
_ 55: had the order been given: the text is corrupt at this point. The MSS. read éru yap emi ta tis ovons, ovbev dy 
eordvge. This is difficult to translate, though it might perhaps be rendered ‘ Nothing would have been lacking for the 
present table’. It is better, however, to accept Mendelssohn’s brilliant conjecture and substitute emetayns for emi ta ris. 
56. picture the appearance, eis ro cumdeiv mpaypdrov éudaow. This might also mean ‘ To design the appearance 
of objects’. The interest which Philadelphus took in art and architecture is well attested. 
in the scriptures: the reference is to the instructions laid down in Exodus, xxv. 23, 24. The technical term for 


Scripture (4 yeah) does not occur here—though it is found in §§ 155, 168. The phrases used here are éca 8 av 2 

aypaha, ... 60a d¢ dua ypanray, see note on § 168. : 
57. one cubit broad: these words are not in the MSS. of Aristeas but 

Wendland thinks that their omission here is purely accidental. 


I0O 


are found in Josephus and in Exodus xxv, 23. 


THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 57-65 


pure solid gold. What Iam describing was not thin gold laid over another foundation. but the whole 
_ 68 structure was of massive gold welded together. And they made a border of a hand’s breadth round 
about it. And there was a wreath of wave-work, engraved in relief in the form of ropes marvellously 

59 wrought on its three sides. For it was triangular in shape and the style of the work was exactly 
the same on each of the sides, so that whichever side they were turned, they presented the same 
appearance. {Of the two sides under the border, the one which sloped down to the table was a very 
$0 beautiful piece of work, but it was the outer side which attracted the gaze of the spectator+. Now the 
upper edge of the two sides, being elevated, was sharp since, as we have said, the rim was three-sided 

} from whatever point of view one approached it}. And there were layers of precious stones on it in the 
midst of the embossed cord-work, and they were interwoven with one another by an inimitable artistic 

61 device. For the sake of security they were all fixed by golden needles which were inserted in perfora- 
62 tions zz the stones. At the sides they were clamped together by fastenings to hold them firm. On the 
part of the border round the table which slanted upwards and met the eyes, there was wrought a pattern 

of eggs in precious stones, telaborately engraved} by a continuous piece of fluted relief-work, closely 
63 connected together round the whole table. And under the stones which had been arranged to repre- 
sent eggs the artists made a crown containing all kinds of fruits, having at its top clusters of grapes 
and ears of corn, dates also and apples, and pomegranates and the like, conspicuously arranged. 
These fruits were wrought out of precious stones, of the same colour as the fruits themselves and 
64 they fastened them edgeways round all the sides of the table with a band of gold. And after the 
crown of fruit had been put on, wxderneath there was inserted another pattern of eggs iz precious 
stones, and other fluting and embossed work, that both sides of the table might be used, according 
to the wishes of the owners and for this reason the wave-work and the border were extended 
65 down to the feet of the table. They made and fastened under the whole width of the table 
a massive plate four fingers thick, that the feet might be inserted into it, and clamped fast with 
linch-pins which fitted into sockets under the border, so that which ever side of the table people 
preferred, might be used. Thus it became manifestly clear that the work was intended to be used 


massive gold welded together: lit. the plate of beaten metal was attached to it. 

58. They made a border. The description of the table is an elaboration of the data in Exod. xxv, 23: ‘ Thou shalt 
make a table of acacia wood: two cubits shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and 
a haif the height thereof. And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold and make thereto a crown of gold round about. 
And thou shalt make a border of an handbreadth round about and thou shalt make a golden crown to the border thereof 
round about’. In the LXX as in Aristeas there is no mention of the foundation of acacia wood. The whole table is 
to be made ypuojv xpuciov xabapov. The use of the LXX phrase orpemra xupdria is also significant. Either we have an 
anachronism. The table is supposed to be made according to the specifications of the LXX text which did not as yet 
exist. Or else the LXX translation was influenced by the table of Philadelphus, and the differences between it and 
the Hebrew were introduced to bring the new table more into accord with Scripture. 

There is considerable difficulty with regard to the exact significance of the word translated border (1), oregavy, 
kupdtia orpenra). AV and RV render by ‘crown’, RV m. by ‘rim or moulding’. The phrase Kupdria orpenta suggests 
a cable moulding—and this is the interpretation which Aristeas puts upon it ; (so also Josephus, 76 €dagos €Xtxos, a spiral). 
On the other hand ‘the same phrase is used in architecture to denote an ogee moulding, and this is certainly the nature 
of the ornament on the table of the Arch of Titus. In any case both the sides and the ends of the massive top were 
separately decorated by a solid gold moulding which gave them the appearance of four panels sunk into the table’, 
DBH iv. 663. ; : 

wreath of wavework: the meaning of this phrase, and indeed of the whole sentence, is very dubious. 
Thackeray translates ‘They made... its ledges of twisted work’ but suggests that the phrase may mean ‘its 
mouldings (or rims) were made so as to revolve’. k 

59. It was triangular, jv yap rpvyevia. .This cannot refer to the table, which had four legs and must have been 
oblong in shape. If the text is correct, it must refer to the border. Thackeray suggests that we ought to follow 
Josephus in reading rpiyeva and translate ‘ the ledges were triangular in shape’. ; ; 

whichever side they were turned: the meaning is very obscure. The words might be translated ‘to which- 
ever side a man turned himself, the same appearance met his eyes’ (Wendland). 

Of the two sides, &c. The text of this sentence is so corrupt that its meaning cannot be made out. I have 
followed the conjecture which substitutes cesmeve, for the Ketpévou or Keiuevns of the MSS. at the commencement of the 
sentence. Thackeray translates ‘and while the ledge rested on the border that side of it which sloped towards the 
table was beautifully worked although the side which sloped outwards [alone] met the eye of the spectator’. Wendland 
renders ‘Wahrend aber die nach dem Tische gerichtete Seite der auf dem Rand aufliegenden [Leiste] ihre schéne 
Arbeit dem Anblick entzog, bot sich die dussere Seite den Blicken des Beschauers dar’. ; : 

62. elaborately engraved : the text exrimwow Exovea mpoooxns is corrupt and we can only conjecture its meaning. 

63. These fruits were wrought, lit. ‘ They worked the stones which had the colour of each species of the aforesaid 

its to resemble those fruits’. 
pS aie a band of gold, or ‘ they attached them to the gold all round the table 2 (Thackeray). é ; 

64. according to the wishes. We must follow Wendland and read aipévra for aipevra here and in the following 
ee wave work, &c. Thackeray translates this sentence ‘with such symmetry that the ledges and the border 

E ide nearest the feet’. : aa 
eC ee it ae &c. The meaning of the Greek is obscure. Thackeray renders ‘ This metal plate was visible 
on the surface as the work was constructed so as to be reversible’. 

iol 


THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS Goce 


66 cither way. On the table itself they engraved a ‘maeander ’, having precious stones standing out in 
the middle of it, rubies and emeralds and an onyx too and many other kinds of stones which excel 

67 in beauty. And next to the ‘ maeander’ there was placed a wonderful piece of network, which made 
the centre of the table appear like a rhomboid in shape, and on it a crystal and amber, as it is called, 

68 had been wrought, which produced an incomparable impression on the beholders. They made the 
feet of the table with heads like lilies, so that they seemed to be like lilies bending down beneath the 

69 table, and the parts which were visible represented leaves which stood upright. The basis of the foot 
on the ground consisted of a ruby and measured a hand’s breadth Azgh all round. It had the 
appearance of a shoe and was eight fingers broad. Upon it the whole expanse of the foot rested. 

70 And they made ‘he foot appear like ivy growing out of the stone, interwoven with akanthus and 
surrounded with a vine which encircled it with clusters of grapes, which were worked in stones, up to 
the top of the foot. All the four feet were made in the same style, and everything was wrought and 
fitted so skilfully, and such remarkable skill] and knowledge were expended upon making it true to 
nature, that when the air was stirred by a breath of wind, movement was imparted to the leaves, and 

+1 everything was fashioned to correspond with the actual reality which tt represented. And they made 

the top of the table in three parts like a triptychon, and they were so fitted and dovetailed together 
with spigots along the whole breadth of the work, that the meeting of the joints could not be seen 
or even discovered. The thickness of the table was not less than half a cubit, so that the whole work 

72 must have cost many talents. For since the king did not wish to add to its size he expended on the 

_—details the same sum of money which would have been required if the table could have been of 

larger dimensions. And everything was completed in accordance with his plan, in a most wonderful 

and remarkable way, with inimitable art and incomparable beauty. 

Of the mixing bowls, two were wrought (in gold), and from the base to the middle were engraved 
with relief work in the pattern of scales, and between the scales precious stones were inserted with 
74 great artistic skill. Then there was a ‘ maeander’ a cubit in height, with its surface wrought out of 

precious stones of many colours, displaying great artistic effort and beauty. Upon this there was a 

mosaic, worked in the form of a rhombus, having a net-like appearance and reaching right up to the 

75 brim. In the middle, small shields which were made of different precious stones, placed alternately, 
and varying in kind, not less than four fingers broad, enhanced the beauty of their appearance. On 
the top of the brim there was an ornament of lilies in bloom, and intertwining clusters of grapes were 

76 engraven all round. Such then was the construction of the golden bowls, and they held more than 
two firkins each. The silver bowls had a smooth surface, and were wonderfully made as if they were 
intended for looking-glasses, so that everything which was brought near to them was reflected even more 

77 Clearly than in mirrors. But it is impossible to describe the real impression which these works of 
art produced upon the mind when they were finished. For, when these vessels had been completed 
and placed side by side, first a silver bowl and then a golden, then another silver, and then another 
golden, the appearance they presented is altogether indescribable, and those who came to see 

78 them were not able to tear themselves from the brilliant sight and entrancing spectacle. The 
impressions produced by the spectacle were various in kind. When men looked at the golden vessels, 
and their minds made a complete survey of each detail of workmanship, their souls were thrilled with 
wonder. Again when a man wished to direct his gaze to the silver vessels, as they stood before him, 
everything seemed to flash with light round about the place where he was standing, and afforded a 
still greater delight to the onlookers. So that it is really impossible to describe the artistic beauty 
of the works. 

79 The golden vials they engraved in the centre with vine wreaths. And about the rims they 
wove a wreath of ivy and myrtle and olive in relief work and inserted precious stones init. The other 
parts of the relief work they wrought in different patterns, since they made it a point of honour to 

80 complete everything in a way worthy of the majesty of the king. In a word it may be said that 
neither in the king’s treasury nor in any other, were there any works which equalled these in costliness 
or in artistic skill. For the king spent no little thought upon them, for he loved to gain glory for the 

81 excellence of his designs. For oftentimes he would neglect his official business, and spend his time 
with the artists in his anxiety that they should complete everything in a manner worthy of the place 

to which the gifts were to be sent. So everything was carried out on a grand scale, in a manner 

82 worthy of the king who sent the gifts and of the high priest who was the ruler of the land. There was 
no stint of precious stones, for not less than five thousand were used and they were all of large size. 


69. the whole expanse of the foot, lit. ‘the whole plate of the foot’. Thackeray renders ‘upon this rested the 
whole plate into which the leg was inserted ’. 
71. fitted and dovetailed, lit. ‘being fitted together by dove-tailing which was secured by pegs in the thickness of 
the structure’ (Thackeray). 
74. with its surface: we must read here with Wendland év érepoxy for evUT DYE. 
102 


THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 82-93 


The most exceptional artistic skill was employed, so that the cost of the stones and the workmanship 

was five times as much as that of the gold. 

I have given you this description of the presents because I thought it was necessary. The next 
point in the narrative is an account of our journey to Eleazar, but I will first of all give you a 
description of the whole country, When we arrived in the land of the Jews we saw the city situated 
84 in the middle of the whole of Judea on the top of a mountain of considerable altitude. On the summit 

the temple had been built in all its splendour. It was surrounded by three walls more than seventy 

cubits high and in length and breadth corresponding to the structure of the edifice. All the buildings 

85 were characterised by a magnificence and costliness quite unprecedented. It was obvious that no 
expense had been spared on the door and the fastenings, which connected it with the door-posts, and 

86 the stability of the lintel. The style of the curtain too was thoroughly in proportion to that of the 
entrance. Its fabric owing to the draught of wind was in perpetual motion, and as this motion was 
communicated from the bottom and the curtain bulged out to its highest extent, it afforded a pleasant 

87 spectacle from which a man could scarcely tear himself away. The construction of the altar was in 
keeping with the place itself and with the burnt offerings which were consumed by fire upon it, and 
the approach to it was on a similar scale. There was a gradual slope up to it, conveniently arranged 
for the purpose of decency, and the ministering priests were robed in linen garments, down to their 

88 ankles. The Temple faces the east and its back is toward the west. The whole of the floor is paved 
with stones and slopes down to the appointed places, that water may be conveyed to wash away the 

89 blood from the sacrifices, for many thousand beasts are sacrificed there on the feast days. And there is 
an inexhaustible supply of water, because an abundant natural spring gushes up from within the temple 
area. There are moreover wonderful and indescribable cisterns underground, as they pointed out to 
me, at a distance of five furlongs all round the site of the temple, and each of them has countless pipes 

9° so that the different streams converge together. And all these were fastened with lead at the bottom 
and at the sidewalls, and over them a great quantity of plaster had been spread, and every part 
of the work had been most carefully carried out. There are many openings for water at the base of 
the altar which are invisible to all except to those who are engaged in the ministration, so that all 
the blood of the sacrifices which is collected in great quantities is washed away in the twinkling of an 

gt eye. Such is my opinion with regard to the character of the reservoirs and I will now show you how 
it was confirmed. They led me more than four furlongs outside the city and bade me peer down 
towards a certain spct and listen to the noise that was made by the meeting of the waters, so that 
the great size of the reservoirs became manifest to me, as has already been pointed out. 

92 The ministration of the priests is in every way unsurpassed both for its physical endurance and for 
its orderly and silent service. For they all work spontaneously, though it entails much painful 
exertion, and each one has a special task allotted tohim. The service is carried on without interrup- 
tion—some provide the wood, others the oil, others the fine wheat flour, others the spices; others 

93 again bring the pieces of flesh for the burnt offering, exhibiting a wonderful degree of strength. For 
they take up with both hands the limbs of a calf, each of them weighing more than two talents, and 
throw them with each hand in a wonderful way on to the high place of she altar and never miss 
placing them on the proper spot. In the same way the pieces of the sheep and also of the goats 
are wonderful both for their weight and their fatness. For those, whose business it is, always select 
the beasts which are without blemish and specially fat, and thus the sacrifice which I have described, 


83 


83. In the land of the Jews. Text corrupt. ; " 
86. in proportion to that of the entrance. Reading Oupsou. Thackeray prefers the reading @vpoca and 
translates ‘ The fashion of the curtain bore a very close resemblance to a door’. PREF ; 
the curtain bulged out. The text is uncertain and the meaning obscure. The MSS. read kara rh KkéAr@ow pexpe 
rijs dvw Suatdoews. Schmidt conjectures karareivew for xaré. Thackeray renders ‘the swell extended to the upper and 
tauter part of the curtain’. f : K 
87. was in keeping. Following the conjecture of Mendelssohn cuppeérpws €xovaar. 
in linen garments. Bvogivois xiroow, quoted from LXX of Ex. xxxvi. 35. See note § 228. J 
89. an abundant natural spring. This statement is supported by Tacitus, who speaks of a ‘ fons perennis aquae 
(Hist. v. 12). There are objections, however, to the statement : (2) No trace of such a well has been discovered, (4) the 
system of aqueducts which brought water from a distance would have been unnecessary if such a spring had existed. 
These ‘two facts or rather our present evidence for them are sufficient to make very doubtful the existence of 
a fountain within the Temple ezceznte’, G. A. Smith, Jerusalem, i. 85, 86. ; ; 
wonderful... cisterns. Some thirty-six or thirty-seven of these remarkable reservoirs have been discovers 
and surveyed. Full lists and descriptions are given In Recovery of Jerus. 204 ff.; P. E. F. Mem. Jerus 217 | a 
P. E. F. 2. 1880; Schick, Stiftshiitte u. Tempel, 292 ff. Speaking of their general characteristics, G. A. Smit ; 
Jerusalem, i. 120, says: ‘They may be distinguished into the smaller surface pits arched over, and probably ag a 
originally cisterns; and the great deep basins hollowed out of the low-lying meleki rock, 30, 40, 50, and 60 feet deep 
(one of them ‘ the Great Sea’ with a capacity of two million gallons) carefully cemented ; their roofs of the harder nis 
mizzeh rock, occasionally supported by heavy pliers of masonry ; with channels of communication, passages for 
inspection and conduits for draining the water at different levels. é; 
go. fastened with lead, or ‘had their bases and sides of lead’. 


103 


THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 94-102 


94 is carried out. There is a special place set apart for them to rest in, where those who are relieved 
from duty sit. When this takes place, those who have already rested and are ready to resume thetr 
duties rise up spontaneously since there is no one to give orders with regard to the arrangement of 

95 the sacrifices. The most complete silence reigns so that one might imagine that there was not a single 
person present, though there are actually seven hundred men engaged in the work, besides the vast 
number of those who are occupied in bringing up the sacrifices. Everything is carried out with 


96 reverence and in a way worthy of the great God. tie ; 
We were greatly astonished, when we saw Eleazar engaged in the ministration, at the mode of his 


dress, and the majesty of his appearance, which was revealed in the robe which he wore and the 
precious stones upon his person. There were golden bells wpox the garment which reached down to 
his feet, giving forth a peculiar kind of melody, and on both sides of them there were pomegranates 
97 with variegated flowers of a wonderful hue. He was girded with a girdle of conspicuous beauty, 
woven in the most beautiful colours. On his breast he wore the oracle of God, as it is called, on which 
twelve stones, of different kinds, were inset, fastened together with gold, containing the names of the 
leaders of the tribes, according to their original order, each one flashing forth in an indescribable way 
98 its own particular colour. On his head he wore a tiara, as it is called, and upon this in the middle of 
his forehead an inimitable turban, the royal diadem full of glory with the name of God inscribed in 
sacred letters on a plate of gold... having been judged worthy to wear these emblems in the 
ministrations. Their appearance created such awe and confusion of mind as to make one feel that one 
had come into the presence of a man who belonged to a different world. I am convinced that any 
one who takes part in the spectacle which I have described will be filled with astonishment and 
indescribable wonder and be profoundly affected in his mind at the thought of the sanctity which 


is attached to each detail of the service. s 
But in order that we might gain complete information, we ascended to the summit of the neighbour- 


ing citadel and looked around us. It is situated in a very lofty spot, and is fortified with many towers, 
which have been built up to the very top of immense stones, with the object, as we were informed, of 
guarding the temple precincts, so that if there were an attack, or an insurrection or an onslaught of 
the enemy, no one would be able to force an entrance within the walls that surround the temple. On the 
towers of the citadel engines of war were placed and different kinds of machines, and the position was 
much higher than the circle of walls which I have mentioned. The towers were guarded too by most 


95. seven hundred. This number is at variance with the estimate given in the passage from Hecataeus which is 
quoted by Josephus c. Apion. i. 22: ‘All the Jewish priests who are in receipt of the tithe of the produce [of the soil] 
and administer the public moneys [or affairs] are at the most fifteen hundred’. Josephus states that there were four 
tribes of priests,each containing more than five thousand (c. Afzon. ii. 8) but probably he includes the Levites and the 
servants, 

96-9. The description of the dress of the High-priest is based upon Exodus xxviii and xxix. For other accounts 
of this dress see Charles’ Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, ET, p. 42. Many phrases are taken from the LXX, 
showing that the writer must have been perfectly familiar with the version. For further illustrations of the use of 
the LXX see §$ 56, 57, 87, 228. 

97. the oracle of God. Exod. xxviii. 30 reads: ‘ Thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and the 
Thummim ’—which the LXX renders kal émOjoets emt ro Adytov THs Kpioews THY Ooo Kal THY GdnOeav. This mistaken 
rendering (which is followed by Aristeas) is mainly responsible for the view that the Urim and Thummim are to be 
identified with the jewels in the breastplate, see DBH, iv. 839. We have here another proof that the LXX translation 
had superseded, in the mind of Aristeas, the Hebrew original before our Epistle was written. 

98. sacred letters—i.e. the older Hebrew characters such as are found on old Hebrew seals, the Moabite Stone, 
and 5 Phoenician inscriptions before they had changed into the later square characters. Driver, Exodus (Cam. Bib., 
p- 309). 

99. Their appearance. Following an emendation of Wendland, who reads é¢updvera for cvpdpdvera, 

too. the summit of the neighbouring citadel. There are many problems connected with the site and the 
history of the dpa. ‘Theories of the position of the Akra are almost as numerous as the writers who have devoted 
attention to the subject’ (for a discussion of the various views see G, A. Smith, Jerwsalem, ii. 444 ff). The earliest 
reference to the dpa is found in Josephus, who says that it was occupied by an Egyptian garrison when in 198 B.C. the 
Jews welcomed Antiochus the Great to Jerusalem. In 168 B.C. the forces of Antiochus Epiphanes fortified the City 
of David witha great and strong wall, with strong towers, and it became unto them an dpa or citadel’ (1 Mac. i. 33-6). 
‘It became a great trap, an ambush against the Sanctuary and throughout an evil adversary to Israel’ (i Mac. iv. 40). 
For further references in the Maccabean period see G. Adam Smith, Jerusalem, i. 157 f. Josephus, however, tells us 
that during the Maccabean war the Jews razed the dkpa to the ground. (B/, ii. 2, iv. 1, Amé. xiii. 6. 7).° In the 
passages in the Avtiguzties he states that Simon, anxious ‘ that the Akra should no more be a base from which the foe 
might storm or harass Jerusalem, thought it the best way to cut down also the hill on which the Akra stood, so that 
the temple should be higher. Having called the people to an assembly, he persuaded them to set themselves to the 
work, which cost them three whole years, night and day, before they reduced the hill to its base and made it a perfect 
level. Thereafter the temple overtopped everything, both the Akra and the hill on which it stood being demolished.’ 
This statement, however, is difficult to reconcile with the assertion of 1 Mac. xiv. 37 that ‘Simon garrisoned and 
fortified the Akra.’ If the assertion of Josephus could be relied upon, it would suggest a point which would have to be 
considered in discussing the date of Aristeas. There is a further difficulty, however. Possibly, as G. Adam Smith 
suggests (ib. ii. 447) Aristeas is referring not to the Akra but to the later Baris. Graetz thinks that the description of 
the Castle points to the tower of Antonia built by Herod the Great (of. cit. 295-6). 

104 


9 


\o 


I0o 


Io 


102 


* Qe wUEL TER OF “ARISTEAS. 1024112 


trusty men who had given the utmost proof of their loyalty to their country. These men were never 
allowed to leave the citadel, except on feast days and then only in detachments, nor did they permit any 

103 stranger to enter it. They were also very careful when any command came from the chief officer to 
admit any visitors to inspect the place, as our own experience taught us. They were very reluctant 

1o4 to admit us,—though we were but two unarmed men—to view the offering of the sacrifices. And 
they asserted that they were bound by an oath when the trust was committed to them, for they had all 
sworn and were bound to carry out the oath sacredly to the letter, that though they were five hundred 
in number they would not permit more than five men to enter at one time. The citadel was the 
— asain of the temple and its founder had fortified it so strongly that it might efficiently 
protect it. 

105 The size of the city is of moderate dimensions. It is about forty furlongs in circumference, as 
far as one could conjecture. It has its towers arranged in the shape of a theatre, with thoroughfares 
leading between them} now the cross roads of the lower towers are visible but those of the upper 

106 towers are more frequented}. For the ground ascends, since the city is built upon a mountain. 
There are steps too which lead up to the cross roads, and tsome people are always going up, and 
others down and they keep as far apart from each other as possible on the road} because of those who 

107 are bound by the rules of purity, lest they should touch anything which is unlawful. It was not with- 
out reason that the original founders of the city built it in due proportions, for they possessed clear 
insight wth regard to what was required. For the country is extensive and beautiful. Some parts 
of it are level, especially the districts which belong to Samaria, as it is called, and which border on 
the land of the Idumeans, other parts are mountainous, especially (those which are contiguous to 
the land of Judea). The people therefore are bound to devote themselves to agriculture and the 
cultivation of the soil that by this means they may have a plentiful supply of crops. In this way 

108 cultivation of every kind is carried on and an abundant harvest reaped in the whole of the aforesaid 
land. The cities which are large and enjoy a corresponding prosperity are well-populated, but they 
neglect the country districts, since all men are inclined to a life of enjoyment, for every one has 

1o9 a natural tendency towards the pursuit of pleasure. The same thing happened in Alexandria, which 

excels all cities in size and prosperity. Country people by migrating from the rural districts and settling 

in the city brought agriculture into disrepute: and so to prevent them from settling zz the city, the 
king issued orders that they should not stay in it for more than twenty days. And in the same way 
he gave the judges written instructions, that if it was necessary to issue a summons against any one 

111 who lived in the country, the case must be settled within five days. And since he considered the 
matter one of great importance, he appointed also legal officers for every district with their assistants, 
that the farmers and their advocates might not in the interests of business empty the granaries of the 

112 city, I mean, of the produce of husbandry. I have permitted this digression because it was Eleazar 
who pointed out with great clearness the points which have been mentioned. For great is the energy 


II 


10) 


1o4. And were...tocarry out. So Thackeray emends. 

105. forty furlongs. This estimate agrees with the statement of Timochares (quoted by Euseb. Praep. Evang. ix. 
34), but Hecataeus states that the circuit was about ‘fifty furlongs’ (quoted by Josephus, c. Apzon. i. 197). 

in the shape of a theatre, ‘ with the comparison to a theatre,’ cf. Ezcy. zd. 11.2412. ‘ There is, however, a second 
affluent or head of the central Tyropoeon valley on the west side of its main course—a kind of dell or theatre-shaped 
depression extending westwards, a depression which would face a spectator looking westwards from the temple-mount, 
where the writer of our letter professes to be standing’ (Thackeray, /QR, xv. 360). 

now the cross roads. The text is uncertain and the meaning obscure. The MSS. read kat fawopéevav diddov 
rav broketpevor, Tov & éerdvabev nOicpéver, but it seems impossible to extract any relevant meaning from the words as 
they stand. In the phrase ray & eravwdey cibiopévwv Thackeray reads «iftopevws and translates ‘the resemblance 
extending to the cross streets, which are seen some below, some above, in the usual manner [of a theatre]’. Wendland 
following a conjecture of Diels substitutes 7 for cai at the commencement of the sentence, and éwxiopever for jOiopévor 
and renders ‘und man sieht zwar nicht die Durchgange der unteren [Tiirme], wohl aber die der oberen, die bei den 
Durchgangen durchbrochen sind.’ ree 

106. the ground ascends, dvixhacw yap Ta Tév témwv, Thackeray translates ‘the ground is irregular’ and takes 
dvdkdaow to mean ‘a bending back’. He quotes in illustration a statement from Smith’s DA 1, ii, 1587: ‘the northern 
and southern outliers of the Mount of Olives dend round slightly towards the city. 

some...are... going up.j The meaning is obscure. Thackeray translates : ‘Some persons take their way along the 
higher level, and others underneath, the distinction in the means of journeying being chiefly made for the sake of those 
who are undergoing the usual purifications’, Wendland substitutes dueornxvias for dtertn«dres. ‘They ascend by the 
one, they descend by the other, especially if they have a long journey to make, with a view to observing’, &c. 

107. contiguous to the land of Judea. These words are supplied by conjecture to fill a lacuna in the MSS. 
Wendland’s reading, ‘ namely those which are in the centre’, is possibly more correct. 

108. a natural tendency. For a further explanation of this inherent bias in human nature, see §§ 222-3, and 
especially 277. j ad Se ; 

111. farmers and their advocates. The meaning of the latter term (mpoordra) is uncertain. Thackeray 
translates ‘directors or agents’, but suggests that we might render ‘the agricultural class who are also the protectors 
(backbone) of the country.’ Legislation in the interests of agriculture is illustrated in the Papyri (cf. Paris Papyri, 
no. 63, Notices et Extraits, tom. xviii, Letronne and Brunet, and Thackeray’s Note, JOR, p. 361). 

105 


THE* LETTER (OF "ARISPERSit i207 - 


which they expend on the tillage of the soil. For the land is thickly planted with multitudes of 
olive trees, with crops of corn and pulse, with vines too, and there is abundance of honey. Other 
kinds of fruit trees and dates do not count compared with these. There are cattle of all kinds in 
113 great quantities and a rich pasturage for them. Wherefore they rightly recognise that the country 
districts need a large population, and the relations between the city and the villages are properly 
114 regulated. A great quantity of spices and precious stones and gold is brought into the country by 
the Arabs. For the country is well adapted not only for agriculture but also for commerce, and the 
115 city is rich in the arts and lacks none of the merchandise which is brought across the sea. It 
possesses too suitable and commodious harbours at Askalon, Joppa, and Gaza, as well as at 
Ptolemais which was founded by the King and holds a central position compared with the other 
places named, being not far distant from any of them. The country produces everything in abundance, 
116 since it is well watered in all directions and well protected from storms. The river Jordan, as it is 
called, which never runs dry, flows through the land. Originally (the country) contained not less than 
60 million acres—though afterwards the neighbouring peoples made incursions against it—and 600,000 
men were settled upon it in farms of a hundred acres each. The river like the Nile rises in harvest- 
time and irrigates a large portion of the land. Near the district belonging to the people of 
117 Ptolemais it issues into another river and this flows out into the sea. Other mountain torrents, as 
they are called, flow down into the plain and encompass the parts about Gaza and the district of 
118 Ashdod. The country is encircled by a natural fence and is very difficult to attack and cannot be 
assailed by large forces, owing to the narrow passes, with their overhanging precipices and deep 
11g ravines, and the rugged character of the mountainous regions which surround all the land. j 
We were told that from the neighbouring mountains of Arabia copper and iron were formerly obtained. 
This was stopped, however, at the time of the Persian rule, since the authorities of the time spread 
120 abroad a false report that the working of the mines was useless and expensive, in order to prevent 
their country from being destroyed by the mining in these districts and possibly taken away from 
them owing to the Perszan rule, tsince by the assistance of this false report they found an excuse 
for entering the districtf. 
I have now, my dear brother Philocrates, given you all the essential information upon this subject 
121 in brief form. I shall describe the work of translation in the sequel. The High priest selected men of 
the finest character and the highest culture, such as one would expect from their noble parentage. 
They were men who had not only acquired proficiency in Jewish literature. but had studied most 
122 carefully that of the Greeks as well. They were specially qualified therefore for serving on embassies 
and they undertook this duty whenever it was necessary. They possessed a great facility for 
conferences and the discussion of problems connected with the law. They espoused the middle 
course—and this is always the best course to pursue. They abjured the rough and uncouth manner, 
but they were altogether above pride and never assumed an air of superiority over others, and in 
conversation they were ready to listen and give an appropriate answer to every question. And all 
of them carefully observed this rule and were anxious above everything else to excel each other in 
123 its observance and they were all of them worthy of their leader and of his virtue. And one could 
observe how they loved Eleazar by their unwillingness to be torn away from him and how he loved 
them. For besides the letter which he wrote to the king concerning their safe return, he also earnestly 
124 besought Andreas to work for the same end and urged me, too, to assist to the best of my ability. And 


114. rich in the arts, wodvrexvos. The description of Jerusalem as ‘a city of many crafts’ is an exaggeration even 
when we admit that the phrase need not necessarily imply technical originality. Apollonius of Rhodes goes to the 
opposite extremes when he says ‘the Jews are the most inept of the Barbarians and the only ones who have not 
contributed any invention useful to life’, Josephus, c. Apzom. ii. 15. Cf. G. A. Smith, Jerusalem, i. 373. 

115. Ptolemais founded by the King. The reference is to Philadelphus II, who gave his name to the town 
which was previously called Acco or Akka, though some authorities regard it as the foundation of Ptolemy I 
(cf. Mahaffy, P/olemaic Dynasty, 60). The place figures very largely in the relations between Egypt and Palestine, 
see Ency. Bib., art. ‘Ptolemais’. Wendland attaches considerable importance to the data afforded by the mention of 
these harbours for fixing the date of Aristeas. Joppa did not belong to the Jews till after 146 B.c. (1 Mac. x. 76, 
xiv. 5, 34) Gaza was not Jewish territory till it was captured by Alexander Jannaeus about 96 B.c. The fact, however, 
that Ascalon and Ptolemais were never Jewish towns makes it impossible to attach too much importance to this 
ee: The writer might obviously have made the same mistake about Joppa and Gaza as about Ascalon and 

tolemals. 

116. made incursions. Two MSS. read inéBnoav (‘retired’) for éméBynoay. It is difficult, however, to make this 
reading fit in with the general sense of the passage. | 

a hundred acres. The writer may possibly be transferring the land system of the Fayfim. to Palestine. 
We know from the Papyri that cleruchies of 100 arourae were common in this district of Egypt. Cf. Mahaffy, Ptolemaic 
Dynasty, p. 90. 

. 122.. They espoused the middle course. An illustration of the influence of the Aristotelian doctrine of the mean 
on Jewish thought, cp. § 223 mAjp ev wact petpiorns kaddy, and also § 256. 
106 


THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 124-139 


oe Cee ee ae best attention to the matter, he said that he was still greatly 
str ; e king out of the goodness of his nature considered it his highest 
privilege, whenever he heard of a man who was superior to his fellows in culture and wisdom. to 
125 summon him to his court. For I have heard of a fine saying of his to the effect that by securing 
Just and prudent men about his person he would secure the greatest protection for his kingdom 
since such friends would unreservedly give him the most beneficial advice. And the men who were 
126 now being sent to him by Eleazar undoubtedly possessed these qualities. And he frequently 
asserted upon oath that he would never let the men go if it were merely some private interest 
of his own that constituted the impelling motive—but it was for the common advantage of 
127 all the citizens that he was sending them. For, he explained, the good life consists in the keeping of 
the enactments of the law, and this end is achieved much more by hearing than by reading. From 
this and other similar statements it was clear what his feelings towards them were. : 
128 It is worth while to mention briefly the information which he gave in reply to our questions. 
For I suppose that most people feel a curiosity with regard to some of the enactments in the law, 
129 especially those about meats and drinks and animals recognised as unclean. When we asked why, since 
there is but one form of creation, some animals are regarded as unclean for eating, and others unclean 
even to the touch (for though the law is scrupulous on most points, it is specially scrupulous on such 
130 matters as these) he began his reply as follows : ‘ You observe,’ he said, ‘what an effect our modes 
of life and our associations produce upon us ; by associating with the bad, men catch their depravities 
and become miserable throughout their life ; but if they live with the wise and prudent, they find 
131 the means of escaping from ignorance and amending their lives. Our Lawgiver first of all laid 
down the principles of piety and righteousness and inculcated them point by point, not merely by 
prohibitions but by the use of examples as well, demonstrating the injurious effects of siz and the 
132 punishments inflicted by God upon the guilty. For he proved first of all that there is only one 
God and that his power is manifested throughout the universe, since every place is filled with his 
sovereignty and none of the things which are wrought in secret by men upon the earth escapes His 
knowledge. For all that a man does and all that is to come to pass in the future are manifest to 
133 Him. Working out these truths carefully and having made them plain, he showed that even if 
a man should think of doing evil—to say nothing of actually effecting ithe would not escape 
134 detection, for he made it clear that the power of God pervaded the whole of the law. Beginning 
from this starting point he went on to show that all mankind except ourselves believe in the 
existence of many gods, though they themselves are much more powerful than the beings whom 
135 they vainly worship. For when they have made statues of stone and wood, they say that they are 
the images of those who have invented something useful for life and they worship them, though 
136 they have clear proof that they possess no feeling. For it would be utterly foolish to suppose that 
any one became a god in virtue of his inventions. For tle zmventors simply took certain objects 
already created and by combining them together, showed that they possessed a fresh utility: they 
137 did not themselves create the substance of the thing, and so it is a vain and foolish thing for people 
to make gods of men like themselves. For in our times there are many who are much more 
inventive and much more learned than the men of former days who have been deified, and yet they 
would never come to worship them. The makers and authors of these myths think that they are 
138 the wisest of the Greeks. Why need we speak of other infatuated people, Egyptians and the like, 
who place their reliance upon wild beasts and most kinds of creeping things and cattle, and worship 
them, and offer sacrifices to them both while living and when dead ?’ 
139 ‘Now our Lawgiver being a wise man and specially endowed by God to understand all things, took 


124. to give our best attention. The MSS. read dporticew which is obviously a corruption. Wendland suggests 
ed dpovrioev, which gives the sense required. a spn? 

127. The good life consists: a good statement of the Pharisaic position which is advocated in this section of the 
Epistle. For the ethical function of the law cp. §§ 144, 168, 169. 

128. I suppose people. So Euseb. ‘ : ; F 

129. specially scrupulous. The reading is uncertain. Some MSS. read mavy daodaipdyws. Eusebius has radu 
for révv. Other MSS. of Aristeas combine thetwo. Schmidt suggests rayranac: and Wendland reads wavteh@s. The 
meaning however is clear. : 

133. the power of God pervaded, or ‘throughout the whole of the law, he displayed the power of God (Thackeray). 

135. who have invented something useful. Aristeas’ explanation of the origin of idolatry is Euhemeristic. 
Euhemerus, who lived at the Court of Cassander in Macedonia about 316 B.C., maintained that the gods were originally 
men who had distinguished themselves either as warriors or benefactors of mankind, and who after their death received 
divine worship from the grateful people. Contrast the explanation of the origin of idolatry in the Look of Wisdom, 
where it is derived from Nature-worship (ch. xiii), ‘Vain are all men by nature who are ignorant of God... and deem 
either fire or wind or the swift air, or the circle of the stars, or the turbulent water, or the lights of heaven to be the 
gods which govern the world.’ ‘ bat es. 
136. it would be.. . foolish, reading avénrov (Eusebius) for the MSS. avénro. 

became a god. So Wendland emends. 
107 


THE:‘LETTER OF ARISTEAS 130-158 


a comprehensive view of each particular detail, and fenced us round with impregnable ramparts and 
walls of iron, that we might not mingle at all with any of the other nations, but remain pure in body 
and soul, free from all vain imaginations, worshipping the one Almighty God above the whole 
140 creation. Hence the leading Egyptian priests having looked carefully into many matters, and being 
cognizant with (our) affairs, call us “men of God”. This is a title which does not belong to the rest of 
mankind but only to those who worship the true God. The rest are men wot of God but of meats 
and drinks and clothing. For their whole disposition leads them to find solace in these things. 
141 Among our people such things are reckoned of no account, but throughout their whole life their 
142 main consideration is the sovereignty of God. Therefore lest we should be corrupted by any 
abomination, or our lives be perverted by evil communications, he hedged us round on all sides by 
143 rules of purity, affecting alike what we eat, or drink, or touch, or hear, or see. For though, speaking 
generally, all things are alike in their natural constitution, since they are all governed by one and the 
same power, yet there is a deep reason in each individual case why we abstain from the use of certain 
things and enjoy the common use of others. For the sake of illustration I will run over one or two 
144 points and explain them to you. For you must not fall into the degrading idea that it was out of 
regard to mice and weasels and other such things that Moses drew up his laws with such exceeding 
care, All these ordinances were made for the sake of righteousness to aid the quest for virtue and 

145 the perfecting of character. For all the birds that we use are tame and distinguished by their 
cleanliness, feeding on various kinds of grain and pulse, such as for instance pigeons, turtle-doves, 
146 locusts, partridges, geese also, and all other birds of this class. But the birds which are forbidden 
you will find to be wild and carnivorous, tyrannising over the others by the strength which they possess, 
and cruelly obtaining food by preying on the tame birds enumerated above. And not only so, but 

147 they seize lambs and kids, and injure human beings too, whether dead or alive, and so by naming 
them unclean, he gave a sign by means of them that those, for whom the legislation was ordained, 
must practise righteousness in their hearts and not tyrannise over any one in reliance upon their own 
strength nor rob them of anything, but steer their course of life in accordance with justice, just as 
the tame birds, already mentioned, consume the different kinds of pulse that grow upon the earth 
3 and do not tyrannise to the destruction of their own kindred. Our legislator taught us therefore 
that it is by such methods as these that indications are given to the wise, that they must be just and 
effect nothing by violence, and refrain from tyrannising over others in reliance upon their own 
strength. For since it is considered unseemly even to touch such wzclean animals, as have been 
mentioned, on account of their particular habits, ought we not to take every precaution lest our own 
150 characters should be destroyed to the same extent? Wherefore all the rules which he has laid down 
with regard to what is permitted in the case of these dirds and other animals, he has enacted with 
the object of teaching us a moral lesson. For the division of the hoof and the separation of the 
claws are intended to teach us that we must discriminate between our individual actions with a view 

151 to the practice of virtue. For the strength of our whole body and its activity depend upon our 
shoulders and limbs. Therefore he compels us to recognise that we must perform all our actions 


- 
aN 
ioe 


14 


Ko) 


140. cognizant with (our) affairs, perecynkdres mpaypdrer, ‘conversant with the world’ (Thackeray). Diels suggests 

ypapparer, for mpayudrwy, ‘conversant with literature.’ 
men of meats and drinks, &c. Cp. Matt. vi. 31-2 ‘After all these things do the Gentiles seek.? The word 
translated ‘ clothing’ (cxénn) also means ‘ shelter’ or ‘ protection’ and this may possibly be the meaning here. 

144. the degrading idea, «is rov xaramemtwxdra Adyov, or ‘Thou must not be led to follow the rejected view’ 
(Thackeray). : 

mice. In Eusebius the best attested reading seems to be pdr, ‘flies’. For the Mosaic prohibition see Ley, xi. 
29. For the argument cp. 1 Cor. ix. 9, ‘Doth God care for the oxen?’ 

145. locusts, Lev. xi. 22, In both RV and AV the word drrd«ng is translated ‘bald locust’. In Eusebius the 
best attested reading is drrayai a species of moor-fowl. There is a full description of this bird in Athen. ix. 387, where 
it is said to be ‘rather bigger than a partridge, striped all over the back and of the colour of clay but rather redder, 
as perhaps to the “attagen Ionicus” of Hor. Efod. ii. 54.’ Cp. Gifford’s note on Eusebius, Praep. 

Vang. 372C. 

147. destruction of their own kindred. Eusebius (whom Wendland follows here) inserts ore rév imoBeBnkdérer 
ovre, before rv cvyyewxay ‘for the destruction either of those beneath them or of their own kind’, 

150. teaching us a moral lesson. The allegorical method seems to have been first employed on a large scale by 
the Stoics, though there are traces of it in Plato and Aristotle. Philo is of course the great exponent of the method, 
though the fact that he speaks of it as a well-established system and warns men that the allegorical interpretation does 
not destroy the literal force of the enactments of the law, proves that it had already found its way into Jewish circles— 
a fact which is further substantiated by the New Testament (Drummond, Philo, i. 20). There is a sign of it, too, in 
the Book of Wisdom (x. 17, xviii. 24). But we have no trace of so elaborate an employment of the method, as we find 
in Aristeas, amongst the Jews before Philo. It is curious, too, that it is only used in the law section. Aristeas does not 
take the opportunity of introducing it into his explanation of the High Priest’s dress, which was a favourite subject 
with later allegorists (cf. Philo, Vz¢. Mos. iii. 11-14, De Monarchia, ii. 225.7 and Josephus, Anéig. iii. 7.7). The 
best illustration of the method of Aristeas is found in the Epistle of Barnabas. 

division of the hoof, cp. Lev. xi. 3 ff., Deut. xiv. 6 ff. 
151. compels us to recognise. The text is uncertain. There are two readings (1) dvayxdger rd onperododa, 
108 


Eee Patti R OF ARISTEAS 151-165 


eee discrimination according to the standard of righteousness—more especially because we have 
152 been distinctly separated from the rest of mankind. For most other men defile themselves by 
promiscuous intercourse, thereby working great iniquity, and whole countries and cities pride them- 
selves upon such vices. For they not only have intercourse with men but they defile their own 
153 mothers and even their daughters. But we have been kept separate from such sins. And the 
people who have been separated in the aforementioned way are also characterised by the Lawgiver 
as possessing the gift of memory. For all animals “which are cloven-footed and chew the cud” 
154 represent to the initiated the symbol of memory. For the act of chewing the cud is nothing else 
than the reminiscence of life and existence. For life is wont to be sustained by means of food, 
155 wherefore he exhorts us in the Scripture also in these words: “ Thou shalt surely remember the Lord 
that wrought in thee those great and wonderful things”. For when they are properly conceived, 
they are manifestly great and glorious ; first the construction of the body and the disposition of the 
156 food and the separation of each individual limb and, far more, the organisation of the senses, the operation 
and invisible movement of the mind, the rapidity of its particular actions and its discovery of the 
157 arts, display an infinite resourcefulness. Wherefore he exhorts us to remember that the aforesaid 
parts are kept together by the divine power with consummate skill. For he has marked out every 
158 time and place that we may continually remember the God who rules and preserves (us). For in the 
matter of meats and drinks he bids us first of all offer part as a sacrifice and then forthwith enjoy 
our meal. Moreover, upon our garments he has given us a symbol of remembrance, and in like 
manner he has ordered us to put the divine oracles upon our gates and doors as a remembrance of 
159 God. And upon our hands, too, he expressly orders the symbol to be fastened, clearly showing that 
we ought to perform every act in righteousness, remembering (our own creation), and above all the 
160 fear of God. He bids men also, when lying down to sleep and rising up again, to meditate upon the 
works of God, not only in word, but by observing distinctly the change and impression produced 
upon them, when they are going to sleep, and also their waking, how divine and incomprehensible 
161 the change from one of these states to the other is. The excellency of the analogy in regard to 
discrimination and memory has now been pointed out to you, according to our interpretation of “the 
cloven hoof and the chewing of the cud”. For our laws have not been drawn up at random or in 
accordance with the first caswal thought that occurred to the mind, but with a view to truth and the 
162 indication of right reason. For by means of the directions which he gives with regard to meats and 
drinks and particular cases of touching, he bids us neither to do nor listen to anything thoughtlessly 
163 nor to resort to injustice by the abuse of the power of reason. In the case of the wild animals, too, 
the same principle may be discovered. For the character of the weasel and of mice and such 
164 animals as these, which are expressly mentioned, is destructive. Mice defile and damage everything, 
not only for their own food but even to the extent of rendering absolutely useless to man whatever 
165 it falls in their way to damage. The weasel class, too, is peculiar: for besides what has been said, it 


(2)=.. 72 onpeovoba. Thackeray conjectures 6 onpevovra, and translates ‘ He constrains us to do everything ..-as he 
signifies by these symbols’. Gifford in Eusebius rendering (2) translates ‘ by the signification herein given’. 

152. we have been kept separate, SueardhpeOa or ‘we have received express injunctions ", see Lev. xviii. 6 ff. It is 
significant as Wendland says that there is no reference to the Egyptian practice of marrying a sister. 

154. life is wont to be sustained, or ‘ He considers that life exists by taking food (Thackeray). 

155. in the scripture. For this remarkable introduction to the quotation, see note on § 168. 

Thou shalt remember. A loose quotation of phrases conflated from Deut. vii. 18, 19, and x. 21. The great 
and wonderful things’ of Deut. refer to the Divine deliverances of Israel, but here the phrase is applied to the human 
anatomy. Gifford thinks there is a reminiscence of Job xhi. 3. ike ; Nee 

156. display an infinite, &c., lit. ‘contain an infinite manner,’ dmrépacroy mepiexet TPOTrOY. Thackeray renders ‘ bear 
the marks of an infinite wisdom’. Gifford, reading émépacroy, renders ‘have a delightful character ’. ; 
157. kept together... with consummate skill. Thackeray renders ‘are both created and preserved ’. 
. enjoy. So Euseb. ? 2 ae 
es garments, ¢« ray mepiBodaiov. There seems to be an allusion to Num. xv. 38, and eo ea 12 = 
Tov recodpey Kpaoréday TOY mepiBoraiwy cov. The reference is to the zizith or gedilim fringes or twisted threads at the 
four corners of the garment, see DBH art. ‘Fringes’. Schiirer, #T il, 2. 112. 


the divine oracles, see note on § 177. 
upon our gates, cp. Deut. vi. 7 ff., a reference to the AZeswsa, an oblong box fixed to house and room doors above 


the right-hand door-post on which was written in twenty-two lines the two paragraphs, Deut. vi. 4-9, xi. 13-21. Schiirer, 


ts 25 Lae : 
eer Foon our hands, cp. Deut. vi. 8, a reference to the Zephilla, a small dice-shaped hollow parchment case 
on which were written the passages Ex. xili. [—Io, Xill. 11-16 ; Deut. vi. 4-9. xi. 13-21. It was fastened by means of 
a strap drawn through it to the upper part of the left arm, Schiirer #7; il. 2. 113. 
wn creation. Restored from Euseb. ! : 
reas doing to sleep. Aristeas seems to have been interested in the psychology of sleep. See §§ 21 3-16, and 
iscussion in 3 Mac. v. 11. a < 
ae a taise of the power, &c., or ‘and not by availing ourselves of the overbearing power of speech have 
Le scais unrighteousness’ (Thackeray), or ‘nor to resort to injustice by employing the mastery of language °. 
109g 


THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 165-177 


has a characteristic which is defiling : It conceives through the ears and brings forth through the 

166 mouth. And it is for this reason that a like practice is declared unclean in men. For by embodying 
in speech all that they receive through the ears, they involve others in evils and work no ordinary 
impurity, being themselves altogether defiled by the pollution of impiety.. And your king, as we 
are informed, does quite right in destroying such men.’ 

167 Then I said ‘I suppose you mean the informers, for he constantly exposes them to tortures and to 

168 painful forms of death’, ‘Yes, he replied, ‘these are the men I mean; for to watch for men’s 
destruction is an unholy thing. And our law forbids us to injure any one either by word or deed. My 
brief account of these matters ought to have convinced you, that all our regulations have been drawn 
up with a view to righteousness, and that nothing has been enacted in the Scripture thoughtlessly or 
without due reason, but its purpose is to enable us throughout our whole life and in all our actions 

169 to practise righteousness before all men, being mindful of Almighty God. And so concerning meats 
and things unclean, creeping things, and wild beasts, the whole system aims at righteousness and 
righteous relationships between man and man.’ 

170 He seemed to me to have made a good defence on all the points; for in reference also to the 
calves and rams and goats which are offered, he said that it was necessary to take them from the 
herds and flocks, and sacrifice tame animals and offer nothing wild, that the offerers of the sacrifices 
might understand the symbolic meaning of the lawgiver and not be under the influence of an arrogant 
self-consciousness. For he, who offers a sacrifice, makes an offering also of his own soul in all 

171 its moods. I think that these particulars with regard to our discussion are worth narrating, and 
on account of the sanctity and natural meaning of the law, I have been induced to explain them 
to you clearly, Philocrates, because of your own devotion to learning. 

172. And Eleazar, after offering the sacrifice, and selecting the envoys, and preparing many gifts for the 

173 king, despatched us on our journey in great security. And when we reached Alexandria, the king 
was at once informed of our arrival. On our admission to the palace, Andreas and I warmly greeted 

174 the king and handed over to him the letter written by Eleazar. The king was very anxious 
to meet the envoys, and gave orders that all the other officials should be dismissed and the envoys 

175 summoned to his presence at once. Now this excited general surprise, for it is customary for those 
who come to seek an audience with the king on matters of importance to be admitted to his presence 
on the fifth day, while envoys from kings or very important cities with difficulty secure admission 
to the Court in thirty days—but these men he counted worthy of greater honour, since he held their 
master in such high esteem, and so he immediately dismissed those whose presence he regarded as 
superfluous and continued walking about until they came in and he was able to welcome them. 

176 When they entered with the gifts which had been sent with them and the valuable parchments, on 
which the law was inscribed in gold in Jewish characters, for the parchment was wonderfully 
prepared and the connexion between the pages had been so effected as to be invisible, the king as soon 

177 as he saw them began to ask them about the books. And when they had taken the rolls out of their 
coverings and unfolded the pages, the king stood still fora long time and then making obeisance 
about seven times, he said: ‘I thank you, my friends, and I thank him that sent you still more, and 


165. through the mouth, cf. ZA, Barn. x. 8. Aristotle, De Generatione Animalium, iii. 6. 5, refutes this common 
belief and explains its origin. ‘The weasel has just the same kind of womb as all other quadrupeds. How then can 
the embryo pass from it into the mouth? But because the weasel, like all other cloven-footed animals... brings forth 
extremely small young and often carries them from place to place in her mouth, she has given rise to this opinion’ 
(quoted by Gifford, Zuseb. 374 d). 

167. informers, éuparcrai—delatores. Graetz cites this passage as an argument for the late date of the Epistle— 
and thinks that it refers incontestably to the punishment inflicted on two Roman knights at the instigation of the 
Emperor for bringing false charges against the Praetor Magius Caecilianus in A.D. 21: cp. the concluding words of § 166, 
‘Your king as we are informed does quite right in putting such men to death’. 

168. has been enacted in the Scripture, oid¢p ciky) Kararérakrat dud THS ypahijs. Compare § 155. This is probably 
the first instance where the law is spoken of as Scripture. It is quite a question whether % ypady is used in this sense 
even in the New Testament (see Lightfoot’s note on Gal. iii. 22). We find the phrase ev ypapy vspov Movoéas used in 
the Testaments of the Patriarchs (T. Zab. iii. 4), but there appears to be no instance of oT yoabn used alone in the pre- 
Christian era. Deissmann has shown that the phrase [kara r7]v ypadny is found ona Fayfim Papyrus of 5-6 a.D.—and 
argues that in the first instance it was used as the equivalent of 7d yeypapypévov in legal documents (Biblical Studies 
p. 250). Compare the use of dypaha and Sid ypartéy in § 56. Possibly the usage may go back to earlier times. ; 


168. without due reason, lit. ‘of a legendary character’, or ‘in a fabulous way’ reading pvdwdas (as in Eusebi 
; 4 sebiu 

for Ovpedas as in the MSS; a °t : 

170. He seemed to me. There is some doubt as to whether this rendering of évdu¢e is possible. Gifford thinks this 
usage of the word is peculiar to Aristeas and compares the phrases vopicery yap rois modXois in § 128. Wendland and 
reey conjecture evopifero. Otherwise we must translate ‘ He thought that he had given me a good defence on 
all the points’. 

171. sanctity and natural meaning, dia tv ceuvdrnta Kat gvorkny Sidvoray rod vopov. The meaning of the latter 
phrase is uncertain. Schiirer thinks it refers to the ‘naturalness? or ‘reasonableness ’ of the law, Thackeray translates 
“the solemnity and inner meaning of the law’. 


Ilo 


THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 178-187 


178 most of all God, whose oracles these are.’ And when all, the envoys and the others who were 
present as well, shouted out at one time and with one voice: ‘God save the King!’ he burst into 
tears of joy. For his exaltation of soul and the sezse of the overwhelming honour which had been 

179 paid him compelled him to weep over his good fortune. He commanded them to put the rolls 
back in their places and then after saluting the men, said: ‘It was right, men of God, that I should 
first of all pay my reverence to the books for the sake of which I summoned you here and then, 
when I had done that, to extend the right-hand of friendship to you. It was for this reason that I 

180 did this first. I have enacted that this day, on which you arrived, shall be kept as a great day and 
it will be celebrated annually throughout my life time. It happens also that it is the anniversary of 

181 my naval victory over Antigonus, Therefore I shall be glad to feast with you to-day.’ ‘ Everything 
that you may have occasion to use’, he said, ‘shall be prepared (for you) in a befitting manner and 
for me also with you.’ After they had expressed their delight, he gave orders that the best quarters 
near the citadel should be assigned to them, and that preparations should be made for the banquet. 

182 And Nicanor summoned the lord high steward, Dorotheus, who was the special officer appointed to 
look after the Fews, and commanded him to make the necessary preparation for each one. For 
this arrangement had been made by the king and it is an arrangement which you see maintained 
to-day. For as many cities (as) have (special) customs in the matter of drinking, eating, and reclining, 
have special officers appointed to look after their requirements. And whenever they come to visit 
the kings, preparations are made in accordance with their own customs, in order that there may be 
no discomfort to disturb the enjoyment of their visit. The same precaution was taken in the case of 
the Jewish envoys. Now Dorotheus who was the patron appointed to look after Fewzshk guests was 

183.a very conscientious man. All the stores which were under his control and set apart for the 
reception of such guests, he brought out for the feast. He arranged the seats in two rows in 
accordance with the king’s instructions. For he had ordered him to make half the men sit at his right 
hand and the rest behind him, in order that he might not withhold from them the highest possible 
honour. When they had taken their seats he instructed Dorotheus to carry out everything in 

184 accordance with the customs which were in use amongst his Jewish guests. Therefore he dispensed 
with the services of the sacred heralds and the sacrificing priests and the others who were 
accustomed to offer the prayers, and called upon one of our number, Eleazar, the oldest of the Jewish 
priests, to offer prayer instead. And he rose up and made a remarkable prayer. ‘May Almighty 

185 God enrich you, O king, with all the good things which He has made and may He grant you and your 
wife and your children and your comrades the continual possession of them as long as you live! i 
At these words a loud and joyous applause broke out which lasted for a considerable time, and then 

_ 186 they turned to the enjoyment of the banquet which had been prepared. All the arrangements for 
service at table were carried out in accordance with the injunction of Dorotheus. Among the 
attendants were the royal pages and others who held places of honour at the king’s court. 

187 Taking an opportunity afforded by a pause 7 the banquet the king asked the envoy who sat in 


177. whose oracles these are. Cp. § 158. This is probably the earliest instance of the application of the term 
ra Aéyta to the law as a whole, though it is used in Sirach xxxvi. 14 of divine utterances in general. This use of the 
word is found several times in the New Testament: Acts vii. 38; Rom. iii. 2; Heb. v. 12. 

180. celebrated annually. Philo asserts that an annual festival was held at Pharos in his day to celebrate the 
translation of the LXX (de vita Moysis, ii. 7. 140 M). ; 

naval victory over Antigonus. Philadelphus was decisively defeated by Antigonus Gonatas at the battle of 
Kos (c. 258). Asaresult of this battle Egypt lost its supremacy for some years, though it regained its power in the 
battle of Andros. Wendland thinks that Aristeas has purposely turned a defeat into a victory. Thackeray holds that 
the reference may be to the victory at Andros. This latter suggestion seems very improbable. According to Droysen 
the battle of Andros did not take place till 245 B.c.—two years after the death of Philadelphus. And even if with 
Mahaffy we date it 247 B.c.—in the last year of the reign of Philadelphus—it would be impossible to reconcile the 
statement here with other historical data in Aristeas. A victory in 247 B.C. could not have been made the subject of 
an annual celebration before the death of Arsinoe (in 270 B. c.), who is assumed to be alive throughout the Epistle. 

181. that you may have occasion to use. I adopt the conjecture of Wendland, who reads ots ovyxpiode for the 
avyxpnoeabe or ovyxpnonoe of the MSS. One important MS. reads ovyyxpioGar, which seems to justify the emendation. 

near the citadel. See note on § 41. ; as : : 

182. the lord high steward. The MSS. read ap xinrpos, the chief physician. This does not seem satisfactory, and 
Josephus paraphrases 6 emt ths rev tévor arrodoxis reraypevos . . . Letronne conjectures dpxedéarpos (which is accepted by 
Wendland). This word is found only on an Inscription (C.1.G. 4678). The term €déarpos originally meant the official 
who tasted dishes before the king, and was borrowed from Persia by Alexandria. _ Apxedearpos may be translated 
‘the lord high steward ’, cp. Thackeray, /QA, xv, p. 371. Lumbroso, Aecherches sur Léconomie polit. de? Egypte, 205. 

183, all the stores, &c. Thackeray translates dts laid out all the coverings for the couches which were in his 

ing were set apart for receptions of this kind’. 
ieee. ceerdink to Tose ahds the man’s name was Elisha, and Wendland suggests that this ought to be 
regarded as the true reading here. 

185. your wife and your children. See notes on § 41. , : : hatha : 

your comrades: dpovoovor, lit. ‘ Those who are in harmony with you.’ Wendland suggests 6poyeveor “relatives ’. 

186. among the attendants, or ‘ among the guests were royal children’, &c. 

Iil 


f 
{ 


THE LETTER OF ARISTBAS 188-199 


the seat of honour (for they were arranged according to seniority), How he could keep his kingdom 

188 unimpaired to the end? After pondering for a moment he replied, “You could best establish its 
security if you were to imitate the unceasing benignity of God. For if you exhibit clemency and 
inflict mild punishments upon those who deserve them in accordance with their deserts, you will 

189 turn them from evil and lead them to repentance.’ The king praised the answer and then asked 
the next man, How he could do everything for the best in all his actions? And he replied, ‘ If 
a man maintains a just bearing towards all, he will always act rightly on every occasion, remembering 
that every thought is known to God. If you take the fear of God as your starting-point, you 
will never miss the goal,’ 

190 Lhe king complimented this man, too, upon his answer and asked another, How he could have 
friends like-minded with himself? He replied, ‘If they see you studying the interests of the 
multitudes over whom you rule; you will do well to observe how God bestows his benefits on the 

191 human race, providing for them health and food and all other things in due season.’ After expressing 
his agreement with the reply, the king asked the next guest, How in giving audiences and passing 
judgments he could gain the praise even of those who failed to win their suit? And he said, 
‘If you are fair in speech to all alike and never act insolently nor tyrannically in your treatment of 

192 Offenders. And you will do this if you watch the method by which God acts. The petitions of the 
worthy are always fulfilled, while those who fail to obtain an answer to their prayers are informed by. 
means of dreams or events of what was harmful zz their requests and that God does not smite them 
according to their sins or the greatness of His strength, but acts with forbearance towards them.’ 

193 The king praised the man warmly for his answer and asked the next in order, How he could be 
invincible in military affairs? And he replied, ‘If he did not trust entirely to his multitudes or his 
watlike forces, but called upon God continually to bring his enterprises to a successful issue, while 

194 he himself discharged all his duties in the spirit of justice.’ Welcoming this answer, he asked another 
how he might become an object of dread to his enemies. And he replied, ‘If while maintaining 
a vast supply of arms and forces he remembered that these things were powerless to achieve 
a permanent and conclusive result. For even God instils fear into the minds of men by granting 
reprieves and making merely a display of the greatness of his power.’ 

195 This man the king praised and then said to the next, What is the highest good in life? And he 
answered ‘To know that God is Lord of the Universe, and that in our finest achievements it is not 
we who attain success but God who by his power brings all things to fulfilment and leads us 
to the goal. 

196 The king exclaimed that the man had answered well and then asked the next How he could keep 
all his possessions intact and finally hand them down to his successors in the same condition? And 
he answered ‘ By praying constantly to God that you may be inspired with high motives in all your 
undertakings and by warning your descendants not to be dazzled by fame or wealth, for it is God 
who bestows all these gifts and men never by themselves win the supremacy ’. 

197 The king expressed his agreement with the answer and enquired of the next guest, How he could 
bear with equanimity whatever befell him? And he said, ‘If you have a firm grasp of the thought 
that all men are appointed by God to share the greatest evil as well as the greatest good, since it is 
impossible for one who is a man to be exempt from these. But God, to whom we ought always 
to pray, inspires us with courage to endure.’ 

198 Delighted with the man’s reply, the king said that all their answers had been good. ‘I will put 
a question to one other’, he added, ‘and then | will stop for the present: that we may turn our attention 

199 to the enjoyment of the feast and spend a pleasant time.’ Thereupon he asked the man, What is the 
true aim of courage? And he answered, ‘If a right plan is carried out in the hour of danger in 
accordance with the original intention. For all things are accomplished by God to your advantage, 
O king, since your purpose is good.’ 


_ 188. inflict mild punishments, Adtpd¢or rods dgious emvetkeatepov Kabas eiow dévot. Thackeray, following Schmidt 
inserts 7 before ka@és, ‘punish with greater forbearance than is due to them.’ Cp. also § 208, ‘ 

189. do everything for the best, following the emendation of Wendland zés av éeacra {kaddora) mpdrror. 
, ifaman...act rightly. I follow the text of Wendland here: dicaov e mpos Gmravras duatnpot €avrdy, Kadas Th 
ekaora mpdéet. Thackeray reads éavré and connects with the following clause éavré kadds ta exaora mpage. This 
is very difficult to translate because we cannot render ‘he will act rightly by Himself.’ Dr. Charles has suggested to 
me that we might possibly read éavréy (which is found in some MSS.) and translate ‘ He will do everything best as 
regards himself so long as he observes what is just towards all’; or else we might suppose that a cai has dropped out 
before €avr@, and then changing mpd€ee to mpdooo Or mpdooe. we might translate ‘If a man maintains righteousness 
towards all and always acts rightly in himself,’ &c. 

starting-point. The emphasis on the connexion between morality and religion is one of the characteristics of 

the Epistle. For the conception of God as the katapx7 of Ethics see §§ 200, 235. 

194. Even God instils. It will be observed that there is no logical parallel here between the human and divine 
action. Wendland suggests that Aristeas makes use of an older collection of sayings, appending to each of them a not 
always appropriate theological conclusion. 


I1l2 


THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 200-211 


200 When all had signified by their applause their agreement with the answer, the king said to the 
philosophers (for not a few of them were present), ‘It is my opinion that these men excel in virtue 
and possess extraordinary knowledge, since on the spur of the moment they have given fitting 
answers to these questions which I have put to them, and have all made God the starting-point of 
their words.’ 

201 And Menedemus, the philosopher of Eretria, said, ‘True, O King—for since the universe is 
managed by providence and since we rightly perceive that man is the creation of God, it follows 

202 that all power and beauty of speech proceed from God.’ When the king had nodded his assent to 
this sentiment, the speaking ceased and they proceeded to enjoy themselves. When evening came 
on, the banquet ended. 

203 On the following day they sat down to table again and continued the banquet according to the 
same arrangements. When the king thought that a fitting opportunity had arrived to put inquiries 
to his guests, he proceeded to ask further questions of the men who sat next in order to those who 

204 had given answers on the previous day. He began to open the conversation with the eleventh man, 
for there were ten who had been asked questions on the former occasion. When silence was 

205 established, he asked How he could continue to be rich? After a brief reflection, the man who had 
been asked the question replied—‘If he did nothing unworthy of his position, never acted 
licentiously, never lavished expense on empty and vain pursuits, but by acts of benevolence made all 
his subjects well disposed towards himself. For it is God who is the author of all good things and 

206 Him man must needs obey.’ The king bestowed praise upon him and then asked another How he 
could maintain the truth? In reply to the question he said, ‘ By recognizing that a lie brings great 
disgrace upon all men, and more especially upon kings. For since they have the power to do 
whatever they wish, why should they resort to lies? In addition to this you must always remember, 
O King, that God is a lover of the truth.’ 

207. The king received the answer with great delight and looking az another said, ‘What is the 
teaching of wisdom?’ And the other replied, ‘As you wish that no evil should befall you, but to 
be a partaker of all good things, so you should act on the same principle towards your subjects and 
offenders, and you should mildly admonish the noble and good. For God draws all men to Himself 
by his benignity.’ 

208 The king praised him and asked the next in order How he could be the friend of men? And he 
replied, ‘By observing that the human race increases and is born with much trouble and great 
suffering : wherefore you must not lightly punish or inflict torments upon them, since you know that 
the life of men is made up of pains and penalties. For if you understood everything you would be 
filled with pity, for God also is pitiful. 

209 The king received the answer with approbation and inquired of the next ‘What is the most 
essential qualification for ruling?’ ‘To keep oneself’, he answered, ‘free from bribery and to practise 
sobriety during the greater part of one’s life, to honour righteousness above all things, and to make 
friends of men of this type. For God, too, is a lover of justice.’ 

210 Having signified his approval, the king said to another ‘ What is the true mark of piety?’ And 
he replied, ‘To perceive that God constantly works in the Universe and knows all things, and no 
man who acts unjustly and works wickedness can escape His notice. As God is the benefactor of 
the whole world, so you, too, must imitate Him and be void of offence.’ 

211 The king signified his agreement and said to another ‘ What is the essence of kingship?’ And he 
replied, ‘To rule oneself well and not to be led astray by wealth or fame to immoderate or unseemly 
desires, this is the true way of ruling if you reason the matter well out. For all that you really need 
is yours, and God is free from need and benignant withal. Let your thoughts be such as become 
a man, and desire not many things but only such as are necessary for ruling.’ 


201. Menedemus, a Greek philosopher who lived at Eretria in Euboea, where he founded a school of thought. 
Born about 350 and died between 278 and 275 B.C. He was the disciple of Stilpo and the friend of Antigonus 
Gonatas. Our knowledge of his philosophy is limited and indefinite; it is derived from statements in Athenaeus, 
Diogenes Laertius, and Plutarch. We have no knowledge that he ever visited Alexandria, and his death had in all 
probability occurred before he is introduced into the narrative, here. See Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, ii. 205 fi. ; 
H. Mallett, Histoire de l'école de Mégare et des écoles a’ Ets et d’ Erétrie (1845). : : } 

206. in addition to this, reading mpocdapBdver. Wendland prefers mpohapBdvew, which would be translated ‘you 
must always set before your mind’. mes : oil, : : ; 

207. As you wish that no evil. A similar statement of ‘the golden rule’ in its negative form is found in 
Tob. iv. 15 kal 6 puceis, undevi roujons. Cp. Hillel, ‘ What is hateful to thyself, do not to thy fellow man. 2 

208. with much trouble, following an emendation of Wendland, who conjectures 7év@ for xpdvg. If we take the MSS. 
reading we must translate with Thackeray, ‘ By considering after how long a time and through what great sufferings 
the human race comes to maturity, aye and to the birth !’ : 

211. Thisis the true way. ‘The text is corrupt and some such words must be supplied to make sense. : 

All that you really need, following a conjecture of Wendland, who suggests daa Séov, for as ovdév. With the 


1105-2 I13 I 





THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 212-225 


212 The king praised him and asked another man How his deliberations might be for the best? and 
he replied, ‘If he constantly set justice before him in everything and thought that injustice was 
equivalent to deprivation of life. For God always promises the highest blessings to the just. 

213 Having praised him, the king asked the next How he could be free from disturbing thoughts 
in his sleep? And he replied, ‘You have asked me a question which is very difficult to answer, for 
we cannot bring our true selves into play during the hours of sleep, but are held fast in these 

214 by imaginations that cannot be controlled by reason. For our souls possess the feeling that 
they actually see the things that enter into our consciousness during sleep. But we make 
a mistake if we suppose that we are actually sailing on the sea in boats or flying through the air 
or travelling to other regions or anything else of the kind. And yet we actually do imagine such 

215 things to be taking place. So far as it is possible for me to decide, I have reached the following 
conclusion, You must in every possible way, O King, govern your words and actions by the 
rule of piety that you may have the consciousness that you are maintaining virtue and that you 
never choose to gratify yourself at the expense of reason and never by abusing your power do 

216 despite to righteousness. For the mind mostly busies itself in sleep with the same things with which 
it occupies itself when awake. And he who has all his thoughts and actions set towards the noblest 
ends establishes himself 2% righteousness both when he is awake and when he is asleep. Wherefore 
you must be stedfast in the constant discipline of self.’ 

217 The king bestowed praise on the man and said to another—‘ Since you are the tenth to answer, 
when you have spoken, we will devote ourselves to the banquet. And then he put the question, 

218 How can I avoid doing anything unworthy of myself? And he replied, ‘Look always to your 
own fame and your own supreme position, that you may speak and think only such things as are 

219 consistent therewith, knowing that all your subjects think and talk about you. For you must not 
appear to be worse than the actors, who study carefully the réle, which it is necessary for them to 
play, and shape all their actions in accordance with it. You are not acting a part, but are really 
a king, since God has bestowed upon you a royal authority in keeping with your character.’ 

220 When the king had applauded loud and long in the most gracious way, the guests were urged to 
seek repose. So when the conversation ceased, they devoted themselves to the next course of 
the feast. : 

221 On the following day, the same arrangement was observed, and when the king found an 
opportunity of putting questions to the men, he questioned the first of those who had been left over 

222 for the next interrogation, What is the highest form of government? And he replied, ‘To rule 
oneself and not to be carried away by impulses. For all men possess a certain natural bent of mind. 

223 It is probable that most men have an inclination towards food and drink and pleasure, and kings 
a bent towards the acquisition of territory and great renown. But it is good that there should be 
moderation in all things. What God gives, that you must take and keep, but never yearn for 
things that are beyond your reach.’ 

224 Pleased with these words, the king asked the next How he could be free from envy? And he 
after a brief pause replied, ‘If you consider first of all that it is God who bestows on all kings glory 

and great wealth and no one is king by his own power. All men wish to share this glory but 

cannot, since it is the gift of God.’ 

The king praised the man in a long speech and then asked another How he could despise his 
enemies? And he replied, ‘If you show kindness to all men and win their friendship, you need 
fear no one. To be popular with all men is the best of good gifts to receive from God,’ 


reading of the MSS. we must translate, ‘Everything is at your command, and i 
as ovdevi ‘you, as no one else, possess everything you need.’ 

214. And yet we actually, following the conjecture of Schmidt, kai ro 
Thackeray connects with the previous sentence and reads & xara Tav0’ brrohauBav 
then suppose to be taking place.’ Mendelssohn would substitute o@adXera for 
Bavev ofaddera, § He who makes this supposition is under a delusion,’ 

216. he who has all his thoughts. Reading with Wendland és 8¢ rdvra Siadoyerpdy for the MSS. ds 8é. Thackeray 
Suggests eds dé (on the ground that the divine name is always used in the concluding sentence of each response), and 


further eypryopéros for €ypnyopas. The translation then runs ‘ but God directs every thought and action which aims at 
the highest both in waking hours and in sleep.’ 


219. worse than the actors, lit. ‘ the least of the actors” 
220. the guests were urged, ‘they urged the guests to sleep.’ The text appears to have suffered dislocation. 
when the conversation ceased, kai ra ev mpds rovtous ds édnéev, lit. ‘ when the turn of these men was ended ’” 
(Thackeray), but probably the text is corrupt. “ 
222. natural bent. For a further account of this inherent bias in human nature see § 108 and especially 277. 
223. and great renown, following the emendation of Wendland kat (for card) 76 rijs ddéns péyeOos. If we follow the 
MSS., the meaning is ‘in proportion to the greatness of their renown.’ 
moderation in all things. See note on § 122, and compare § 156. 
224. by his own power, following the reading of Wendland, zap’ éauréy for €avrod, ‘ king of himself.’ 
225. best of good gifts. The text is corrupt. For the MSS. kai xaddv dépor ethnpeva mapa beod rovr’ earl kpatisto.— 


114 


No 
is} 
ou 


tis asnothing.’ Mendelssohn conjectures 


av” €repa troapBdvopev Kabeordvat. 
opev. ... ‘Other such things which we 
kabeordva, reading kal 6 avd’ bro\ap- 


MIE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 226-239 


226 Having praised this answer the king ordered the next man to reply to the question, How he could 

ae Mierke le as and he replied that ‘ - you ate generous and large-hearted in bestowing 
5 grace upon others, you will never lose your renown, but if you wish the 
aforesaid graces to continue yours, you must call upon God continually.’ 

227 ae king expressed his approval and asked the next, To whom ought a man to show liberality ? 

‘nd he replied, ‘All men acknowledge that we ought to show liberality to those who are well 
disposed towards us, but I think that we ought to show the same keen spirit of generosity to those 
who are opposed _to_us that by this means we may win them over to the right and to what is 
advantageous to ourselves. But we must pray to God that this may be accomplished, for he rules 
the minds of all men.’ 

228 Having expressed his agreement with the answer, the king asked the sixth to reply to the 
question, To whom ought we to exhibit gratitude? And he replied, ‘To our parents continually, 
for God has given us a most important commandment with regard to the honour due to parents. 
In the next place He reckons the attitude of friend towards friend for He speaks of “‘a friend which is 
as thine own soul”. You do well in trying to bring all men into friendship with yourself.’ 

229 The king spoke kindly to him and then asked the next, What is it that resembles beauty in 
value? And he said, ‘Piety, for it is the pre-eminent form of beauty, and its power lies in love, 
which is the gift of God. This you have already acquired and with it all the blessings of life.’ 

230 The king in the most gracious way applauded the answer and asked another How, if he were to 
fail, he could regain his reputation again in the same degree? And he said, ‘It is not possible for 
you to fail, for you have sown in all men the seeds of gratitude which produce a harvest of goodwill, 

231 and this is mightier than the strongest weapons and guarantees the greatest security. But if any 
man does fail, he must never again do those things which caused his failure, but he must form 
friendships and act justly. For it is the gift of God to be able to do good actions and not the 
contrary.’ 

232 Delighted with these words, the king asked another How he could be free from grief? And he 
replied, ‘If he never injured any one, but did good to everybody and followed the pathway of 

233 righteousness, for its fruits bring freedom from grief. But we must pray to God that unexpected 
evils such as death or disease or pain or anything of this kind may not come upon us and injure us. 
But since you are devoted to piety, no such misfortune will ever come upon you.’ 

234 The king bestowed great praise upon him and asked the tenth, What is the highest form of glory? 
And he said, ‘To honour God, and this is done not with gifts and sacrifices but with purity of soul 
and holy conviction, since all things are fashioned and governed by God in accordance with His will. 
Of this purpose you are in constant possession as all men can see from your achievements in the 
past and in the present.’ 

235 With loud voice the king greeted them all and spoke kindly to them, and all those who were 
present expressed their approval, especially the philosophers. For they were far superior to them 
[i.e. the philosophers] both in conduct and in argument, since they always made God their starting- 
point. After this the king to show his good feeling proceeded to drink the health of his guests. 

236 On the following day the same arrangements were made for the banquet, and the king, as soon as 
an opportunity occurred, began to put questions to the men who sat next to those who had already 
responded, and he said to the first ‘Is wisdom capable of being taught?’ And he said, ‘ The soul is 
so constituted that it is able by the divine power to receive all the good and reject the contrary.’ 

237 The king expressed approval and asked the next man, What is it that is most beneficial to health ? 
And he said, ‘Temperance, and it is not possible to acquire this unless God create a disposition 
towards it.’ 

238 The king spoke kindly to the man and said to another, ‘ How can a man worthily pay the debt 
of gratitude to his parents?’ And he said, ‘ By never causing them pain, and this is not possible 
unless God dispose the mind to the pursuit of the noblest ends.’ 

239 Theking expressed agreement and asked the next How he could become an eager listener? And 
he said, ‘By remembering that all knowledge is useful, because it enables you by the help of God in 


Thackeray suggests kai xahdv Sdpwv (as above). Wendland conjectures kal xadjy dé€av eiAnpévar Odpov—‘ To win a fair 
‘yeputation is the highest gift of God.’ _ Ais? : 
227. To whom ought a man, reading with Wendland zpos riva for the MSS. més twa. 
228. most important commandment. Exod. xx. 12. aD, sella? ; A 
a eaoad ae fas thine own soul, ioov 77 Wuy7 tov hidov, quoted from the LXX of Deut, xiii. 6 Pidos ioos ths puxns 
A ri wuyn). For the use of the LXX see §§ 56-7, 87, 96-9. 
aoe eee is so constituted, &c., or ‘The soul “is through God’s power so adapted as to accept all that is good 
and to reject what is contrary thereto’ (Thackeray). For the conception that Divine assistance 1s needed for the 


attainment of virtue see §§ 226, 238, 248. 
115 I 2 


THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 239-252 


a time of emergency to select some of the things which you have learned and apply them to the 
crisis which confronts you. And so the efforts of men are fulfilled by the assistance of God.’ 

240 The king praised him and asked the next How he could avoid doing anything contrary to law ? 
And he said, ‘If you recognize that it is God who has put the thoughts into the hearts of the 
lawgivers that the lives of men might be preserved, you will follow them.’ 

241 The king acknowledged the man’s answer and said to another, ‘What is the advantage of 
kinship?’ And he replied, ‘ If we consider that we ourselves are afflicted by the misfortunes which 
fall upon our relatives and if their sufferings become our own—then the strength of kinship is 

242 apparent at once, for it is only when such feeling is shown that we shall win. honour and esteem in 
their eyes. For help, when it is linked with kindliness, is of itselfa bond which is altogether 
indissoluble. And in the day of their prosperity we must not crave their possessions, but must pray 
God to bestow all manner of good upon them.’ 

243 And having accorded to him the same praise as to the rest, the king asked another How he could 
attain freedom from fear? And he said, ‘When the mind is conscious that it has wrought no evil, 
and when God directs it to all noble counsels.’ 

244 ~The king expressed his approval and asked another How he could always maintain a right 
judgement? And he replied, ‘ If he constantly set before his eyes the misfortunes which befall men 
and recognized that it is God who takes away prosperity from some and brings others to great 
honour and glory.’ 

245 . The king gave a kindly reception to the man and asked the next to answer the question How he 
could avoid a life of ease and pleasure? And he replied, ‘If he continually remembered that he was 
the ruler of a great empire and the lord of vast multitudes, and that his mind ought not to be 
occupied with other things, but he ought always to be considering how he could best promote their 
welfare. He must pray, too, to God that no duty might be neglected.’ 

246 Having bestowed praise upon him, the king asked the tenth How he could recognize those who 
were dealing treacherously with him? And he replied to the question, ‘If he observed whether the 
bearing of those about him was natural and whether they maintained the proper rule of precedence 
at receptions and councils, and in their general intercourse, never going beyond the bounds of 

247 propriety in congratulations or in other matters of deportment. But God will incline your mind, 
O King, to all that is noble.’ When the king had expressed his loud approval and praised them all 
individually (amid the plaudits of all who were present), they turned to the enjoyment of the feast. 

248 And on the next day, when the opportunity offered, the king asked the next man, What is the 
grossest form of neglect? And he replied, ‘If a man does not care for his children and devote every 
effort to their education. For we always pray to God not so much for ourselves as for our children 
that every blessing may be theirs. Our desire that our children may possess self-control is only 
realized by the power of God.’ 

249 The king said that he had spoken well and then asked another How he could be patriotic? ‘By 
keeping before your mind,’ he replied, ‘the thought that it is good to live and die in one’s own 
country. Residence abroad brings contempt upon the poor and shame upon the rich as though 
they had been banished for acrime. If you bestow benefits upon all, as you continually do, God 
will give you favour with all and you will be accounted patriotic.’ 

250  <AAfter listening to this man, the king asked the next in order How he could live amicably with 
his wife? And he answered, ‘ By recognizing that womankind are by nature headstrong and 

energetic in the pursuit of their own desires, and subject to sudden changes of opinion through 
fallacious reasoning, and their nature is essentially weak. It is necessary to deal wisely with them 
and not to provoke strife. For the successful conduct of life the steersman must know the goal 
toward which he ought to direct his course. It is only by calling upon the help of God that 
men can steer a true course of life at all times.’ 


252 The king expressed his agreement and asked the next How he could be free from error? And 


to 
oO 
) 


239. apply them to thecrisis. The text is uncertain. The MSS. read dvOuror 
tat, which is obviously corrupt. Thackeray renders ‘that... bringing it to b 
counteract the events of critical times ’. 

242. help, when it is linked, 76 yap cuvepyes cdvdws yg evov. Some editors prefer rd ya ‘s, ‘kinship.’ 

246.. natural, lit, ‘free’, devdépiow. a eee ate ee ae: 

If he observed whether. It is doubtful whether the sentence refers to the conduct of the king or the courtiers 
If we read pndev imepreivorras rod d€ovros, we must adopt the latter alternative. If we read tzepreivew, the former is just 
possible and we may translate, ‘ If he maintained a free bearing and constantly observed the proper rule of precedence 
at receptions, councils, and in his general intercourse with those about him and took care to avoid exceeding the 
Pe of peeueety in his congratulations,’ &c. The other reading and rendering, however, provides the best answer 
to the question. 


248. Our desire, 76 dé émieicba madia for the MSS. radeiav. Wendland also su ests that 
> , . . . : : : we I 
ert6éaGat, ‘But to live to see our children endowed with self-control is a gift,’ &c. ee oa 


116 


Ons mpos Ta TOY Kaper dy dyturpaoon- 
ar upon an emergency thou mayest 


THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 252-266 


he replied, ‘If you always act with deliberation and never give credence to slanders 
yourself the things that are said to you and decide by your ow , 
made to you and carry out everything in the light of your jud 
O King. But the knowledge and practice of these things is th 

253 Delighted with these words, the king asked another How hec 
in reply to the question, ‘If he recognized that he had powe 
them, if he gave way to wrath, and that it would be useless an 

254 deprived many of life. What need was there for wrath 
was hostile to him? It is necessary 
kindness and without wrath at all 
example.’ 


The king said that he had answered well and then inquired of the next man, What is good counsel ? 

To act well at all times and with due reflection, he explained, ‘comparing what is advantageous 
to our own policy with the injurious effects that would result from the adoption of the opposite view, 
in order that by weighing every point we may be well advised and our purpose may be accomplished. 
And most important of all, by the power of God every plan of yours will find fulfilment because you 
practise piety.’ 

256 The king said that this man had answered well, and asked another What is philosophy? And 
he explained, ‘To deliberate well in reference to any question that emerges and never to be carried 
away by impulses, but to ponder over the injuries that result from the passions, and to act rightly as 
the circumstances demand, practising moderation. But we must pray to God to instil into our mind 
a regard for these things.’ : 

257 The king signified his consent and asked another How he could meet with recognition when 
travelling abroad? ‘ By being fair to all men, he replied, ‘and by appearing to be inferior rather than 
superior to those amongst whom he was travelling. For it is a recognized principle that God by 
His very nature accepts the humble. And the human race loves those who are willing to be in 
subjection to them.’ 

258 Having expressed his approval at this reply, the king asked another How he could build in such 
a way that his structures would endure after him? And he replied to the question, ‘If his creations 
were on a great and noble scale, so that the beholders would spare them for their beauty, and if he 
never dismissed any of those who wrought such works and never compelled others to minister to his 

259 needs without wages. For observing how God provides for the human race, granting them health 
and mental capacity and all other gifts, he himself should follow His example by rendering to men 
a recompense for their arduous toil. For it is the deeds that are wrought in righteousness that abide 
continually.’ 

260 The king said that this man, too, had answered well and asked the tenth, What is the fruit of 
wisdom? And he replied, ‘ That a man should be conscious in himself that he has wrought no evil 

261 and that he should live his life in the truth. Since it is from these,O mighty King, that the greatest 
joy and stedfastness of soul and strong faith in God accrue to you if you rule your realm in piety.’ 
And when they heard the answer they all shouted with loud acclaim, and afterwards the king in the 
fullness of his joy began to drink their healths. 

262 Andon the next day the banquet followed the same course as on previous occasions, and when 
the opportunity presented itself the king proceeded to put questions to the remaining guests, and 

263 he said to the first, ‘How can a man keep himself from pride?’ And he replied, ‘If he maintains 
equality and remembers on all occasions that he is a man ruling over men. And God brings the 
proud to nought, and exalts the meek and. humble.’ : 

264 The king spoke kindly to him and asked the next, Whom ought a man to select as his 
counsellors? and he replied, ‘Those who have been tested in many affairs and maintain unmingled 
goodwill towards him and partake of his own disposition. And God manifests Himself to those who 
are worthy that these ends may be attained.’ 

2653 The king praised him and asked another, What is the most necessary possession for a king ? 
‘The friendship and love of his subjects,’ he replied, ‘ for it is through this that the bond of goodwill 
is rendered indissoluble. And it is God who ensures that this may come to pass in accordance with 

our wish, ’ 

es The king praised him and inquired of another, What is goal of speech? And he replied, ‘To 


é but prove for 
n judgement the requests which are 
gement, you will be free from error, 
e work of the Divine power,’ 

ould be free from wrath? And he said 
r over all even to inflict death upon 
d pitiful if he, just because he was lord, 
, when all men were in subjection and no one 
to recognize that God rules the whole world in the spirit of 
, and you,’ said he, ‘O King, must of necessity copy His 


255 


255. comparing what is advantageous. The meaning is not clear. I follow Wendland in supplying the clause 
in italics. Thackeray translates, ‘And while forming our decisions not neglecting to weigh [lit. comparing] the 
injurious effects of following the opposite view.’ : 

. 57. It-is arecognized principle, xowas. Thackeray takes the word with the latter clause only : ‘the human race 
commonly loves,’ &c. 


LI7 


THE‘ LETTER/OFP ARISTERS 20022 


convince your opponent by showing him his mistakes in a well-ordered array of arguments. For * 
this way you will win your hearer, not by opposing him, but by bestowing praise upon him wit 
a view to persuading him. And it is by the power of God that persuasion is accomplished. Sit 

267 The king said that he had given a good answer, and asked another How he could live amicably 
with the many different races who formed the population of his kingdom ? ‘ By acting the proper 
part towards each, he replied, ‘and taking righteousness as your guide, as you are now doing with 
the help of the insight which God bestows upon you.’ 

268 The king was delighted by this reply, and asked another ‘ Under what circumstances ought a man 
to suffer grief?’ ‘In the misfortunes that befall our friends,’ he replied, ‘when we see that they 
are protracted and irremediable. Reason does not allow us to grieve for those who are dead and 
set free from evil, but all men do grieve over them because they think only of themselves and their 
own advantage. It is by the power of God alone that we can escape all evil. ; 

269 The king said that he had given a fitting answer, and asked another, How is reputation lost: 
And he replied, ‘When pride and unbounded self-confidence hold sway, dishonour and loss of 
reputation are engendered. For God is the Lord of all reputation and bestows it where He will. 

270 The king gave his confirmation to the answer, and asked the next man, I’o whom ought men to 
entrust themselves? ‘To those,’ he replied, ‘who serve you from goodwill and not from fear or self- 
interest, thinking only of their own gain. For the one is the sign of love, the other the mark of 
ill-will and time-serving. For the man who is always watching for his own gain is a traitor at heart. 
But you possess the affection of all your subjects by the help of the good counsel which God bestows 
upon you.’ 

271 The king said that he had answered wisely, and asked another, What is it that keeps a kingdom 
safer And he replied to the question, ‘Care and forethought that no evil may be wrought by 
those who are placed in a position of authority over the people, and this you always do.by the help 
of God who inspires you with grave judgement ’. es ee 

272. The king spoke words of encouragement to him, and asked another, What is it that maintains 

gratitude and honour? And he replied, ‘ Virtue, for it is the creator of good deeds, and by it evil is 

destroyed, even as you exhibit nobility of character towards all by the gift which God bestows 
upon you. 

The king graciously acknowledged the answer and asked the eleventh (since there were two more than 
seventy), How he could in time of war maintain tranquillity of soul ? And he replied, ‘ By remembering 
that he had done no evil to any of his subjects, and that all would fight for him in return for the 
benefits which they had received, knowing that even if they lose their lives, you will care for those 
274 dependent on them. For you never fail to make reparation to any—such is the kind-heartedness with 

which God has inspired you.’ The king loudly applauded them all and spoke very kindly to them 
and then drank a long draught to the health of each, giving himself up to enjoyment, and lavishing 

, the most generous and joyous friendship upon his guests. 

275 On the seventh day much more extensive preparations were made, and many others were present 
from the different cities (among them a large number of ambassadors). When an opportunity 
occurred, the king asked the first of those who had not yet been questioned How he could avoid 

276 being deceived by fallacious reasoning? and he replied, ‘ By noticing carefully the speaker, the thing 
spoken, and the subject under discussion, and by putting the same questions again after an interval 
in different forms. But to possess an alert mind and to be able to form a sound judgement in every 
case is one of the good gifts of God, and you possess it, O King.’ 

277 The king loudly applauded the answer and asked another, Why is it that the majority of men 
never become virtuous? ‘Because,’ he replied, ‘all men are by nature intemperate and inclined to 

278 pleasure. Hence, injustice springs up and a flood of avarice. The habit of virtue is a hindrance 
to those who are devoted to a life of pleasure because it enjoins upon them the preference of 
temperance and righteousness. For it is God who is the master of these things.’ 

279 The king said that he had answered well, and asked, What ought kings to obey? And he said, 
‘The laws, in order that by righteous enactments they may restore the lives of men. Even as you 


27 


w 


266. by showing him his mistakes, &c., or ‘pointing out his errors by means of the chain of arguments which he 
has formulated’ (Thackeray). 
273. in return for the benefits, or ‘for the glory of rendering thee service’ (Thackeray). 
for those dependent on them, trav Bio, or ‘for their welfare’ (Thackeray). 

_277. by nature intemperate. Aristeas has no developed doctrine of original sin but he lays stress on the natural 
bias or yezer in human nature, cp. § 108, 222f. His clear enunciation of this view is remarkable, because there is little 
reference to the yezer in Alexandrian literature. Tennant says that he is unable to find ‘any certain proof that the 
yezer doctrine was adopted by the Alexandrian’ (The Fall and Original Sin, p. 138). It is of course common in 
Sirach and Palestinian literature. 


I18 


PapevpE TITER OF ARISTEAS 279-291 


ie ere eoneact in obedience to the Divine ccmmand have laid up in store for yourself a perpetual 

280 The king said that this man, too, had spoken well, and asked the next, Whom ought we to appoint 
as governors? And he replied, ‘All who hate wickedness, and imitating your own conduct act 

righteously that they may maintain a good reputation constantly. For this is what you do 

O mighty King,’ he said, ‘and it is God who has bestowed upon you the crown of righteousness.’ 

The king loudly acclaimed the answer and then looking at the next man said, ‘ Whom ought we 
to appoint as officers over the forces?’ And he explained, ‘Those who excel in courage and 
righteousness and those who are more anxious about the safety of their men than to gain a victory by 
risking their lives through rashness. For as God acts well towards all men, so too you in imitation 
of Him are the benefactor of all your subjects.’ 

The king said that he had given a good answer and asked another, What man is worthy of 
admiration? And he replied, ‘The man who is furnished with reputation and wealth and 
power and possesses a soul equal to it all. You yourself show by your actions that you are most 
worthy of admiration through the help of God who makes you care for these things.’ 

283 The king expressed his approval and said to another ‘To what affairs ought kings to devote most 
time?’ And he replied, ‘To reading and the study of the records of official journeys, which are 
written in reference to the various kingdoms, with a view to the reformation and preservation of the 
subjects. And it is by such activity that you have attained to a glory which has never been 
approached by others, through the help of God who fulfils all your desires.’ 

284 The king spoke enthusiastically to the man and asked another How ought a man to occupy 
himself during his hours of relaxation and recreation? And he replied, ‘To watch those plays 
which can be acted with propriety and to set before one’s eyes scenes taken from life and enacted 

28s with dignity and decency is profitable and appropriate. For there is some edification to be found 
even in these amusements, for often some desirable lesson is taught by the most insignificant affairs 
of life. But by practising the utmost propriety in all your actions, you have shown that you are 
a philosopher and you are honoured by God on account of your virtue.’ 

286 The king, pleased with the words which had just been spoken, said to the ninth man, How ought 
a man to conduct himself at banquets? And he replied, ‘You should summon to your side men 
of learning and those who are able to give you useful hints with regard to the affairs of your 
kingdom and the lives of your subjects (for you could not find any theme more suitable or more 

287 educative than this) since such men are dear to God because they have trained their minds to 
contemplate the noblest themes—as you indeed are doing yourself, since all your actions are 
directed by God.’ 

288 Delighted with the reply, the king inquired of the next man, What is best for the people? 
That a private citizen should be made king over them or a member of the royal family? And he 

289 replied, ‘He who is best by nature. For kings who come of royal lineage are often harsh and 
severe towards their subjects. And still more is this the case with some of those who have risen 
from the ranks of private citizens, who after having experienced evil and borne their share of 

290 poverty, when they rule over multitudes turn out to be more cruel than the godless tyrants. But, 
as I have said, a good nature which has been properly trained is capable of ruling, and you are 
a great king, not so much because you excel in the glory of your rule and your wealth but rather 
because you have surpassed all men in clemency and philanthropy, thanks to God who has endowed 
you with these qualities.’ ; 

291 The king spent some time in praising this man and then asked the last of all, What is the 


281 


282 


280. crown of righteousness, cf. 2 Tim. iv.8. The phrase is also found in the Zestaments of the Twelve Patriarchs 
(T.Levi viii. 1) where it is used of the crown of the High Priest. ; : 
281. risking. MSS. read mepiBdddovras, which Schmidt has emended into mapaBa)dorras. : i 4 
282. possesses a soul equal to it all, or ‘yet inwardly regards himself as on an equality with all men 
IE . 
eae is you care, diddvros «is radra thy énupédecav, This is the reading of the MSS., but Wendland prefers 
to emend émipéAeray into émiréAetav. ‘Who grants you the capacity for attaining these things. : 
283. the records of official journeys. Illustrations of these travel-diaries or acta diurna are to be found in the 
Papyri as Wendland points out. See Wilcken, article on vropynpariopor in Philologus, li. 80 ff. Hee, ee 
written in reference to the kingdoms. Mendelssohn reads rovs BacsAcis for Tas Baordeias, written for kings. 
284. is profitable and appropriate, following the suggestion of Mendelssohn to read Bip otbppopoy kai xaOjKov for 
the MSS. uot (Br0ts) coppovdr kai karéxav, which cannot be translated without infringing the canons of Greek syntax. 
286. give ycu useful hints, reading with Wendland Xphowpa for Xpjpara. 
more suitable or ... educative, éupedéorepov i} povotxorepov, Thackeray renders ‘No more harmonious or 
i uld’st thou find’. ; 
Sed acover them, reading én’ airay (Wendland) for in’ avroy ‘appointed by them’. 
He who is best, reading rév d@puoroy (with Schmidt) for 76 dpiorov. 
291. some time. Wendland attaches this phrase to the previous clause. 


119 


THE LETTER OF ARISTEAS 291-306 


greatest achievement in ruling an empire? And he replied, ‘That the subjects should continually 
dwell in a state of peace, and that justice should be speedily administered in cases of dispute. 

292 These results are achieved through the influence of the ruler, when he is a man who hates evil and 
loves the good and devotes his energies to saving the lives of men, just as you consider injustice the 
worst form of evil and by your just administration have fashioned for yourself an undying reputation, 
since God bestows upon you a mind which is pure and untainted by any evil. i ; 

293 And when he ceased, loud and joyful applause broke out for some considerable time. When 
it stopped the king took a cup and gave a toast in honour of all his guests and the words which they 
had uttered. Then in conclusion he said, ‘I have derived the greatest benefit from your presence. 

294 I have profited much by the wise teaching which you have given me in reference to the art of ruling. 
Then he ordered that three talents of silver should be presented to each of them, and appointed one 
of his slaves to deliver over the money. All at once shouted their approval, and the banquet 
became a scene of joy, while the king gave himself up to a continuous round of festivity. 

295 I have written at length and must crave your pardon, Philocrates. I was astonished beyond 
measure at the men and the way in which on the spur of the moment they gave answers which 

296 really needed a long time to devise. For though the questioner had given great thought to each 
particular question, those who replied one after the other had their answers to the questions 
veady at once and so they seemed to me and to all who were present and especially to the philosophers 
to be worthy of admiration. And I suppose that the thing will seem incredible to those who will 

297 read my narrative in the future. But it is unseemly to misrepresent facts which are recorded 
in the public archives. And it would not be right for me to transgress in such a matter as this. 
I tell the story just as it happened, conscientiously avoiding any error. I was so impressed by the 
force of their utterances, that I made an effort to consult those whose business it was to make 

298 a record of all that happened at the royal audiences and banquets. For it is the custom, as you 
know, from the moment the king begins to transact business until the time when he retires to rest, 
for a record to be taken of all his sayings and doings—a most excellent and useful arrangement. 

299 For on the following day che minutes of the doings and sayings of the previous day are read over 
before business commences, and if there has been any irregularity, the matter is at once set right. 

300 I obtained therefore, as has been said, accurate information from the public records, and I have set 
forth the facts in proper order since I know how eager you are to obtain useful information. 

301 Three days later Demetrius took the men and passing along the sea-wall, seven stadia long, to the 
island, crossed the bridge and made for the northern districts of Pharos. . There he assembled them 
in a house, which had been built upon the sea-shore, of great beauty and in a secluded situation, and 
invited them to carry out the work of translation, since everything that they needed for the purpose 

302 was placed at their disposal. So they set to work comparing their several results and making 
them agree, and whatever they agreed upon was suitably copied out under the direction of Demetrius. 

303 And the session lasted until the ninth hour; after this they were set free to minister to their physical 

304 needs. Everything they wanted was furnished for them on a lavish scale. In addition to this 
Dorotheus made the same preparations for them daily as were made for the king himself—for thus 
he had been commanded by the king. In the early morning they appeared daily at the Court, and 

305 after saluting the king went back to their own place. And as is the custom of all the Jews, they 
washed their hands in the sea and prayed to God and then devoted themselves to reading and 

306 translating the particular passage upon which they were engaged, and I put the question to them, 
Why it was that they washed their hands before they prayed? And they explained that it was 
a token that they had done no evil (for every form of activity is wrought by means of the hands) 
since in their noble and holy way they regard everything as a symbol of righteousness and truth. 


295. [have written at length, era mdelova. Mendelssohn suggests ei memAedvaxa (‘if I have been too prolix’) and 
this emendation is accepted by Wendland and Thackeray. 

297. I was so impressed, or ‘ after hearing with approval at their own mouth their powers of speech ’ (Thackeray). 
For the allusion to the recorders see Wilcken’s article mentioned in § 283. 

298. from the moment. The MSS. read ap’ hs dv jpépas for which Mendelssohn reads épas. Probably, as 


Thackeray suggests, the original text ran agp’ fs dv 6 Baowdels &pEnrar with an ellipse of Spas (cp. Luke vii. 45) and 
7Hépas is an interpolation, 
300. from the public records, or ‘ from the keepers of the public records’ (Thackeray). 

301. the sea-wall. The Heptastadion or breakwater which connected Alexandria with the island of Pharos and 
divided the bay into two main harbours. See the description in Strabo, xvii. 6. 792, and Botti’s map of Alexandria in 
Mahaffy’s Ptolemaic Dynasty. 

302. making them agree. Contrast the later traditions which represent the agreement as supernatural. See 
Introduction ix on Pseudo-Justin, Cohortatio ad Graecos, Irenaeus, Clement of Alex. and Epiphanius. 
304. Dorotheus is represented in § 182 as the special officer appointed to look after the needs of Jewish guests. 
305. they washed their hands. For the Jewish customs of purification see Schiirer, Z7, ii. 2. 109; the Stbylline 
Oracles, iii. 591, and the references in the New Test.: Matt. xv. 2, Xxill. 25, 26; Mark vii. 2-5; Luke xi. 38, 39. 
306. every form of activity. Thackeray compares the statement of Aristobulus (ap. Eusebius, PE, viii. 10. 377 a) 
120 


DribebePreR OF ARISTEAS 307-316 


307 As I have already said, they met together daily in the place which was delig i i 
its brightness and applied themselves to their tdske And it so chanced that Bouin ee 
was completed in seventy-two days, just as if this had been arranged of set purpose. 

308 When the work was completed, Demetrius collected together the Jewish population in the place 
where the translation had been made, and read it over to all, in the presence of the translators, who 
met with a great reception also from the people, because of the great benefits which they had 

309 conferred upon them. They bestowed warm praise upon Demetrius, too, and urged him to have the 
whole law transcribed and present a copy to their leaders. 3 


310 + After the books had been read, the priests and the elders of the translators and the Jewish 
community and the leaders of the people stood up and said, that since so excellent and sacred 
and accurate a translation had been made, it was only right that it should remain as it was and no 

311 alteration should be made in it. And when the whole company expressed their approval, they bade 
them pronounce a curse in accordance with their custom upon any one who should make any 
alteration either by adding anything or changing in any way whatever any of the words which had 
been written or making any omission. This was a very wise precaution to ensure that the book 
might be preserved for all the future time unchanged. 

312 When the matter was reported to the king, he rejoiced greatly, for he felt that the design which 
he had formed had been safely carried out. The whole book was read over to him and he was 
greatly astonished at the spirit of the lawgiver. And he said to Demetrius, ‘ How is it that none of 
the historians or the poets have ever thought it worth their while to allude to such a wonderful 

313 achievement?’ And he replied, ‘ Because the law is sacred and of divine origin. And some of those 
who formed the intention of dealing with it have been smitten by God and therefore desisted from 

314 their purpose.’ He said that he had heard from Theopompus that he had been driven out of his 
mind for more than thirty days because he intended to insert in his history some of the incidents 
from the earlier and somewhat unreliable translations of the law. When he had recovered 

315 a little, he besought God to make it clear to him why the misfortune had befallen him. And it was 
revealed to him in a dream, that from idle curiosity he was wishing to communicate sacred truths to 
common men, and that if he desisted he would recover his health. I have heard, too, from the lips 

316 of Theodektes, one of the tragic poets, that when he was about to adapt some of the incidents 
recorded in the book for one of his plays, he was affected with cataract in both his eyes. And when 


Gore ai xeipes emi Suvdyews voodvyrar Oeod. kal yap ore vonoa THy masay icxiv Tov avOparey kal Tas évepyelas ev Tais Xepolv 
eivat, Cp. also the reference to the Zephilla, § 159. 

310. the Jewish community, trav dm6 tov modurevpatros. Though the Jews enjoyed the rights of citizenship at 
Alexandria, they nevertheless formed an independent and separate community within the city. This community, as 
Strabo (quoted by Josephus, Azz. xiv. 7. 2) tells us, was presided over by an e6vapxns, ‘ who governs the people and 
administers justice among them and sees that they fulfil their obligations and obey orders just like the archon of an 
independent city.’ The use of the term zoXirevja for the Jewish community is confirmed by the Berenice inscription 
quoted by Schiirer, £7, ii.2. 246. it is rather striking that there should be no allusion to the ethnarch in the present 
passage, and that the term mpeoSvrepo should be used in connexion both with the translators and the community. It 
almost looks as if the word ‘ ethnarch’ had accidentally dropped out. 

311. They bade them, so Eusebius. The MSS. of Aristeas read ‘ He (i.e. Demetrius) gave orders’. 

in accordance with their custom, cf. Deut. iv. 2, xii. 32 ; Rev. xxii. 18f. Possibly this statement may point to 
the fact that at the time when the Epistle was written, the text of the LXX had begun to be tampered with. We 
know that corruptions had crept into the text as early as the time of Philo, and Justin Martyr charges the Jewish 
authorities with the deliberate excision of many passages ; see Swete, /troduction, pp. 478-9. 

314. Theopompus, a Greek historian and rhetorician, born c. 380 B.C. at Chios. He became the pupil of Isocrates, 
who advised him to devote himself to writing history. He lived under the protection of Alexander, and after his death 
was expelled from Chios: he went to Egypt about 305 B.C., but was coldly received by Ptolemy I. Among the writings 
ascribed to him are Zhe Hellenica, The Epitome of Herodotus, The History of Philip, and several panegyrics and 
hortatory addresses, the chief of which is 7he Letter to Alexander. The papyrus fragment of a Greek historian 
discovered by Grenfell and Hunt is regarded by some authorities as an extract from the /ellenica (Oxyrhynchus 
Pap. V,1908). He is described (Phot. Cod. 176) as a busybody (moAvmpdypor), which gives point to the meprepyarduevos 
of § 315. ‘Theopompus’ writings seem to have been characterized by a pretentious and turgid rhetoric, and a fondness 
for sensational stories. The fragments which remain of his works are collected in Miiller, Frag. Hest. Graec. i, and 
in The Fragments of Theopompus and Cratippus (Oxford, 1909). 

earlier and... unreliable translations, rivd rSv rponppnvevrpévar emopadéarepor €k Tov vouou mpooraropeiy. I follow 
Wendland in taking émogahéorepov with mponppnverpévor. Thackeray, however, takes it with mpoowropew and 
translates, ‘ when he was too rashly intending to introduce into his history some of the incidents from the law which 
had previously been translated.’ For the reference to Greek translations earlier than the LXX, see note on § 30. 

316. Theodektes (c. 380-340 B.C.), Greek rhetorician and tragic poet, pupil of Isocrates and Plato and friend of 
Aristotle, lived the greater part of his life at Athens. He is said to have been defeated by Theopompus in the contest 
for the oratorical prize arranged by Artemisia, though he won the prize for tragedy. He 1s said to have been victorious 
eight times out of thirteen dramatic contests. The fragments of his works are collected in Nauck (Zragicorum 
Graecorum Fragmenta, 1887). See monograph by C. F. Marker (Breslau, 1835), and article in Smith, Dict. Gr. and 
Rom. Biog. 

in the book. As Thackeray says, ‘ This seems to be the earliest use of 1) Bi8Xos for a collection of sacred writings.’ 
I2I 


THE ‘LETTER OF ARISTEAS 316-222 


he perceived the reason why the misfortune had befallen him, he prayed to God for many days and 
was afterwards restored. : 

317 And after the king, as I have already said, had received the explanation of Demetrius on this 
point, he did homage and ordered that great care should be taken of the books, and that they should 

318 be sacredly guarded. And he urged the translators to visit him frequently after their return to Judea, 
for it was only right, he said, that he should now send them home. But when they came back, he 

319 would treat them as friends, as was right, and they would receive rich presents from him. He 
ordered preparations to be made for them to return home, and treated them most munificently. 
He presented each one of them with three robes of the finest sort, two talents of gold, a sideboard 
weighing one talent, all the furniture for three couches. 

320 And with the escort he sent Eleazar ten couches with silver legs and all the necessary equipment, 
a sideboard worth thirty talents, ten robes, purple, and a magnificent crown, and a hundred pieces 
of the finest woven linen, also bowls and dishes, and two golden beakers to be dedicated to God. 

321 He urged him also in a letter that if any of the men preferred to come back to him, not to hinder 
them. For he counted it a great privilege to enjoy the society of such learned men, and he would 
rather lavish his wealth upon them than upon vanities. 

322, And now Philocrates, you have the complete story in accordance with my promise. I think 
that you find greater pleasure in these matters than in the writings of the mythologists. For you are 
devoted to the study of those things which can benefit the soul, and spend much time upon it. 
I shall attempt to narrate whatever other events are worth recording, that by perusing them you 
may secure the highest reward for your zeal. 


We have elsewhere BiPXos or BiBdiov diadyKns (Ecclus. xxiv. 23; 1 Macc. i. 57), ra BiBdia roo vopov (1 Macc. i. 56) ra 
BtBria ta dya (I Macc. xii. 9). It is possible, however, that the reference to the rv fepay Bi8dov in 2 Macc. viii. 23 may 
be earlier. Cp. also the allusion to the line as Scripture, d.a rijs ypadjs in § 168. 

318. they would receive rich presents, kai roAvdapias rijs peyiorns tredEecOa. For moAvdwpias (MSS. and Joseph.) 
Mahaffy (C7ass. Rev. viii. 349) suggests modvepias, which is adopted by Wendland and Thackeray, ‘ They would meet 
with the utmost consideration at his hands.’ 

319, 320. a sideboard. The MSS. read xvAixov (in both paragraphs), which generally means goblet or beaker. 
Wendland suggests kvAccetov—side-board. ‘The form kvAikov, however, occurs in 1 Macc. xv. 32, where a piece 
of furniture for supporting vessels is clearly intended, and that is probably the meaning here’ (Thackeray). 


122 


THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


INTRODUCTION 


$1. A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE BOOK. 


THE Book, or rather Books, which bear the name of Adam belong to a cycle of legendary 
matter, of which the Jews were fond, and which the Christians took, and developed, from them. 
It is hard to tell how much belongs to the original Jewish kernel. 

Ginzberg (Fewish Encyc. i. 179-81, ‘Book of Adam’), in reconstructing this, combines most of 
the matter to be found in the Greek and Latin versions of the story, even including those parts 
of the Latin which the editor of the Slavonic saw fit to omit. 

The Book opens with the period immediately following the expulsion from paradise, which is 
treated as a garden of fruit-trees; not in Heaven, but separated only by a low wall from the earth 
(cf. Apoc. Mos. XVii. 1). If we endeavour to reconstruct the Greek ‘ Apocalypsis Mosis’ by the aid 
of the Slavonic Life of Adam, we shall be compelled to pass over the opening sections of the Latin 
‘Vita’ and begin with the dream of Eve, which follows immediately on their departure to the west, 
where they sojourn eighteen years and two months, and where Cain and Abel are born. This 
dream foreshadows Abel’s murder which is then related.1. The parents are overcome with grief, 
at comforted by the appearance of Michael, who promises them another son. After this Seth is 

orn. 

The story then hastens at once to the death-bed scene where Adam is lying ill, surrounded by 
his sixty-three children, whom he intends to bless before he dies. Seth is distressed and surprised 
at his condition, for pain and sickness‘:s to him a thing unknown. Adam tells the story of his fall 
and God’s curse upon him. Adam’s cries of woe rouse Seth to action, and at his father’s request 
he undertakes to go with Eve to the gate of paradise, there to pray God to give him oil from the 
Tree of Life to anoint Adam. On their way they are attacked by a beast (which the Vita wrongly 
calls a serpent and identifies with the devil); this is merely a sign of the beast’s revolt, which 
followed the Fall (Apoc. Mos. xi). Eve is powerless before it, Seth is bitten, Vit. xxxvii. 1, 
xxxix. 2 = Apoc. Mos. xii. 1-2 (A) x. 3, but succeeds in escaping by frightening it with God’s 
judgement. Their prayers for mercy are answered by a promise of a pure heart in the future, Apoc. 
Mos. xiii. 3-5. The Vita turns this into a prophecy of Christ (xlii. 2). 

They are told to go back, as Adam will die ‘in six days’. On their return Adam abuses Eve, 
who has brought a curse on all mankind, and asks her to tell their children how she was deceived 
(the Vita evades this by adding ‘ after my death’), which she proceeds to do; cf. Apoc. Mos. x, xiv, 
with Vita xliv. Her fall is told in such a way as to suggest a double element in the source of the 
narrative. The devil sometimes appears as the inspirer, sometimes rather as the alas of the 
serpent, Apoc. Mos. xvii. The story is brought down to the time of their expulsion from paradise, 
when they were comforted by a gift of perfumes, seeds for their food, and a promise of future 
resurrection, Apoc. Mos. xxviii. 4, xxix. 

Thereupon Eve witnesses marvellous scenes accompanying Adam’s reconciliation, but falls 
asleep when God comes down to paradise before the burial of Adam. 

In answer to the prayer of the angels Adam is pardoned, and his soul given to Michael to be 
cleansed in the Acherusian stream, Apoc. Mos. xxxvii-xxxix, and kept in paradise till the end of 
the times, when a resurrection is promised. His body is then buried by the archangels in the 
neighbourhood of the earthly paradise, Apoc. Mos. xl-xliii = Vita xlviii. 

The book ends with a typical Jewish admonition given by Michael, Israel’s guardian angel, to 
Seth not to mourn on the Sabbath day, Vita li, Apoc. Mos. xviii; cf. Jubilees ii. 23, &c. 

Chapters xxviii-xl of the Slavonic Vita are in reality a recension of the same subject-matter 
of the Latin Vita i-x. It deals with the penitence of Adam and Eve and the second temptation of 
Eve by Satan, and chapters xii—xvii of the Latin Vita explain the envy and fall of Satan. 

The Vita also inserts before Eve’s death an account of her directions to Seth concerning 
memorials of her life, which are mentioned by Josephus. Lastly, this version expands in non- 


1 According to the Slavonic, Adam dreams this dream before the birth of his children. 
123 


THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


ascetic Jewish tone the story of Cain's birth. Ginzberg (contrary to Israel Levi) seems to have 
established the Jewish nature of all these pieces. I have given elsewhere my reasons for believing 
they never formed one book with the rest of the Apoc. Mos. in 

Two more pieces remain. These are Vit. xxv-xxx—Adam’s vision of the future, seen after 
he ‘had eaten of the tree of knowledge’, and ending in a specifically Christian prophecy. The other 
in the Slav. Vit. xxxiii is strongly dualistic in tone, and is taken by Jagi¢ to be a mediaeval inter- 
polation by a writer of the Bogomilian heresy. 

For other versions of the story, see ‘ Ancient Versions,’ § 4. 


§2. TITLE OF THE BOOKS. 


The title ‘Apocalypsis Mosis’ (Tischendorf, 1866, Ceriani) is an erroneous one; it perhaps 
arose through a confusion with the book of ‘ Jubilees’, which was a revelation to Moses through the 
Angel of the Presence (Jub. i. 29, ii.1). Cf. heading to Apoc. Mos. (A B C D Arm. slight variations 
only). See Fuchs in Kautzsch, Apok. und Pseud. ii. 507. 

Still less can ‘ Apocalypsis Seth’ (Hort) be original. The ‘Sethite’ character of these books, 
which is much exaggerated in the case of the Armenian by Preuschen, is reduced to a minimum in 
the case of the oldest text (cf. Kabisch Liechtenhan in ZVV7W., Giessen, 1903, 1906). 

It is not the same as the ‘ Apocalypsis’ = ‘Testament of Adam’ (M. R. James, Renan) in 
Syriac, Coptic, and Greek Fragment. 

Latin and Russian versions simply ‘ Vita Adae et Evae’, to be carefully distinguished from 
‘Conflict of Adam and Eve’ (in Ethiopic), Dillmann and Trumpp’s Adambuch des Morgenlandes. 

According to Ginzberg (Yew. Encyc, i. 179), the statement of Zunz, Gottesdienstliche Vortrige 
der Fuden, as to the mention of a Hebrew ‘ Book of Adam’ in the Talmud, from Aboda Zarah 5 a, 
Gen. R. xxiv. 2, is incorrect, though such a book must have existed whatever its name. Moreover, 
Zunz mentions also Baba Mezia 86 a—Wajjikra rabb. 181 b, Midrash Koheleth 84a in support of 
a book of Adam at the beginning of the third century. Fuchs supposes that the original was the 
work of a Hellenistic Jew in language influenced by the LXX, Ginzberg would say in Aramaic. 

The book in its mediaeval form, and connected with a ‘Lignum Crucis’ (Holy Rood) legend, 
had an extensive circulation in the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries, not only in England, 
Germany, and Russia, but in Bulgaria, Italy, and Servia, &c., being translated into many languages. 
The original of these translations is nearly always the Latin, not the Greek form of the story. The 
exception is the Slavonic version extant in two recensions, which are probably composed out of two 
or more independent tales. See § 6. 


03). THE Moo: 


1° Apoc. Mosts. Six MSS. are at present known of the Apoc. Mosis. 
A Venice. Thirteenth century. 
B Vienna. Twelfth to fourteenth centuries. Tischendorf. 
C Vienna. Twelfth to fourteenth centuries. 
D Milan. Eleventh century. Ceriani. 
E! Paris. _ Fifteenth century. < 
E? Montpellier. ~ Fuchs, 


The names are those of Ceriani, Tischendorf,and Fuchs. I owe my knowledge of the different 
readings of E’ and E? to the great kindness of Dr. Fuchs, who placed all his notes at my disposal. 
The knowledge of the other MSS. is derived from Tischendorf, Ajoc. Apocryphae, 1866,and Ceriani 
Monumenta, v. I. ; : 

It will be observed that all these MSS. are more or less fragmentary with the exception of C. 
This, however, is often obscure. A, though nearly complete till XxxXvi, is rightly regarded by Fuchs 
as very untrustworthy, and is much spoilt by glosses, Apoc. Mos. xvi. 2, xiv. 2, xxiv. 3, XXvili. 3 
XXxii. 4, even while it preserves some good readings, especially xxii. 2 (‘judgement’), and retains 
Apocalypse in xiii, which I believe to be original, and elsewhere lost through influence of Latin 
version. 

D, where it is to be had (i-xvi,xxxvi-xliv) seems the safest to follow ; but it appears, especially 
at the end, to aim too much at clearness and classical Greek, and I have often found myself 
suspecting that the less easy and more clumsy sentences of C had a closer affinity with the original 
text ; even though conscious that in so doing I have been compelled to depart from the precedent 
~ by ak Fuchs, whose work marks an epoch in the study of this literature, and to whom 

Owe much, 


124 


INTRODUCTION 


Besides D, like B, though to a less extent, is not above filling up the gaps from the Scriptures 
(cf. Apoc. Mos. ix. 2, &c.), and altering phrase or word to correspond with a biblical text (Apoc. 
Mos. viii. 1-2, &c.). 

E, like B, is often redundant and diffuse. Its chief interest lies in its very near relationship to 
the Armenian Version, with which it often agrees against all the others; if not the source of that 
translation, it is very closely related to it. 

In the following translation, I have taken D and C as the chief guides, but, where they are 
unsatisfactory, have often thought it wiser to follow one of the others. Cf. xxvi.4 (AB), xxix. 5(E). 
I agree with Fuchs that the construction of the true text is ‘schwierig’ and largely guesswork, but 
have adopted no reading without comparing all MSS. 

2° Vita Adae et Evae. Numerous MSS. and versions exist of the Latin Vita, which Meyer 
has divided into four classes. 

Cod. Arund., 326. 10, which I have seen at the British Museum, seems to belong to Class II 
and contains the additional paragraph describing Solomon’s finding of the tables. 

To Ciass III, which contains ‘legend of the holy rood’ in an expanded form, belong most of 
the mediaeval versions, e. g. Deutsches Adam-Buch, ‘ Herlwin’, and others. 

Meyer's text from which I have translated is based principally on Class I, and omits all the 
additions in the other classes. Where I have departed from it, I have noted the fact. 

Class IV. The text of the Paris MSS. of the eighth or ninth century, often abbreviated and 
corrupt, is interesting if it is, as Meyer believes, an autograph of the tutor of Charles Martel and 
shows the early interest taken in the book. It is occasionally used and forms one of the authorities 
for the text of the long interpolation in Vit. xxix. 


§ 4. THE ANCIENT VERSIONS OF THE ADAM BOOKS. 


1° Armenian. Besides those of the Latin Vita we have two others of the Apoc. Mosis. First, 
the Armenian (translated by Conybeare in 7QR., 1895, vol. vii; Preuschen, Armen.-Gnostische 
Adam-Schriften, 1904) is based on three MSS. in the library of Etschmiadzin. This has been 
published by Mechitarist Fathers at Venice, and contains an edited and expanded version of the 
tale. Most of the additions and verbal alterations, especially those not already found in E, are ina 
Gnostic direction, and their presence as well as that of other similar Gnostic works on Seth, &c., has 
led Preuschen to suggest a Gnostic origin for the whole Adam literature, which is an untenable 
hypothesis. The present Arm. text is from a Gk. MS. akin to E. 

The names of herbs in xxix. 6 are transliterations of the Greek. Sea ‘not made with hands’ 
(Gx e.poofnrov) is a scribal emendation of (Apoc. Mos. xxxvii. 3) “Axepovetay ; cf. ‘ Hojil’ for ‘Jael’ in 
Apoc. Mos. xxix. 7. 

2° Slavonic. The Slavonic has been edited with Latin and German translations by Jagi¢ from nine 
MSS. It presents longer and shorter (South Slav.) recensions of the same book. (Denkschriften d. 
Wiener Akad. Wissensch., Phil.-Hist. K1., xlii, Vienna, 1893). Jagi¢ is convinced that these are 
from the same original. The present version is closely parallel to the Greek from which, like the 
Armenian (Kabisch), it is evidently translated ; but at xxxvii, Eve goes on to tell a tale of penance 
in the water on the lines of that described in Vita i-xii, though with many significant variations, 
e.g. ‘44’ for 37’ (Slav. Vit. xxxv. 3). The devil’s story of his own Fall, Vit. xii—xviii, is left out, but 
another incident of the devil claiming rule over man (Slav. Vit. xxxiii-xxxiv), strongly dualistic 
and perhaps connected with Bogomilian heresy, takes its place. The end of the book is very 
abbreviated and several passages are rudely Christianized by a phrase, e. g. xlvi. 1 (‘ Christ’), xlvii. 3 
(‘ Sign of the Cross’), 1. 1. : 

The misunderstanding of the old Hebrew name of Jah-El had led to the creation of a new and 
imaginary angel named ‘ Joel’ (see notes). While the beast who attacks the penitents is described 
not as a serpent but a ‘cotur ’, which Vollmer (Deutsches Adam-Buch, 1908) would translate as felis 
ma Caneats. a 

The old Jewish ending in praise of the Sabbath (Apoc. Mos. xliii = Vita li) is obscured. 

3° Christian and Gnostic. Besides these Christian editions of the Jewish original, numerous 
other versions of the Adam tales exist, to which a Christian or Gnostic author can definitely be 

ssigned. 
7 'Sach are the Gnostic ‘Testament’ or ‘ Apocalypse of Adam ’—the two names belong to two 
recensions—in Syriac and Arabic, rightly mentioned by Renan as the piece referred to in Gelasius 
decree, ‘Liber qui appellatur Penitentia Adae Apocryphus. Renan _thinks its liturgy of ‘the 
hours’ became through Coptic and then Apost. Constitutions, viii-xxiv, a chief source for 
determining the ‘Canonical Hours’. ; 
12 


THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


It is probable that this book (which is mainly concerned with an elaborate breviary and 
angelology) has borrowed from the Apoc. Mos. xxxvi-xl its account of the gloom of sun and 
moon after Adam’s death and the funeral carried out by the ‘virtues’ (cf. Vita Ad. xxi), It has 
been used in turn by the Ethiopic Adam Book, which follows it in bringing the story down to the 
prophecy of Christ, of whom Seth, not Adam, is regarded as the prototype (cf. Gloss in Slav. Vita, 
xlvi). This latter has taken largely from a Syriac work, The Cave of Treasure, translated by Bezold 
into German, Die Schatzhdhle. Hort supposed this might be derived from the Ethiopic, but 
this is very unlikely. Both these works are strongly Christian and plainly ascetic. In both, 
‘sons of God’ (Gen. vi. 1) = ‘sons of Seth’. Holiness consists in celibacy. ; 

All these later works differ from our books in making Adam’s life and death but a starting- 
point for further chronicles, prophecies, and expectations of later ages. In the last two, the point of 
Adam’s death lies in the history of the fortunes of his corpse in its progress to Mount Calvary. This 
is embalmed and placed in a cave with the treasures the Magi are to bring to the second 
Adam (this is the new version of the fragrant herbs for which Adam made request in the Apoc. 
Mosis xxix). 

The Conflict} is the latest and most elaborate, but this work and the Schatzhohle are entirely 
Christian, and wholly unlike our works, though they employ very little new material. 


$5. DATE OF ORIGINAL TEXT. 


Terminus ad quem. Frequently the principal means of ascertaining the date of ancient 
books is the nature of the ideas which appear in their pages. In the case of the Books of Adam 
as in the ‘ Odes’ of Solomon historical allusions are conspicuously absent. The chief, if not the only 
criterion of date, is the relation of religious notions to those of other works. Still we are in a position 
at once to place the composition both of the Apoc. Mos. and the Vita Adae before the appearance 
of the Ethiopic Adambuch (dated to seventh century by Dillmann and Malan ; fifth century by 
Charles, 2 En., Intro. § 5, p. xviii) which borrows largely from both; and also before the Armenian 
version which dates, perhaps, from a period before 360 (Preuschen). The mention of the Acherusian 
lake (Apoc. Mos, xxxvii. 3) is perhaps the original of the Apoc. Pauli xxii which was ‘ revealed’ in 
A.D, 380 (Tisch.). Charles (Zucycl. Brit, ii. 175) dates it A.D. 388 from internal evidence. 

Meyer thinks the Vita Adae xlii (= Ev. Nicodemi xix of A. D. 405-50) was a later interpolation 
into the text of Vita which existed before. Bousset thinks that the interpolation in Vita xxix, 
‘maior quam prius,’ is part of a Jewish Apocalypse to which a Christian has added a long piece 
(like a gloss). If so, he thinks it refers to Herod’s temple, which was built in the author’s lifetime. 
For another view of this, see my note zy loc. 

Only general considerations remain to fix the date more exactly, but they are the most 
important. We have ample evidence to prove (1) that the contents are Jewish; (2) that the 
tone and temper is earlier than the Golden Age of the Rabbis, e.g. it has no polemic against the 
Christians ; (3) that the Theology and Eschatology are that of the later Judaism and akin to that 
of the 2 Enoch. 

There is little doubt that the author of the Apoc. Mos. is indebted to the latter book, or the 
school where it originated, for some of his most characteristic traits, e. g. its conception of the Tree 
of Life and of the sacred oil (cf. 2-Enoch viii. 3), the sin of Eve, and the lake of purification, the 
‘seven Heavens’, &c. His relation to the older books of Enoch is more remote and his angelology 
is more developed than even that in the ‘ Parables’ (1 Enoch XxXXvii-lxxi). The Demonology 
outside the Vita xiii-xvii is of a pre-Christian type, and Kabisch may be right in claiming that 
2 Cor. xi. 14 is quoted from our text or more likely from the source of our text. Of the angelology 
and the eschatology, especially the doctrine of the Heavens, the same is true. See §$ 7-9. 

It is equally certain that the Book (apart from brief interpolations and possibly Vita xxv—xxix) 
is of purely Jewish origin. As Ginzberg, Kabisch, and Fuchs unanimously declare, there is absolutely 
nothing specifically Christian in the contents. Many of the cited Christian phrases, e.g. ‘son of 
wrath’ (Apoc. Mos. iii. 2), are Hebraisms and in accordance with Rabbinic usage. (Cf. Hort’s list 
with Ginzberg’s article, ‘Book of Adam, in ¥ew. Encyc.) The complete absence of references, 


* In Conflict, Bk. i, the following appear to be derived from the Apoc. Mos. and the Vita :—vi, xvii = Apoc 
Mos. xxxvii (Acherusian lake); xxviii = Apoc. Mos. vi. 2, xxix. 3; Vita xxxi. 1; v.xx= Apoc. Mos. xii ANE) Si hie Vita 
x11, XVI, XV. 33 cf. Koran Sura ii. 30; xviii = Vita XXXVli-xl; ix, xxi = Vita iii. 1; xvii = Apoc. Mos. xvi; XXxii 
xxxill = Vita vi-x; xxxvii = Vita xxxvi. 2; Apoc. Mos. ix. 3; xxxviii. 2 = Vita xlii = Evangel Nicodemi xix. 1; xlv. 
9 = Apoc. Mos. x. 1-2, X1, 2; Vita xxxvil. 2, xxxviil. 2; xxxix = Vita iv. Qe Vie ‘ = te 
_ _ The ‘water of life’ in Conflict is not referred to in Apoc. Mos. or in Vita (save interpolation in Vita xxix)? J 
is Christian substitute for ‘oil of life’ (Apoc. Mos. ix, xiii, XXvill; Vita xxxvi, xl-xlii). nth 


126 


INTRODUCTION 


direct or indirect, to Christian notions of Incarnation, Redemption, even of Christia 
teaching, would make it impossible to assign to most of the work a Christian origin. The startling 
abruptness of Christian interpolations serves, as in the case of Test. Twelve Patriarchs passim, to clinch 
the argument from silence; which is the stronger, since the doctrine of a future judgement and 
future resurrection is clearly taught (Apoc. Mos. x, xii, xiii, XXVili, XxXxvii, xli, xliii, Wits XXXix 
xlvii, li); even though the Messiah plays no part and no judge other than God is mentioned. The 
Resurrection is rather connected in both the Vita and the Apoc. Mos. with the weekly rest of the 
Sabbath. Cf. Apoc. Mos. xliii, Vita li with Jub. iii. 17. Nor can Preuschen’s theory of a Gnostic 
(Sethite) origin for these pieces be accepted, even in the case of the Armenian version (though 
we have sought to show in the notes how this version has been subsequently modified in a Sethite 
direction on the lines of ‘the Gospel of Seth’ and other Adam legends preserved only in Armenian, 
which have so largely modified Preuschen’s conclusion) ; see his Adam Books, ii-vii. See $9. 
Terminus a quo. Hort was ready to admit a date anywhere in the first three centuries for the 
Apoc. Mos. It seems certain that the whole material contained in our Adam Books belongs to a 
period not earlier than the first century A.D. or later than the fourth century ; but the uniform 
absence of polemic against the Christians, the wide and tolerant view of the future of the Gentiles, 
the conception of Adam’s or rather Eve’s sin (so nearly akin to that in Paul and 4 Ezra), the old 
simple hopes of the future Resurrection, the glaring dissimilarity of the Christian interpolated 
passages (Vita xlii, xxix ; Apoc. Mos. xliii-end, xxxvi-end, A only) render the earlier date far the 
more probable for the bulk of the work. The absence of any Messiah in the future prospects (see § 9) ! 
is yet another link with the 2 Enoch, and points not obscurely to an author of ‘the Dispersion ’, 
perhaps in Alexandria. Since it is certain that both the Latin, the Slavonic, and the Armenian, are 
from a Greek original, though ultimately parts of the book may be based on Hebrew documents 
(see § 5°), seeing that the text is strongly coloured by Hebrew words and phrases, a further proof is 
forthcoming that the author or authors were Jewish Hellenists. For the date of the several parts, 


or books, included in this material, and especially for the relation of the Greek Apoc. Mos. to the 
Latin Vita, see § 6. 


n higher moral 


*, DATE OF VERSIONS OF THE ADAM BOOKS. 
5 


Armenian. The MSS. in the library of Etschmiadzin were written by Mechitarist fathers in 
1539. Preuschen ascribes the earliest translation in Armenian to an Archontic heretic Eutaktus in 
360, but this is bound up with his view of the Gnostic character of these works. Conybeare would 
admit a date in fifth century. 

Slavonic. Jagi¢ ascribes the earliest of these MSS. to a date not later than the fourteenth 
century, but the existence of a second Bulgarian recension probably derived from it renders this 
date none too early. Both are from the Greek, much modified by similar tales in the Russian 
‘ Palaea’, the Bohemian ‘ Life of Adam’ (containing also parts of the Vita absent here), and other 
Polish and Slavonic Adam tales of the sixteenth century. 

Syriac. ‘The Cave of Treasure.’ Bezold assigns the Schatzhdhle to sixth century. Un- 
doubtedly written in Syriac, which language it declares to be ‘the queen of tongues’, the speech of 
paradise and of Heaven. Written not by S. Ephraem but by a Christian and one of his disciples. 
Hort thinks this and ‘ Conflict’ are based on fourth century traditions. 

Syriac and Arabic. ‘The Apocalypse or Testament of Adam,’ Probably not later than 
fourth century. Decret. Gelasii-Liicke, Offenbarung des Fohannes, i. 232, referred to by Syncell. 
Chron. xviii, Cedren. I. In Syriac, Arabic and Greek fragment. Renan decides it is early Gnostic. 
Hort says not Gnostic but ‘ lies outside Greek and Latin Christianity’. : 

Ethiopic. ‘Conflict of Adam and Eve.’ From Ethiopic (Kraft’s) MSS. Since the author of 
the ‘Conflict of Adam and Eve’ criticises Syrians, Greeks and Hebrews, he was none of these 
(Hort). Dillniann assigns it to the seventh, Charles to the sixth century. The original was Arabic. 

Gospel of Eve. A Gnostic work describing Eve’s seduction by Satan and the birth of Cain and 
Abel, sons of Satan (the Serpent). Epiphanius, adv. Haereses, xxvi. Date uncertain. Fabricius, 
Cod. Pseudepigr. Vet. Test. i. 95. (1712.) 

Armenian Adam Looks bound up in MSS. with Armen. Version of the Vita Adae, treated as 
one, by Preuschen, include ‘ Gospel of Seth ’, ‘ Words of Adam to Seth’, ‘ Tale of the Sons of Adam’, 
‘Tale of the penance of Adam and Eve’, ‘ Death of Adam’, ‘Tale of the Creation of Adam and 
Eve ’, ‘ Tale of the Expulsion of Adam and Eve.’ Compare Story of Satan’s trick in ‘ Tale of the 
Expulsion of Adam and Eve’ with Slav. Vita Ad. xxxi, xxxii. 

All these are Christian, or Gnostic anti-Jewish pieces (in ‘ Death of Adam’, Jerusalem is called 
‘ place of the fallen angels’), and are far more akin to the ‘ Conflict’, especially in attitude to celibacy, 
than to the Armenian Version of Apoc. Mos. Probably this latter was modified to agree with them. 

127 


THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


Seth is here always the hero. Satan’s fall is narrated, and history brought down to Christ as in 
other Christian books. The Trinity is definitely and crudely taught. Preuschen’s derivation from 
Archontic heretics through Eutaktus A.D. 360 may be right. (Cf. Epiphanius, adv. Haer. xl—xlvi.) 
They show a complete knowledge of the contents of the Apoc. Mos. and the Vita (except i—xii). 


§ 6. COMPOSITE NATURE OF THE TEXT. 


The Problems. It is plain at first glance, that the three versions with which we are here 
concerned, though exhibiting a great deal of unity, are also in some respects strikingly divergent. 
In § 1 we found that to the main narrative in Apoc. Mos. a number of-separate pieces are attached 
both in the Slav. and Latin versions! of the legend. Before discussing the nature and origin of 
these, we must pause to justify the position. 1°. That the Apoc. Mos. and not the Vita is the main 
narrative. 2°. That this story possesses a unity of its own which is disturbed by the addition of the 
separate legends referred to. 

Both positions have been and will be challenged; and it must be admitted that neither can be 
proved to demonstration. The defence of the first is based on Dr. Fuchs’ masterly essay in his 
introduction to these books. He seeks to show that (a) the material of the Apoc. Mos. was certainly 
before the editor of the Vita. It may further be urged (4) that the Vita was unknown or at least 
unemployed by the author of the Apoc. Mos. 

(2) It is hard to see how any careful reader of the books can deny this first proposition. From 
xxix-—li the Vita is little more than a condensed abstract of the picturesque and extravagant 
descriptions of the Apoc. Mos. To suppose that these represent a working up of the earlier simple 
language of the Vita seems to be a direct misunderstanding of the methods and style of Jewish 
Apocalyptic, as they appear in all the mass of literature which still remains. Moreover, if these 
phantasies are a later production, despite the countless parallels in Rabbinical and Apocalyptic 
literature, some few of which are adduced in our notes, how is it that they have received so faint 
a colouring from their presumably Christian authors? In $4 it is intended to illustrate the purely 
Jewish nature of the theology which these sections exhibit even down to the fact that Jehovah still 
bears his ancient name; that marriage is still regarded as a holy thing, and not denounced as by the 
monks who wrote romances for Christians. Besides, the Vita, though it omits Eve’s tale (Apoc. 
Mos. xv-xxx) in its proper place, has incorporated practically the whole of the material therein con- 
tained; thus the division of paradise into two parts for Adam and Eve (Vita xxxii. 2) is taken from 
Apoc. Mos. xv. 2; Vita xi-xvil seems almost like an expansion of Apoc. Mos. xvi. 3; Vita xliv contains 
preface to Eve’s tale, only postponed by three additional words, ‘after my death’; but the most 
striking fact of all is that the account of their attempt to get food in Vita v does not prevent 
Vita xliii from taking Eve’s account in Apoc. Mos. xxix; leaving out the ‘seeds for his food’ and 
delaying the events till after their quest for the oil of life, making this a sort of substitute for 
that which they were ‘not to receive now’. 

Lastly, the interpolation from Ev. Nicodemi replaces an obviously Jewish, if not original, 
Apocalypse, in this same section of the Apoc. Mos. Since this interpolation is found in Vit. 
xiii (eighth century) earliest MS. of Vita, it is of some age, though not, perhaps, in the first text. 

(2) On the other hand, the present text of the Apoc. Mos. shows no trace of the special matter 
peculiar to the two other versions, though this matter is of Jewish origin, as Ginzberg has shown 
that it is well known in other Fewish works. The long account of the devil’s fall, not in the 
Slavonic, but closely akin to the legends on which both the Slav. Palaea Historica, the Koran, and the 
Mandean Book of Adam are based, presupposes a wholly different demonology to that in the Apoc. 
Mos. The nearest approach is in Apoc. Mos. xxxix. 3, but ‘those who have hearkened to him’ is 
most naturally taken of wicked men. The whole piece seems to be introduced through the second 
failure of Eve, which is omitted even in the Slavonic, and never hinted at in the Apoc. Mos. The 
elaborate Midrash on Cain’s birth (Vita xvii-xxii) has no parallel in the Apoc. Mos., though it is 
thoroughly Jewish and quite innocent of any doctrinal application, to which the author might have 
objected. The explanation of the way Adam and Eve obtained food from God (whose object is 
obscured by the new ending put on the story to find room for Satan’s narrative) is not only different 
from, but inconsistent with, the story that Adam obtained this help from God by the angel’s prayers 
at the time of his expulsion, Apoc. Mos. xxix, a relic of which has, as we have seen, been retained 
by the Vita in a wrong connexion. The forty days’ fast in Jordan is entirely ignored in Apoc. Mos., 


* Both these seem plainly translations from the Greek. For Slay. see §§ 4, 5. 
transliteration of Greek names of herbs (Vita xliii, 3) ‘cinnamomum et calaminthe 
Graecisms, €.g. Alagas = mAnyds (Vita xxxiv. 1); plasma = whdopa (Vita xlvi. 
(xlvill. 4), owddvas Bvacivas, 


In the Latin Vita, apart from 
n et nardum’, there are many 
3, Cf. xxvii. 2); séadones byssinas 


128 


INTRODUCTION 


nor is fasting mentioned as a means by which Eve and Seth may induce | 
Tree of Life. The fact that this tale is amplified in the Pirke eleven ce fortune cee ae 
assigned to it, does not even prove an early origin, for Israel Levi in FQR, 1895, has shown that 
this work is subsequent to the Mohammedan movement and mentions the Mosque of Omar. Early 
or not, the story is ignored by the author of the Apoc. Mos., and its inclusion in the Slav. version 
tends to show rather the acquaintance of the Slav. editor with several Adam books, of which the 
original Greek form of the Vita may be one, for it comes very awkwardly after God has granted 
to Adam ‘the seeds for his food’ ; it contrasts alike with the heretical interpolation of xxxii_-xxxiii 
and the bald statement of the Vita xxii. 1 that God gave them ‘seeds for their food’ after Cain’s 
birth (a new version of the Apoc. Mos. xxix). Lastly, its triumphant conclusion in the Slav. version 
compels the alteration of Adam’s words to Eve at the close of her tale (Slav. Vita xl; Apoc. 
Mos. xxxi). 

The final directions of Eve concerning the tables (though the story is as old as Josephus) are 
not represented in the Apoc. Mos., even though she tells her story to warn future generations 
(Apoc. Mos, xxx. 1). 

Vita xxv—-xxix, quite apart from the markedly Christian ending, which is probably a later gloss, 
is somewhat removed in tone, temper, and theology, from the rest of the Vita, and the whole of the 
Apoc. Mos. Adam and Seth are here glorified, despite a possible reference to Apoc. Mos. xxiv. 1. 
Paradise is treated not as the garden of Eden, but as a celestial realm, the abode of God (Vita xxv. 
3, cf. 2 Enoch viii) into which Adam is translated long before ‘the end of the times’ (Apoc. Mos. 
xiii) in contradiction to the whole tenor of both the Vita and the Apoc. Mosis.1 

Still more astonishing is the new attitude towards knowledge and the Tree of Knowledge, the 
eating of which has brought, not death, but supernatural wisdom (xxix. 2, xxvii. 3).? 

Besides these facts, the new names for God, ‘ Light,’ ‘ Life,’ ‘Almighty,’ ‘ Power,’ &c., the new 
date for the ‘translation’? immediately after the expulsion, the abrupt entrance of the story into 
the narrative, no preface or attempt to soften the break, are comparatively insignificant, though 
sufficiently remarkable features. It seems possible that the author of this piece had both our works 
before him—e. g. xxv. 3 seems borrowed from the account of God’s coming to paradise in Apoc. 
Mos. xxii. 3, cf. xxxili. 2—but he used them merely as ornament to his own wholly original vision, 
of which the ending seems to be lost. I confess it seems strange to me that the separate nature of 
this piece has not been more remarked.* It appears as if the editor of the Latin Vita put this and 
other pieces together with little regard to order or probability. His object was, perhaps, merely 
the collection of all the oldest legends relating to our ‘first father ’. 

The Apoc. Mos. is thus in our view the oldest document. This was then combined with other 
Jewish legends about Adam and Eve and translated into Latin. Possibly the translator incorporated 
xxv-xxix of the Vita, perhaps also xiii—xvii, from earlier Jewish sources. The addition of Christian 
touches, e.g. Jordan for Gihon (Vit. vi), &c., and interpolations, such as xlii, may have been made 
subsequently. Whether the Apoc. Mos. as it stands is a complete unity is a hard question. The 
text is at any rate much injured and disarranged, and the original hard to find. I have taken the 
liberty of altering the order in my translation of xxxix and xxxvii in deference to a suggestion in 
Dr. Fuchs’ edition. 


§ 7. AUTHORSHIP. 


I have attempted to show, in examining the date of these works, that the author of the original 
Apocalypsis Mosis, and very probably also the editor, who put together the other legends concerning 
Adam and Eve contained in the Latin Vita, was a Jew of the Dispersion writing between A.D. 60 
and 300, and probably in the earliest years of this period. 

The Greek text is full of Hebraic words and phrases, of which Fuchs (in Kautzsch, Afok. und 
Pseud. ii. 511) gives a fairly full list; most of these will be found mentioned in the notes with a few 
others, such as the constant use of xai, where we should expect dcre (Deissmann, Light from 
Ancient East, shows this use of ‘and’ was common in Greek popular dialect of N.T. times), and a 
very frequent use of cognates, ‘ die the death ’, ‘ weep with tears’, &c., or plays on words, which are 
so frequent in the Old Testament and later Jewish books (see critical notes). ; 

Perhaps the most striking of Dr. Fuchs’ examples, besides Jael (xxix-xxxiii), (Jahwe-Elohim) 


1 Since the Adam literature is dependent on 2 Enoch, the reference to the ‘ Paradise of Righteousness’ in this 
section is quite consistent with its belonging to this literature. As regards Adam’s ¢emporary translation see note 3. 
—[Gen. Editor.] ka 4 : 

2 This idea is Judaistic and pre-Christian: cf, 1 Enoch xxxii. 6.—[Gen. Editor.] : 

8 Adam is not here finally translated but only temporarily in order to receive the revelation, The same type of 
translation is found in the Books of Enoch and other Apocalypses.—[Gen. Editor.] | 

4 The Vision in xxv-xxix is already referred to in the Apoc. Mos. iii—[Gen. Editor. ] 


1105.2 129 K 


THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


are AdAndowva (xiii); Adyou Tapavoyutas (xxi) = ‘ words of Belial > Gyba mas (cf, Ps. Sol. iv. 11) and 
the strange names for Cain (Diaphotos or Barekhooh, or Adiaphotos I) and Abel (Amilabes see note 
on i. 1): oxedos aydpiorov (Xxvi. I), €Aavov Tod éd€ov (I confess I do not understand why Fuchs says 
‘nicht als ein Wortspiel zu beurteilen ’) ; on the contrary, the parallel in Vita seems to prove this. The 
curious use of the relative and the article with the infinitive in conjunction with the preposition év 
may stand for Hebrew ? or even 3, e. g. xvi. I pia év 4, cf. rpdmov év 6(xxx. i), eyeveto ev TO Huddooe 
nuas (xv. 2), &dAov ev peer €& adrod (xiii. 2). Other Hebraisms may be exclamations such as [dod ey, 
ii. 2 cf. 1 Sam. iii. 4-5; (7 6 eds dr (xviii), cf. 2 Kings xi. 1. The obvious error in A. M. XXV, I ép 
paratos (see note) is a strong evidence of a Hebrew source, also of cizev ph hayeiv am avrod (xxi. 3). 

On the other hand, most of the quotations are from LXX (Fuchs, 511 f.), and for Hebrew 
conceptions such as ‘Gan Eden’, Sheol, Gehenna; Greek words rapddeuros, Axepovota (or Axépovea) 
are employed, or phrases, e. g. tov rémov robrov (Apoc. Mos. xxxix). ; 

Dr. Fuchs seems to rest his faith on an Aramaic original from which his Hellenist has trans- 
lated; or a supposed ‘ Book of Adam’, containing all existing: traditions on the subject. If such 
existed, it was probably not the work of a single author. For any nearer determination of the 
author’s place and time, our only guide is the author’s literary connexion with other works whose 
date is approximately known. Since a fuller treatment of the theology of this work is given in 
§ 9, while its influence on subsequent writings is discussed in § 8, it must suffice here to point out 
some of the links connecting it with earlier literature. It is, as we have seen, a commentary on the 
ancient books of the Law written from a didactic standpoint. As such it belongs to a period when 
reflection on the Old Testament narratives had passed through a considerable process of develop- 
ment and reached some striking conclusions as to the real events connected with ‘the Fall’ and its 
consequences upon the race of men. The blessing of deliverance from this curse (not restricted as 
in the Palestinian 4 Ezra to the Jews, but extended to all men) is taught as a hope in the future, 
but it is not connected with a Messiah. (This omission is of course soon supplied by Christian 
interpolators in Slav. and Latin versions.) There is, therefore, no polemic in the book, though it 
moves in the circle of ideas familiar to readers of Paul and 4 Ezra (cf. 4 Ezra iii. 21, iv. 30, vii. 118), 
esp. Apoc. Mos. x. 2, xiv. 2 (cf. Rom. v. 12-14); but a ‘Christ’ as either the Jews or the Christians 
expected him is wholly ignored (whereas in 4 Ezra vii he is attacked); as he is in the 2 Enoch. 
As in Paul, the mercy of God (quite unlike 4 Ezra and Apoc. Bar.) is repeatedly dwelt on, but God 
pities man ‘because he made him’ (Apoc. Mos. xxxvii. 2), not because ‘ Christ died for him’; 
cf. Rom. iv. 25, 30. 

(Only in Apoc. Mos. xxviii is a condition attached to the promise of Resurrection, ‘if thou 
shouldst keep thyself from all evil,’ but this is not to be compared with the doctrine of works of 
merit as it is taught in Apoc. Baruch; cf. esp. Apoc. Bar. xiv. 12. 

It is perhaps not without significance that sacrifice, though alluded to in Apoc. Mos. xxix. 3, 
iv. 2, is not treated as a cause of God’s pardon to Adam; which is due to God’s mercy and the 
angel’s prayers (Apoc. Mos. xxxv-xxxvii; cf. 2 En. Ixi. 4), 

The resemblance to the Pauline teaching is the more remarkable since Everling (Paulinische 
Demonologie) and Thackeray (Sz. Paul and Contemporary T, hought) have shown that the two appear 
to agree very closely in their estimate of Eve’s part in the fall of man. Cf. 1 Cor. xi. IO, esp. 
1 Tim. ii. 14 and 2 Cor. xi. 3 and 13-15. (See Thackeray’s note on pp. 53-4.) Cf. Apoc. Mos. 
xix. 1, 2, 3 with xvii. 1 = Vita ix and Apoc. Mos. xxv. 3; 2 En. xxxi. 1, Sir. xxv. 23; Apoc. Mos. 
ix, 2, X. 2 = Vita iii, 2, v. 3. Cf. Philo, Quaestiones, 1-33. . 

2 Cor. xi. 14 reads almost like a quotation from Apoc. Mos. xvii or its prototype. It is of 
comparatively minor importance that Everling notices the close resemblance of Paul’s early concep- 
tion of the Parousia in 1 Thess. ii. 14 with that portrayed in Apoc, Mos. xxii; while ‘the Paradise 
in the Third Heaven’ of 2 Cor. xii. 2 is identical with that in Apoc. Mos. xl. 1, xxxvii. 5. These 
are common features in the Rabbinic writings, though Talmud (Ber. Rabb. vi, Chagiga’ 12 b) 
changed the order of the Heavens (see Charles, 2 En. XXXviii). 

If Kabisch goes too far in identifying our Apoc. Mosis with the source used By St. Paul; it 
seems at least tenable that S. Paul and the author of the 2 Enoch were near contemporaries of the 
original author of Apoc. Mos. and moved in the same circle of ideas; profoundly modified in 
St. Paul’s case by his Christian convictions; in the case of 2 Enoch by the author’s interest in the 
Philonic and Platonic speculations, e.g. of Pre-Existence; in the case of the author of Apoc. Mos, 
by his love of the picturesque and extravagant use of Jewish Haggada. In that case, we may 
assign the original nucleus of the Apoc. Mos., of which our Greek copy is a slightly revised version, to 
the middle or end of the first century A. D. and picture the author as a religious Jew of Alexandria 


_ 1 Ifthe author was an Alexandrian Jew, then he must have drawn on Hebrew or Aramaic sources, since the text 
In certain passages presupposes mistranslations of a Semitic original.—[Gen. Editor.] 


130 


INTRODUCTION — 


§ 8. INFLUENCE ON LATER LITERATURE. 


Some traditions included in the Latin version are not without early attestation, Inthe Vita L. 
the request of Eve concerning the two ‘tables’, which are to commemorate her life and Adams, is 
probably parallel with, not derived from, the legend in Josephus, Azz. i. 2. 3, perhaps from a Baby- 
lonian original! See note zz loc. 

The way by which Satan secured his bond over man (Slav. Vita XXxili-iv) appears in a new 
form in the Arm. ‘Tale of the Expulsion of Adam and Eve’, ii, iii, connected with fear of darkness ; 
cf. also Aboda Zara 8a, Conflict of Adam and Eve, I, xii; both appear to be of later origin. But 
the devil’s claim seems to have appeared in embryo form also in the original ‘ Assumption of Moses’ 
as reconstructed by Charles from later allusions (Charles, Ass. Mosis, p. 106). 

The story of the serpent putting the poison of lust on the fruit (connected with Rabbinic 
teaching of yeser hara (97) "¥}) 4 Ezra’s ‘evil seed’ in man) has been frequently dwelt upon in 
the Rabbis and in the Jewish Apocalypses (now Christianized), Slav. Bar. xcvii, Apoc. Abraham 
Xxiil (cited by Ginzberg). 

The glory of Adam and Eve before the Fall, the brightness they lost, the Resurrection that 
was promised to Adam, the nature of the serpent’s temptation, the limbs of the serpent, the kind of 
the tree of knowledge, the trumpet of Michael the guardian angel of Eve, the judgement of God 
coming with his angels, the mutilation of the serpent, all are enumerated in Rabbinic literature (see 
notes on Apoc. Mos, xvii, xviii, xx, xxvi, xxxii-xxxvii, xxix, &c.). 

Far from showing no repentance, Adam is regarded already in Jub. xix. 24 as a righteous 
patriarch, and the nature of his penance is described in Erubin 18b, Ab. Zara 18a, Ab. R. Nath. i 
(cited by Ginzberg). The sacrifice of fragrant herbs offered by Adam (xxix) and the failure of Cain 
to bury Abel (xl) are both already known to the author of Jubilees. With the seventy-two ‘ plagues’ 
of God’s curse on Adam in Apoc. Mos, viii. 2; cf. Mishna, Veg. i. 4 (Ginzberg), as also God’s words 
in Targ., Jer. iil. 9, with Apoc. Mos. viii. 1 (= xxiii. 1). The later scenes in God’s care of Adam’s soul 
and body after death are all to be found inthe Rabbinic commentaries, very likely derived from this 
book. The‘ Apocalypse’ or ‘Testament of Abraham’, which according to James, Texts and Studies, 
and Kohler (QR, 1895, 581-601), is in the main pre-Christian, Jewish, or Essene, and certainly dates 
before Origen, i.e. circ. A. D. 200, has taken much from our book for the material on which it is based ; 
concerning the nature of the Fall, the tree of which they ate, even the old Hebrew name of Jael for 
' God, also the seventy-two kinds of death (cf. Apoc. Mos. viii. 2, seventy-two ‘ plagues’ or ‘ strokes’). 

With regard to the more general features of belief in angels, seven ‘ Heavens’, two abodes of 
Paradise, ‘ chariot of cherubim,’ revolt of the beasts, Acherusian lake, &c., see § 9, ‘Theology.’ These, 
alike in Christian and Jewish Apocalypse, form a large body of common ground not derived from a 
single work, but the crystallized conceptions of generations. Cf. art. ‘ Apocalyptic’ in Fewzsh Encyc. 

When we come to a consideration of Christian, Gnostic, and Moslem productions, the suspicion 
of a direct influence becomes more pressing, though it is still hard to decide in individual cases. 
It has already appeared that both Syriac Schatzhohle and Ethiopic Conflict of Adam and Eve 
with Satan, and especially the latter, are full of comments on, and expansions of, the subject-matter 
of both the Vita and the Apoc. Mos. A reader of these works and of the Gnostic Armenian Tales 
of Adam and Seth, and the Syriac ‘Testament of Adam’, will be struck at once by the contrast of 
the tone and likeness of the events narrated in the two literary cycles. The most marked characteristic 
of these Christian and Gnostic books is the new part played by the ascetic life as such. Ascetic 
touches, e. g. division of paradise for males and females (Vita xxxii = Apoc. Mos. xv), Eve's ‘sin of 
the flesh’ (Apoc. Mos. xxv), the fasting in Jordan (Vita i-xii), the birth of Cain after the Expulsion 
from Eden (Apoc. Mos. i, Vita xix—xxi) are not wanting in our Adam books ; but they are far removed 
from the way of thinking presented by those products of the pious imagination of monks, where it 
is on account of their fasting and celibacy that the children of Seth are styled ‘Sons of God’, and 
live apart on a holy mountain; where the temptation of Adam is an incitement to marry Eve, where 
long years of separation between husband and wife are only brought to an end by the special 
command of God (even as Noah is only induced to take a wife against his will by the same 
command), where fasting is a constant practice, and celibacy a necessary mark of saintliness. 

In the ‘Testament’ yet another feature of our books is taken up and enormously expanded. 
This is the old Hebrew notion of the sympathy of the elements, conceived almost as angels (so in 
1 En. Ixxvi, ‘those stars’, also xxi. 3) in the sorrows of men, The prayers of the sun and moon for 
Adam (Apoc. Mos, xxxvi-xxxvii, condensed in Vita xvi) and the darkness of the sun in the 
presence of God (Apoc. Mos. xxxvi = 2 En. xiv. 2 (Charles’ note), cf. Vita vili, Slav. Vit. XXXvii), 
are the basis of the elaborate poetical description of the combined intercessions of all the powers of 


1 This seems to be a late development of the myth found in Jubilees viii. 3. See my edition zz /oc.—[Gen. Editor.] 
sige saa) 


THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


Heaven, of which we are told in this work. The arrangement into hours of day and night is perhaps 
based on Gnostic imaginations of the ‘aeons’ of the world, but serves to give a grandeur and com- 
pleteness to the representation. A more direct reference to the words of Apoc. Mos. xxxv is to be 
found possibly in the Dormitio Mariae xxxviii (Tisch.), a late Christian book, condemned in Decret. 
Gelasii vi. 28, and perhaps this account is copied from Apoc. Mos. Probably the censing by angels 
of Mary’s corpse in Dorm. Mar. xxvi repeats idea of Apoc. Mos. xxxiii. 4. 

The pleading of Seth and Eve for the oil of mercy is probably taken down by the author of 
the Ev. Nicodemi xix direct from our text (Apoc. Mos. xiii = Vita xli), though in a later form (but 
before Ethiopic ‘Conflict’, sixth century) of the Latin version his own statement of the promise has 
taken the place of the Jewish ‘ Apocalypse’ in Apoc. Mos. xiii. 3-5; where its presence seems to 
me (with Fuchs, Kautzsch, Apok. und Pseud. ii. 509) to need no apology. 

Similarly the Apoc. Pauli xxii seems to have taken the name ‘Acherusian lake’, though not 
the thing, which is very old, from Apoc, Mos. xxxvii. 3; cf. Orac. Sibyl. i. 302, ii. 341. Apoc. Pauli 
xliv claims for Sunday rest and peace even in Hell, which Jews and Essenes ascribed to the Sabbath, 
as in Apoc. Mos. xliii = Vita li. 


$9, THEOLOGY OF THE APOCALYPSIS MOSIS. 


Nothing could more effectually demonstrate that the Apocalypsis Mosis originated in a foreign 
city than the complete absence, outside the manifest insertion in Vita xxix, of any reference to the 
Jerusalem temple; unless ‘the place where he was accustomed to pray’, on which the Moslems 
learnt to build their reverence for the sacred Caaba, may be taken as a distant allusion (Vit. xxx. I 
= Apoc. Mos, v, 1) to some specially holy place. This distinguishes it from the ‘ Assumptio Mosis’, 
the work of a Palestinian, a Pharisaic Quietist, without a Messiah. Nor, as we have seen, does the 
author follow his teacher, the author of 2 Enoch (xlii. 6, lix. 1, 2, lxvi. 2), in giving prominence to 
sacrifice, which is here treated as entirely subsidiary, and plays no part in attaining the desired 
pardon. Yet the God he pictures, like the future he prophesies, is a naive and childlike conception 
only one step removed from the primitive figure in Genesis. Despite occasional higher flights, 
e.g. XXxvii, Eve’s prayers in xxxii. 2 and xlii. 4-8, the studied anthropomorphism is so marked as 
almost to suggest an antiquarian design. In this respect, he goes far beyond 2 Enoch. God not only 
speaks to Adam and Eve (Apoc. Mos. viii. 1, xxviii. 1, xxix. 5), comes to the garden in a chariot 
of his Cherubim (Apoc. Mos. xxii. 3), or as Slav. has it, ‘on their shoulders’, sits on a throne placed 
at the tree of life (Apoc. Mos. xxii. 4), rebukes the angels for being more merciful than Himself 
(Apoc. Mos. xxvii. 4; cf. Apoc. Abraham xxviii), puts out his hand and lifts up Adam from the 
Acherusian lake after handing him over to Michael to be dealt with, comes down to supervise the 
arrangements for Adam and Abel’s burial (xxxviii. 3-5), and holds a conversation first with Adam’s 
soul (xxxix), and then with his corpse (xli. 1, 3). Yet despite this curious humbling of the Almighty, 
the author shows manytraces of the newand transcendent view of His attributes, which was causing men 
to lift Him ever further and further out of reach. Though God often speaks to Adam, his appearance 
after the Fall is not described as in Gen. iii. 8, but heralded by the ‘ trump of the archangel’ (xxii. 1, 
cf. 1 Thess. iv. 16 of the ‘ Parousia’), and neither the expulsion, the funeral, nor the last injunctions 
are his direct work; they are entrusted to a host of subordinate beings. The two cherubim of 
Gen. iii. 24 are there (Apoc. Mos. xxviii. 3) but their efforts are now supported by a host of other 
angelic beings. The archangels (four of whom are mentioned by name, xl. 1, cf. Vita xlviii. 6) and 
the Seraphim, one of whom (xxxvii. 3) is given the task of casting Adam’s soul into the Acherusian 
lake, are the most important. Thus Michael’s special concern is with the care of men’s bodies 
(Apoc. Mos. xxxii. 3). This was a well-known conception of later Judaism (see Notes). The 
other archangels (Uriel, Raphael, Gabriel) who carry out the funeral, are all names well known to 
readers of ‘Enoch’ and parallel works of Jewish Apocalyptic. The ‘virtues’, who support Eve 
in her hour of trial, Vita xxii. 1,and watched her once in Paradise, Vita xxxiii. 1 (perhaps the 
latter passage in the Vita borrows them from here, i.e. Apoc. Mos. vii. 2) are the guardian angels 
of which Our Lord speaks (Matt. xviii. 10) and which are perhaps first mentioned in Jubilees 
xxxv.17. In another respect the author follows the practice of the later Jews in ascribing great 
efficacy to the prayers not only of the righteous but of angels, for the departed (cf. Apoc. Mos. 
XXXV, Xxxvi; Vita xxi. 2, ix. 3). In this case he opposes the teaching of 2 Enoch (liii. 1) who 
unlike Philo, attacked this practice. 

The doctrine of a Future Life corresponds very nearly to the notion entertained by the later 
Judaism. The teaching of a Resurrection and a Judgement is clear and emphatic, as also is the 
doctrine concerning the intermediate abode of departed souls in Paradise, the third of the seven 
Heavens (Apoc. Mos. xxxiii. 4, (A) Tisch.), (xxxv. 2), (xxxvii. 3, 5, xl. 2) and thus quite distinct from 
the original Garden of Eden where Adam and Eve dwelt before the Fall. (Apoc. Mos. i, vi, viii 
xill, xvi, xxl, &c.; Vita xxxi, xxxii, xxxiii, xl, xlviii, &c.; Slav. Vita XXX, XXxXi.) avis 

1237 


sl) 


INTRODUCTION 


§ 10. BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


CHIEF EDITIONS OF TEXT AND VERSIONS OF THE ADAM LITERATURE, 
Greek. 


-Tischendorff, Apocalypses Apocryphae, 1866 (based on A, B, C, and beginning and end of D). 
Ceriani, Monumenta Sacra et Profana, v. 21 sqq. (text of D). 
Latin. 


- Meyer, in Adhandlungen der Miinchner Akademie der Wissenschaften, philos.-philol. K1., xiv, 1878. 
erman. 

H. Vollmer, Deutsches Adambuch, 1908. 
Slavonic. 

Jagi¢, Denkschriften der Wiener Akademie der Wissenschaften, philos.—hist., K1., xlii, 1893. 
Armenian. 

Conybeare, Jewish Quarterly Review, 1895, vii. 216-35. 

Preuschen, Festschrift, 1900, ‘ Armenische Gnostische Adam-Schriften.’ 
Syriac. 

Bezold, Schatzhohle, 1890. 

Renan, Journal Asiatigue, 1853, pp. 427-53. 
Ethiopic Adambuch. 

Dillmann, Adambuch des Morgenlandes, 1850. 

Trumpp, 4vhandlungen der Miinchner Akademie, philos.-philol. K1., xv, 1879 (Eth. text). 


CRITICAL INQUIRIES. 


J. H. Hort, Dictionary of Christian Biography, Art. ‘ Books of Adam.’ 
Kabisch, Entstehungszeit der Apoc. Mosis, ZVZW, 1905, pp. 109-35. 
M. R. James, ‘ Greek Apoc. of Adam,’ Text and Studies, ii, iii, 1891. 
Renan, ‘Syr. Test. of Adam,’ Journal Asiatigue, Ser. v, 1853. 

Malan, Conflict of Adam and Eve, London, 1899. 

Fuchs, ‘Adambuch’ in Kautzsch, Afok. und Pseud., ii, 506-28. 
Ginzberg, Die Haggada bet den Kirchenviitern, 1899, pp. 63 sqq. 
Dreyfus, Adam und Eva nach Auffassung der Midrasch, 1894. 
Ginzberg, Jewish Encyclopedia, Art. ‘ Book of Adam.’ 

Preuschen, Die apokryphen Gnostischen Adamschriften, 1900. 


Lee) 


i, 


ii. 


ill. 


THE BOOKS? OR 


Vita ADAE ET EVAE. 
Penance of Adam and Eve, i-xi. 


1 When they were driven out from paradise, 
they made themselves a booth, and spent seven 
days mourning and lamenting in great grief. 

1 But after seven days, they began to be hungry 
and started to look for victual to eat, and they 

2 found it not. Then Eve said to Adam: ‘My 
lord, I am hungry. Go, look for (something) 
for us to eat. Perchance the Lord God will 
look back and pity us and recall us to the place 
in which we were before.’ 


1 And Adam arose and walked seven days over 
all that land, and found no victual such as they 

2 used to have in paradise. And Eve said to Adam: 
‘Wilt thou slay me? that I may die, and per- 
chance God the Lord will bring thee into paradise, 
for on my account hast thou been driven thence.’ 

3 Adam answered: ‘Forbear, Eve, from such 
words, that peradventure God bring not some 
other curse upon us. How is it possible that I 
should stretch forth my hand against my own 
flesh? Nay, let us arise and look for something 
for us to live on, that we fail not.’ 


- I And they walked about and séarched for nine 


days, and they found none such as they were 
used to have in paradise, but found only animals’ 

2 food. And Adam said to Eve: ‘This hath the 
Lord provided for animals and brutes to eat ; 

3 but we used to have angels’ food. But it is just 
and right that we lament before the sight of God 
who made us. Let us repent with a great peni- 
tence: perchance the Lord will be gracious to 
us and will pity us and give us a share of some- 
thing for our living.’ 


i. I, paradise. Cod. Ar.+‘they went to the West’. 
ll. I. after seven days. 


started to look for = guaerebant. 


ADAM AND EVE 


SLAVONIC VITA ADAE ET EVAE. 


And we sat together before the gate of para- xxviil. - 


dise, Adam weeping with his face bent down 
to the earth, lay on the ground lamenting. 
And seven days passed by and we had nothing 2 
to eat and were consumed with great hunger, 
and I Eve cried with a loud voice: ‘ Pity me, O 
Lord, My Creator; for my sake Adam suffereth 
thus!’ 


And I said to Adam: ‘ Rise up! my lord, that xxix. 1 


we may seek us food; for now my spirit faileth 
me and my heart within me is brought low.’ 
Then Adam spake to me: ‘I have thoughts of 2 
killing thee, but I fear since God created thine 
image and thou showest penitence and criest to 
God; hence my heart hath not departed from 
thee.’ 


And Adam arose and we roamed through all xxx. 1 


lands and found nothing to eat save nettles (and) 
grass of the field. And we returned again to 
the gates of paradise and cried aloud and en- 
treated: ‘Have compassion on thy creature. 2 
O Lord Creator, allow us food.’ 


And for fifteen days continuously we entreated. xxxi. 1 


Then we heard Michael the archangel and Joel 2 
praying for us, and Joel the archangel was 
commanded by the Lord, and he took a seventh 
part of paradise and gave it to us. Then the 3 
Lord said: ‘ Thorns and thistles shall spring up 
from under thy hands; and from thy sweat 
shalt thou eat (bread), and thy wife shall tremble 
when she looketh upon thee.’ 


4 The archangel Joel said to Adam :‘ Thus saith xxxii. 1 


the Lord ; I did not create thy wife to command 
thee, but to obey ; why art thou obedient to thy 
wife?’ Again Joel the archangel bade Adam 2 
separate the cattle and all kinds of flying and 
creeping things and animals, both wild and tame; 
and to give names to all things. / Then indeed 3 
he took the oxen and began to plough. 


Cod. Ar. has ‘after six days’; cf. Mishna Taanit i. 6. 


iii. 1. seven days. Mishna Taanit i. 6 says he fasted seven days, see Introd. §§ 4, 5. 


victual ... 
explains it as ‘nettles’. 


in paradise: eating beasts’ food was one of Adam’s curses in Ber. rabba xx, Pirke Eliezer. 


Slav. 


2. on my account. MSS. have doublet ‘quoniam propter me iratus est tibi dominus deus vis interficere me ut 
moriar et forte introducet te dominus deus in paradisum, quia propter meam causam expulsus es inde’. 


3. bring). - 
_ my own flesh = Gen. ii. 24. 
iv. 2. angels’ food: cf. Ps. Ixxviii. 25 (Fuchs). 





XxVill. 1. before the gate of paradise. 
xxxl. 2. Joel. Confusion with Jah-El. 


- Some other curse. Cod. Ar. ‘curse us with some other curse’, Hebraism. 


Slav. Vita i marks this off from Heavenly ‘ Paradise’. 
Cf. Apoc. Mos. xliii. 4 (note). 


xxxll. 3. plough. No extreme asceticism—corn regarded as a blessing—just as there is no disparagement of marriage ; 


contrast Christian version in Introd. § 5 a. 


134 


v. I 


2 


3 


Vi. I 


Vii. I 


tN 


Vill. 1 


2 


3 


THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


VITA ADAE ET EVAE. 


And Eve said to Adam: ‘ What is penitence ? 
Tell me, what sort of penitence am I to do? 
Let us not put too great a labour on ourselves, 
which we cannot endure, so that the Lord will 
not hearken to our prayers: and will turn away 
His countenance from us, because we have not 
fulfilled what we promised. My lord, how much 
penitence hast thou thought (to do) for I have 
brought trouble and anguish upon thee ?’ 


And Adam said to Eve: ‘Thou canst not do 


so much as I, but do only so much as thou hast | 


strength for. For I will spend forty days fasting, 
but do thou arise and go to the river Tigris and 
lift up a stone and stand on it in the water up to 
thy neck in the deep of the river. And let no 
speech proceed out of thy mouth, since we are 
unworthy to address the Lord, for our lips are 
unclean from the unlawful and forbidden tree. 
And do thou stand in the water of the river 
thirty-seven days. But I will spend forty days 
in the water of Jordan, perchance the Lord God 
will take pity upon us.’ 

And Eve walked to the river Tigris and did 
as Adam had told her. Likewise, Adam walked 
to the river Jordan and stood on a stone up to 
his neck in water. 

And Adam said: ‘I tell thee, water of Jordan, 
grieve with me, and assemble to me all swimming 
(creatures), which are in thee, and let them sur- 
round me and mourn in company with me. Not 
for themselves let them lament, but for me; for 
it is not they that have sinned, but I.’ 

Forthwith, all living things came and sur- 
rounded him, and, from that hour, the water of 
Jordan stood (still) and its current was stayed.’ 


vi. I. as thou hast strength for. 
unlawful and forbidden. 





SLAVONIC VITA ADAE ET EVAR. 


Then the devil approached and stood before xxxiii. 1 


the oxen, and hindered Adam in tilling the field 
and said to Adam: ‘Mine are the things of 2 
earth, the things of Heaven are God’s; but if 
thou wilt be mine, thou shalt labour on the 
earth; but if thou wilt be God’s, (pray) go 
away to paradise. Adam said: ‘The things 3 
of Heaven are the Lord’s, and the things of earth 
and Paradise and the whole Universe.’ 


The devil said: ‘I do not suffer thee to till xxxiv. 1 


the field, except thou write the bond that thou 
art mine.’ Adam replied: ‘ Whosoever is lord of 2 
the earth, to the same do I (belong) and my 
children.’ Then the devil was overcome with 
joy.. (But Adam was not ignorant that the Lord 3 
would descend on earth and tread the devil 
under foot.) The devil said: ‘Write me. thy 4 
bond.’ And Adam wrote: ‘Who is lord of the 
earth, to the same do I belong and my children.’ 


Eve said to Adam, ‘ Rise up, my lord, let us xxxv. 1 


pray to God in this cause that He set us free 
from that devil, for thou art in this strait on my 
account.’ 

But Adam said: ‘ Eve, since thou repentest of 2 
thy misdeed, my heart will hearken to thee, for 
the Lord created thee out of my ribs. Let us 
fast forty days perchance the Lord will have 
pity on us and will leave us understanding and 
life’ I, for my part, said: ‘Do thou, (my) lord, 3 
fast forty days, but I will fast forty-four.’ 


And Adam said to me: ‘ Haste thee to the xxxvi. 1 


river, named Tigris, and take a great stone and 
place it under thy feet, and enter into the stream 
and clothe thyself with water, as with a cloak, 
up to the neck, and pray to God in thy heart 
and let no word proceed out of thy mouth.’ And 2 
I said: ‘O (my) lord, with my whole heart will 
I call upon God. And Adam said to me:3 
‘Take great care of thyself. Except thou seest 
me and all my tokens, depart not out of the 
water, nor trust in the words, which are said to 
thee, lest thou fall again into the snare.’ And 4 
Adam came to Jordan and he entered into the 
water and he plunged himself altogether into the 
flood, even (to) the hairs of his head, while he 
made supplication to God and sent (up) prayers 
to Him. 


I ef salveris: 11 sed salveris. c 
I contradicté : I III zllicito et contradicto. 


Cor. Ar. zlictto. 


2. Jordan. Probably changed by Christian editor from ‘Gihon’, where Jews, e.g. Pirke Eliezer, placed Adam’s 


penitence, for we expect another river of Paradise. 
viii. 3. stood still. 
this lasted eighteen days. 





xxxiii-xxxv. Heretical interpolation by Bogomilian dualist (Jagi¢). 
separated from the earth. For this whole section cf. Pauline phrase 
MSS. of ‘Solfernus’ and Polish and Bohemian Adam tales. 


xxxiv. 3. But Adam, &c. A gloss within a gloss. 
xxxv. 3. forty-four. Eve stronger here. 


xxxvi. 3. fall... snare = scandalizeris, 


135 


I steterunt ex agua non agentes cursum\. 


Meyer gives singular as text. Katona’s text says 


‘Paradise’ here is the Heavenly one, widely 
‘bond servants of sin’. It occurs in all Slav. 


In Latin Vit. vi, I has ‘thirty-seven’, III ‘thirty’ days. 


bees 


Xl, 


THE BOOKS VE 


VITA ADAE ET EVAE, 

1 And eighteen days passed by; then Satan 
was wroth and transformed himself into the 
brightness of angels, and went away to the river 

2 Tigris to Eve, and found her weeping, and the 
devil himself pretended to grieve with her, and 
he began to weep and said to her: ‘Come out 
of the river and lament no more. Cease now 
from sorrow and moans. Why art thou anxious 

3 and thy husband Adam? The Lord God hath 
heard your groaning and hath accepted your 
penitence, and all we angels have entreated on 
your behalf, and made supplication to the Lord ; 

4and he hath sent me to bring you out of the 
water and give you the nourishment which you 
had in paradise, and for which you are crying 

5 out. Now come out of the water and I will 
conduct you to the place where your victual hath 
been made ready.’ 


- I But Eve heard and believed and went out of 


the water of the river, and her flesh was (trembling) 
2like grass, from the chill of the water, And 
when she had gone out, she fell on the earth and 
the devil raised her up and led her to Adam. 
3 But when Adam had seen her and the devil with 
her, he wept and cried aloud and said: ‘O Eve, 
Eve, where is the labour of thy penitence? 
4 How hast thou been again ensnared by our 
adversary, by whose means we have been 


estranged from our abode in paradise and: 


spiritual joy?’ 

1 And when she heard this, Eve understood that 
(it was) the devil (who) had persuaded her to go 
out of the river; and she fell on her face on the 
earth and her sorrow and groaning and wailing 

2 was redoubled. And she cried out and said: 
‘Woe unto thee, thou devil. Why dost thou 
attack us for no cause? What hast thou to do 
with us? What have we done to thee? for thou 
pursuest us with craft? Or why doth thy malice 

3 assail us? Have we taken away thy glory and 
caused thee to be without honour? Why dost 
thou harry us, thou enemy (and persecute us) to 
the death in wickedness and envy?’ 


ix. I. was wroth. III >. 
4. crying out. II III plangitis: I planxistis. 


ADAM AND EVE 


SLAVONIC VITA ADAE ET EVAE. 


And there, the angels came together and all yyyvyij, 


living creatures, wild and tame, and all birds that 
fly, (and) they surrounded Adam, like a wall, 
praying to God for Adam. 


The devil came to me, wearing the form and yyyviij, 


brightness of an angel, and shedding big tear- 


drops, (and) said to me: ‘ Come out of the water, , 


Eve, God hath heard thy prayers and (heard) us 
angels. God hath fulfilled the prayers of those 
who intercede on thy behalf. God hath sent me 
to thee, that thou mayst come out of the water.’ 


But I (Eve) perceived that he was the devil xxxix, 1 


and answered him nothing. But Adam (when) he 
returned from Jordan, saw the devil’s footprints, 
and feared lest perchance he had deceived me; 
but when he had remarked me standing in the 
water he was overcome with joy (and) he took , 
me and led me out of the water. 


Then Adam cried out with a loud voice: ‘Be yj ; 


silent, Eve, for already is my spirit straitened 
in my body; arise, go forth, utter prayers to 
God, till I deliver up my spirit to God.’ 


(Passage follows exactly parallel to Apocalypsis 
Mosis xxxii. seq., but in abbreviated form.) 


xl. 2. with craft = dolose Fuchs, Meyer, Katona: others dolore. 





XXXVll. I. a wall. 


Far greater than concise Latin account. 


Cf. Rom. viii. 22. In Recension ii. Satan appears 


twice—the first time as Adam. The ‘tokens’ of xxxvi. 3 are explained there. 
xxxix. I, answered nothing. Here only, Eve is not deceived. Contrast ‘Conflict’ of Adam and Eve, I. xxxiii- 


XXXV. 


xl. 1. Adam cried out, &c. Only here. Latin Vita xi perhaps inserted to link on story in xvi-xxiii. Eve 


deliberately compels Satan to come forward with his tale. 








THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


VITA ADAE ET EVAE. 


The Fall of the Devil, xii—xvii. 


xi. I And with a heavy sigh, the devil spake: ‘O Adam! all my hostility, envy, and sorrow is for 
thee, since it is for thee that I have been expelled from my glory, which I possessed in the heavens 
2 in the midst of the angels and for thee was I cast out in the earth’ Adam answered, ‘What dost 
3 thou tell me? What have I done to thee or what is my fault against thee? Seeing that thou hast 
received no harm or injury from us, why dost thou pursue us?’ 
xiii, 1 The devil replied, ‘Adam, what dost thou tell me? It is for thy sake that I have been hurled 
2 from that place. When thou wast formed, I was hurled out of the presence of God and banished 
from the company of the angels. When God blew into thee the breath of life and thy face and 
likeness was made in the image of God, Michael also brought thee and made (us) worship thee in the 
sie of God ; and God the Lord spake: Here is Adam. I have made thee in our image and 
ikeness. 
xiv. 1 And Michael went out and called all the angels saying : 
‘Worship the image of God as the Lord God hath commanded.’ 
2 And Michael himself worshipped first; then he called me and said: ‘ Worship the image of God 
3the Lord.’ And I answered, ‘I have no (need) to worship Adam.’ And since Michael kept 
urging me to worship, I said to him, ‘ Why dost thou urge me? _I will not worship an inferior and 
younger being (than I). I am his senior in the Creation, before he was made was I already made. 
It ishis duty to worship me.’ 
Xv. 1,2 When the angels, who were under me, heard this, they refused to worship him. And Michael 
saith, ‘Worship the image of God, but if thou wilt not worship him, the Lord God will be wrath 
3 with thee.’ And I said, ‘If He be wrath with me, I will set my seat above the stars of heaven and 
will be like the Highest.’ 
xvi. 1 And God the Lord was wrath with me and banished me and my angels from our glory; and on 
2 thy account were we expelled from our abodes into this world and hurled on the earth. And 
3 straightway we were overcome with grief, since we had been spoiled of so great glory. And we 
4 were grieved when we saw thee in such joy and luxury. And with guile I cheated thy wife and 
caused thee to be expelled through her (doing) from thy joy and luxury, as I have been driven 
out of my glory.’ 
xvii, 1 When Adam heard the devil say this, he cried out and wept and spake: ‘O Lord my God, my 
life is in thy hands. Banish this Adversary far from me, who seeketh to destroy my soul, and give 
2, 3 me his glory which he himself hath lost.’ And at that moment, the devil vanished before him. 
But Adam endured in his penance, standing for forty days (on end) in the water of Jordan. 


Lirth of Cain and Abel; Death of Abel; Book of Seth, xviii-xxiv. 


xviii. 1 And Eve said to Adam: ‘ Live thou, my Lord, to thee life is granted, since thou hast committed 
neither the first nor the second error. But I have erred and been led astray for I have not kept the 
commandment of God; and now banish me from the light of thy life and I will go to the sunsetting, 

2 and there will I be, until I die” And she began to walk towards the western parts and to mourn 
3 and to weep bitterly and groan aloud. And she made there a booth, while she had in her womb 
offspring of three months old. 


xii. 1. expelled I. [l1+e¢ alenatus sum. Story closely parallel to Al Koran Suras vii-xi, Codex Nazaraeus 67: 
‘The highest kings of light declared: ‘‘ Let the kings of fire serve Adam.” But one, the author of ill, did not follow 
the commands of the Lord and was hurled in chains.’ Cf. Rabbi Moses-Hadarschan: ‘When God made Adam, he 
said to the higher angels, ‘‘ Bow yourselves down !”’ 

3. noharm. II III 2om nocitus: 111 15 damnatus: I natus. 119.17, 14>. 

Site (Gh 2 Bn. xxxl.-3, 

xiv. 2. God the Lord = Jahwe Elohim (oy5N m1»), 

3. Ihave no (need) to = ox hadeo with infinitive. path, Pe” 

xv. I. the angels .. . under me. Sole reference to devils (in plural) in Vita or Apoc. Mos. 

3. like the Highest. Midrasch on Isa. xiv (LXX). Cf. Dan. xi. 11. stars II III. ‘throne’ I. 

Xvi f, error = Ba Gree ; 

2. western parts = Apoc. Mos. i. I. ; 

5 pmoing. So aever III I. Jewish anti-ascetic piece. Contrast ‘ Conflict’ and Magyar ‘Vita Adae’, where 
they remain apart one hundred years and are only married at God’s express command. Cf, Noah in Arm. ‘ Gospel of 
Seth’ (Preuschen’s translation). : 

three months old. So III 43; 11 3.9. I1 17 + ‘Cain’. 
137 


THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


xix. r And when the time of her bearing approached, she began to be distressed with pains, and she 
2 cried aloud to the Lord and said: ‘ Pity me, O Lord, assist me.’ And she was not heard and the 
3 mercy of God did not encircle her. And she said to herself: ‘Who shall tell my lord Adam? 
I implore you, ye luminaries of heaven, what time ye return to the east, bear a message to my 

lord Adam,’ 
But in that hour, Adam said: ‘The complaint of Eve hath come to me. 
hath the serpent fought with her.’ | 
2 And he went and found her in great distress, And Eve said: ‘From the moment I saw thee, 
my lord, my grief-laden soul was refreshed. And now entreat. the Lord God on my behalf to 
3 hearken unto thee and look upon me and free me from. my awful pains.’ And Adam entreated 

the Lord for Eve. 

xxi, t And behold, there came twelve angels and two ‘ virtues’, standing on the right and on the left 
2of Eve; and Michael was standing on the right; and he stroked her on the face as far as to 
the breast and said to Eve: ‘Blessed art thou, Eve, for Adam’s sake. Since his prayers and 
intercessions are great, I have been sent that thou mayst receive our'help. Rise up now, and 
3 prepare thee to bear. And she bore a son and he was shining; and at once the babe rose up 


Sse er Perchance, once more 


and ran and bore a blade of grass in his hands, and gave it to his mother, and his name was 


called Cain. 


VITA ADAE ET.EVAE. 


xxii, 1 And Adam carried Eve and the boy and led 
2 them to the East. Andthe Lord God sent divers 
seeds by Michael the archangel and gave to 
Adam and showed him how to work and till 
the ground, that they might have fruit by which 

they and all their generations might live. 

3 For thereafter Eve conceived and bare a son, 
whose name was Abel ; and Cain and Abel used 
to stay together. 

4 And Eve said to Adam: ‘My lord, while I 
slept, I saw a vision, as it were the blood of 
our son Abel in the hand of Cain, who was 
gulping it down in his mouth. Therefore I have 
sorrow.’ 

5 And Adam said,‘ Alas if Cainslew Abel. Yet 
let us separate them from each other mutually, 


xix. 2. did not encircle her. 
3. what time . . . to the east. 
xx. I. the Serpent. 


xxl. I. virtues (or ‘powers’ Fuchs). 
‘principalities, thrones, powers’, &c. 
and Michael... right. II only. So Meyer. 

2. en the face. I facdem ezus: I1, II] eam a facie. 
3. Shining (/ucidus). Cf. Adiaphotos, Apoc. Mos. i. 


blade of grass... Cain. 

say Cain slew Abel with a reed. 
xxil. 4. I saw. 

5. separate . 





i, All MSS. (ABCD and Arm.) give preface describing book as taught to 


Like the title, this is a later addition. 
Apoc. Mos. xi. 1), 


APOCALYPSIS Mosis. 


This is the story of Adam and Eve after they had i. 1 
gone out of Paradise. And Adam knew his wife 2 
Eve and went upwards to the sun-rising and abode 
there eighteen years and two months. And Eve 3 
conceived and bare two sons; Adiaphotos, who 
is called Cain and Amilabes who is called Abel. 

And after this, Adam and Eve were with one ii. 1 
another and while they were sleeping, Eve said 
to Adam her lord: ‘My lord, Adam, behold, I 2 
have seen in a dream this night the blood of my 
son Amilabes who is styled Abel being poured 
into the mouth of Cain his brother and he went 
on drinking it without pity. But he begged him 
to leave him a little of it. Yet he hearkened 3 
not to him, but gulped down the whole; nor 
did it stay in his stomach, but came out of his 


Not a Christian sentiment, but Jewish. 
Cf. Test. Adam, describing the fourth hour of the night. 
Cf. Eve’s tale in Apoc. Mos. xv-xxx. Also attack of beast in Vita xxxvii, Apoc. Mos. x-xi. 
2. was refreshed. vefrigeravit Meyer: I infrégeravit. 
Probably ‘guardian angels’ (Ginzberg). Cf. Apoc. Mos. vii. Like Pauline 
Name agrees in Test. Adam. 


The ‘Incunabulum’ (see Meyer 215), the Deutsches Adam 
Buch and III say Eve was frightened and wished to kill Cain, 


Perhaps alludes to myth that he was Satan’s child. 


Better ‘reed.’ Play on words—Hebrew N22 (Kanéh) and 3? (Cain). Some. Rabbis 


In Slav. Adam sees it before Cain’s birth. » 
- mutually. Midrasch on Gen. iv. 2, 7-10. 


Moses by Michael the archangel. 


Slav. describes subjection of all animals in first chapter (cf. beasts’ words in 


2. knew. éyvo (Gen. iv. 1) DE Arm.: AC ‘took’ (\aBev). _ 

went upwards (avnOev) AC: D ‘went out? (é&4er). 

3. Adiaphotos D: other MSSt. Arm. ‘ Anloys’ = ‘full of light, 
Ante-Nicene Christian Library, xvi, 1870, 
‘a keeper of sheep’ for Amilabes. 

Amilabes AD: CB corrupt. Arm. ‘ Barekhooh’ = ‘ well-minded’ (Conybeare). 

ii. 2. went on drinking E: AC D has aorist (Emer). 


Cf. Vita xxi. 3 Zwcidus. The translator in the 
suggests duapirwp or duapurevtijs, ‘a planter,’ for Adiaphotos and pmdo8drns, 


138 


THE BOOKS OF 


VITA ADAE ET EVAE. 


and let us make for each of them separate 
dwellings,’ 

And they made Cain an husbandman, (but) 
Abel they made a shepherd; in order that in 
this wise they might be mutually ‘separated. 
2 And thereafter, Cain slew Abel, but Adam was 

then one hundred and thirty years old, but Abel 

was slain when he was one hundred and twenty- 
two years. 


XXUl. I 


3 And thereafter Adam knew his wife 

and he begat a son and called his name Seth. 
And Adam said to Eve, ‘ Behold, I have be- 

gotten a son, in place of Abel, whom Cain slew.’ 

2 And after Adam had begotten Seth, he lived 
eight hundred years and begat thirty sons and 
thirty daughters; in all sixty-three children. 
And they were increased over the face of the 
earth in their nations. 


XXIV. I 


ADAM AND EVE 


APOCALYPSIS MosIs. 


mouth. And Adam said, ‘Let us arise and go 4 
and see what has happened to them. (I fear) 
lest the adversary may be assailing them some- 
where.’ 

And they both went and found Abel murdered jj 
by the hand of Cain his brother. And God > 
saith to Michael the archangel : ‘Say to Adam: 
“Reveal not the secret that thou knowest to Cain 
thy son, for he is a son of wrath. But grieve 
not, for I will give thee another son in his stead ; 
he shall show (to thee) all that thou shalt do. Do 
thou tell him nothing.”’ Thus spake the arch- 3 
angel to Adam. But he kept the word in his 
heart, and with him also Eve, though they grieved 
concerning Abel their son. 

And after this, Adam knew Eve his wife, and iv. 1 
she conceived and bare Seth. 

And Adam said to Eve: ‘See! we have be- 2 
gotten a son in place of Abel, whom Cain slew, 
let us give glory and sacrifice to God.’ 

And Adam begat thirty sons and thirty v. 1 
daughters and Adam lived nine hundred and 
thirty years; and he fell sick and cried witha loud 2 
voice and said, ‘ Let all my sons come to me 
that I may see them before I die.’ 


I 


VITA ADAE ET EVAE. 


Vision of Adam, xxv-xxix. 


XXV. I 


And Adam said to Seth, ‘Hear, my son Seth, that I may relate to thee what I heard and 
2 saw after your mother and I had been driven out of paradise. 


When we were at prayer, there 


3 came to me Michael the archangel, a messenger of God. And I saw a chariot like the wind and 
its wheels were fiery and I was caught up into the Paradise of righteousness, and I saw the 


Xxill. 2. one hundred and twenty-two. 
Xxiv. 2. Sixty-three. 
omits ‘thirty daughters’. 


Cf. Jub. iv. 3 (Charles’s note); Abel there is twenty-two. 
Cf. Jub. iv. 10 (Charles’ note): Jub. says ‘nine’; ‘ Conflict of A. and E.’ says ‘five’; Arm. 


xxv. I. Seth. Some MSS. have preface explaining choice of Seth. D.A. JZ. says it was told to a// his sons. 


2. at prayer. 


Paradise of righteousness. 


D. A.B. says ‘where he was standing in Jordan’. 
3. fiery. Cf. 2 Kings ii. 11; Ezek.i; Apoc. Mos, xxxiii. : 
Heavenly Paradise, as in 2 En. andi En. (xxxii. 3). 


Elsewhere in Vita either 


garden of Eden on ear¢/ or ‘ third Heaven’ (e.g. Apoc. Mos. xxvii, xl.1), not in presence of God, as here. 





4. said DE: AC +‘to Eve’. 


Let us arise and go CE: D is better Greek (dvacrdyres), but less original. 
what has happened A D: C ‘what is this dream about our sons’: Arm. ‘ to see about our sons’. 
assailing. C prefixes ¢A@av = ‘has come and is assailing’. 


ili. 2. archangel B C E Slav.: A D ‘angel’. 
the secret. 
son of wrath. Eph. ii. 3. 
his stead (Gen. iv. 25). 


tell him nothing A C Arm. Tisch. 
3. also Eve. E Slav. expand. 


Arm. changes to ‘the secret of the vision’ (i.e. Vita xxv—xxix). 


Here not in Abel’s, but in Cain’s stead (Kabisch). 
all that thou shalt do. Arm. alters to ‘all that I shall do’ (for same reason cf. Introd. 3, 4). 


A+‘to him’. 


iv. 2. glory and sacrifice: So A. CD read ‘glorify God and give worship’: B ‘glory’: E Slav. ‘praise and 


sacrifice’: Arm. ‘ praise and glory’. 


2. sick Arm.: E “a little sick’: C ‘a great disease’. 





Cf. ‘ Conflict ’, I. ii-xi. 
v. 1. And Adam lived... years DB Slav. Arm. AC >. 


die C +‘and he sent off his son Seth to all to tell them’. 
139 


XXVi. 


XXVii, 


XXVili, 


XXIX. 


THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


Lord sitting and his face was flaming fire that could not be endured. And many thousands of 
angels were on the right and the left of that chariot. 

1 When I saw this, I was confounded, and terror seized me and I bowed myself down before 

2 God with my face to the earth. And God said to me, ‘ Behold thou diest, since thou hast trans- 
gressed the commandment of God, for thou didst hearken rather to the voice of thy wife, whom 
I gave into thy power, that thou mightst hold her to thy will. Yet thou didst listen to her and 
didst pass by My words.’ ; 

1 And when I heard these words of God, I fell prone on the earth and worshipped the Lord 
and said, ‘My Lord, All powerful and merciful God, Holy and Righteous One, let not the 
name that is mindful of Thy majesty be blotted out, but convert my soul, for I die and my 

2 breath will go out of my mouth. Cast me not out from Thy presence, (me) whom Thou didst 
form of the clay of the earth. Do not banish from Thy favour him whom Thou didst nourish. 

And lo! a word concerning thee came upon me and the Lord said to me, ‘Since thy days 
twere fashioned}, thou hast been created with a love of knowledge; therefore there shall not be 
taken from thy seed for ever the (right) to serve Me.’ 

1 And when I heard these words, I threw myself on the earth and adored the Lord God and 
said, ‘Thou art the eternal and supreme God; and all creatures give thee honour and praise. 
2 ‘Thou art the true Light gleaming above all light(s), the Living Life, infinite mighty Power. 
To Thee, the spiritual powers give honour and praise. Thou workest on the race of men the 

abundance of Thy mercy.’ 


3 After I had worshipped the Lord, straightway Michael, God’s archangel, seized my hand and 


4 cast me out of the paradise tof ‘vision’} and of God’s command. And Michael held a rod in 
his hand, and he touched the waters, which were round about paradise, and they froze hard. 
1 And I went across, and Michael the archangel went across with me, and he led me back to 
2 the place whence he had caught me up. Hearken, my son Seth, even to the rest of the secrets 
[and sacraments | that shall be, which were revealed to me, when I had eaten of the tree of the 
3 knowledge, and knew and perceived what will come to pass in this age ; [what God intends to do 
4 to his creation of the race of men. The Lord will appear in a flame of fire (and) from the 
mouth of His majesty He will give commandments and statutes [from His mouth will proceed 
a two-edged sword] and they will sanctify Him in the house of the habitation of His majesty. 
5 And He will show them the marvellous place of His majesty. And then they will build a house 
to the Lord their God in the land which He shall prepare for them and there they will trans- 
gress His statutes and their sanctuary will be burnt up and their land will be deserted and they 
6 themselves will be dispersed; because they have kindled the wrath of God. And once more He 
will cause them to come back from their dispersion ; and again they will build the house of God; - 
7 and in the last time the house of God will be exalted greater than of old. And once more iniquity 
will exceed righteousness. And thereafter God will dwell with men on earth [in visible form]; and 
then, righteousness will begin to shine. And the house of God will be honoured in the age and 
their enemies will no more be able to hurt the men, who are believing in God; and God will stir up 
for Himself a faithful people, whom He shall save for eternity, and the impious shall be punished 


flaming fire. Cf. 1 En. (xili-xvii) for description of God’s dwelling, &c. 
xxvl. 2. rather II zx primis; 1 pris. III (Meyer) plus. to thy wife. Cf. Apoc. Mos. xxiv. 
Xxvil. I. name. Hebrew expression = personality. Cf. Kautzsch, Hastings’ &, D., art. ‘ Religion of Israel *. 
2. didst form. fplasmasti (Graecism). 
favour. II gratia: I gratiae. 
3. concerning thee = tuum (verbum). 
came upon me. 7zcedit Il 5: incendit, ‘ inflamed’ II 17. 
were fashioned. t/igurantur (Meyer). All MSS. corrupt. 
love of knowledge. See Introd. § 6. 
xxvilil. 2. Light ... Life ... Power. Gnostic epithets, 
mighty. So Fuchs. MSS. corrupt. II 5, III 2 magnitudinis: 1 matutine: 11 3 magna. 
3. vision and of God’s command. II 3. 17 viséomzs: 11 5 and III wisctationis et visionis: Fuchs with Cod. 
Wright vzsctationds et tussionts. . 
4. arod. vwivgam II (andso Fuchs): I twirtutes. 
froze hard. Sea of ice round Paradise. Cf. 2 En. iii. 3; Rev. iv. 6, xv. 2; Test. Lev. iii. 2; Jellinek, Bet 
ha-Midrasch iv. 132, Perhaps = ‘ Acherusian Lake’ (Apoc. Mos. xxxvii—xxxix), : 
xxix. 2. [and sacraments] II III. Meyer brackets as a gloss. I (and Fuchs) >. , 
3-10. In II (3, 5, 9, 17), III (18 only), IV. Interpolation. First part (3-6)—‘ what God .. . than of old ’—may 
Le ay of dey Apocalypse ; last part certainly Christian. 
- greater than of old (maior quam prius). Bousset refers this to Herod’s 2 i 
the Messianic one. Cf. 1 En. M68 13. : ae . re anata eee 
7. in visible form, &c. These phrases are certain marks of Christian origin. [Cf. Ps. lxxxiv. 7, LXX Vulg. 
T. Zeb. ix. 8 where God is spoken of as being seen by men, There is no Lae for feraieet ie ee. 
Christian with the exception of a few words.—Gen. Editor.] ? 


140 


THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


8 by God their king, the men who refused to love His law. Heaven and earth, nights and days, and 
all creatures shall obey Him, and not overstep His commandment. Men shall not change ‘their 
9 works, but they shall be changed from forsaking the law of the Lord. Therefore the Lord shall 
repel from Himself the wicked, and the just shall shine like the sun, in the sight of God. And 
to in that time, shall men be purified by water from their sins. But those who are unwilling to be 
purified by water shall be condemned. And happy shall the man be, who hath ruled his soul, 


when the Judgement shall come to pass and the greatness of God be seen among men and their 
deeds be inquired into by God the just judge. 


VITA ADAE ET EVAE. APOCALYPSIS MOSIS. 


xxx. 1 After Adam was nine hundred and thirty 
years old, since he knew that his days were 
coming to an end, he said: ‘Let all my sons 
assemble themselves to me, that I may bless 
them before I die, and speak with them.’ 


2 And they were assembled in three parts, before And all assembled, for the earth was divided v. 3 
his sight, in the house of prayer, where they used | into three parts. And Seth his son said to him: 4 
3 to worship the Lord God. And they asked him | ‘Father Adam, what is thy complaint ?’ 
(saying): ‘ What concerns thee, Father, that thou And he saith, ‘My children, I am crushed by 5 
shouldst assemble us, and why dost thou lie on | the burden of trouble. And they say to him, 
4thy bed?’ Then Adam answered and said: | ‘What is trouble?’ 
‘My sons, I am sick and in pain.’ And all his 
sons said to him: ‘What does it mean, father, 
this illness and pain?’ 

xxxi. 1 Then said Seth his son: ‘O (my) lord, per- And Seth answered and said to him: ‘ Hast vi. 1 
chance thou hast longed after the fruit of paradise, | thou called to mind, father, the fruit of paradise 
which thou wast wont to eat, and therefore thou | of which thou usedst to eat, and hast been 
liest in sadness? Tell me and I will go to the | grieved in yearning for it?’ 
nearest gates of paradise and put dust on my ‘If this be so, tell me, (and) I will go and 2 
head and throw myself down on the earth before | bring thee fruit from paradise. For I will set 
the gates of paradise and lament and make | dung upon my head and will weep and pray that 
entreaty to God with loud lamentation; per- | the Lord will hearken to me and send his angel 
chance he will hearken to me and send his angel | (and bring me’a plant from paradise), and I will 
to bring me the fruit, for which thou hast | bring it thee that thy trouble may cease from 
longed.’ thee.’ 

2 Adam answered and said: ‘No, my son, I do Adam saith to him: ‘Nay, my son Seth, but 3 
not long (for this), but I feel weakness and great | I have (much) sickness and trouble!’ Seth saith 
3 pain in my body.’ Seth answered, ‘ What is pain, | to him: ‘ And how hath this come upon thee?’ 
my lord father? Iam ignorant ; but hide it not 
from us, but tell us (about it).’ 

xxxii. 1 And Adam answered and said: ‘ Hear me, my And Adam said to him: * When God made us, vii. 1 
sons. When God made us, meand your mother, | me and your mother, through whom also I die, 
and placed us in paradise and gave us every tree | He gave us power to eat of every tree which is in 


g-lo. purified by water, i.e. baptism. a ; 

xxx. I. bless them. Cf. Gen. xxvii. 14, xlviil. 3, 2 En. Ixiv. 4. j 

2. in the house of prayer. So I coram oratorio; 11 III ante oratortum Apoc. Mos. v (AC). Meyer and 
Kabisch find here origin of ‘Caaba’ legends (cf. Weil, Bibiische Legenden der Muselmanner). See Introd. §§ 1,8, 9. 





3. parts. SoDB. At “they came to the door of the house where he used to enter to pray to God.’ SoC 
except that it reads ‘before him, where’ instead of ‘to the door of the house ’. 
Dera. 
2 oe Aaiok ae Lit. § great disease oppresses me’. A BC D Slav. (névos rohds ovvexet pe). 
What is trouble ? B+ ‘father’: A D+‘and sickness’, 
vi. 1. in yearning for it (emOupnoa airoy). Arm.A Tisch. DBC>. ?agloss. 
2. I will go (wopevoopa) CD: AB ‘I go’: Slav. ‘we’. 
dung. Arm. ‘dust’. ; 
that. Lit.‘and’ = vav conversive. : Aa ws rae, ee. 
bring me a plant. Inserted for clearness—perhaps in original. B has évéyke (2c) poe amd tov Evdov ev g peer 16 
‘ Gos . . . upon thee (és oor) AC E Arm. Slav.: D ‘how much * (1éc01). 
vii. 1. to him. C only has zpés airdy as often. Aili 
tree (EvAov) C: AB D ‘plant ? (furov): Arm, ‘fruits’. 
Idie ACED: B Arm. ‘we die’. ae 
4 


THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


VITA ADAE ET EVAE. 


bearing fruit to eat, he laid a prohibition on us 
concerning the tree of knowledge of good and 
evil, which is in the midst of paradise; (saying) 
‘Do not eat of it.’ But God gave a part of 
paradise to me and (a part) to your mother: the 
trees of the eastern part and the north, which is 
over against Aquilo he gave to me, and to your 
mother he gave the part of the south and the 
western part. 

(Moreover) God the Lord gave us two angels 
to guard us. The hour came when the angels 
had ascended to worship in the sight of God; 
forthwith the adversary [the devil] found an 
opportunity while the angels were absent and 
the devil led your mother astray to eat of the 
unlawful and forbidden tree. And she did eat 
and gave to me. 

And immediately, the Lord God was wrath 
with us, and the Lord said to me: ‘In that thou 
hast left behind my commandment and hast not 
kept my word, which I confirmed to thee; be- 
hold, I will bring upon thy body, seventy blows ; 
with divers griefs, shalt thou be tormented, 
beginning at thy head and thine eyes and thine 
ears down to thy nails on thy toes, and in every 
separate limb. These hath God tappointed for 
chastisementf. All these things hath the Lord 
sent to me and to all our race,’ 

Thus spake Adam to his sons, and he was 
seized with violent pains, and he cried out with 
a loud voice, ‘What shall I do? I am in dis- 
tress. So cruel are the pains with which I am 
beset.’ And when Eve had seen him weeping, 
she also began to weep herself, and said: ‘O Lord 
my God, hand over to me his pain, for it is I 
who sinned.’ 

3 And Eve said to Adam: ‘My lord, give me 
a part of thy pains, for this hath come to thee 
from fault of mine.’ 

And Adam said to Eve: ‘ Rise up and go with 


to 


SKU 


to 


ies) 


OREK Vt 


nN 


XXXV, I 


N 


SOOQU RET! 


XXXll. 2. your mother. 





APOCALYPSIS MosIs. 


paradise, but,concerning that oneonly, Hecharged 
us not to eat of it, and through this one we are 
to die. And the hour drew nigh for the angels 2 
who were guarding your mother to go up and 
worship the Lord, and I was far from her, and 
the enemy knew that she was alone and gave to 
her, and she ate of the tree of which she had been 
told not to eat. Then she gave also to me to eat. 3 


‘And God was wroth with us, and the Lord viii. 1 
came into paradise and called me in a terrible 
voice and said: “ Adam, where art thou? And 
why hidest thou from my face? Shall the house 
be able to hide itself from its builder?” And he 2 
saith to me: “Since thou hast abandoned my 
covenant, I have brought upon thy body seventy- 
two strokes; the trouble of the first stroke is 
a pain of the eyes, the second stroke an affection 
of the hearing, and likewise in turn all the strokes 
shall befall thee.’ ” 

As he said this to his sons, Adam groaned ix. 1 
sore and said: ‘What shall I do? I am in great 
distress.’ 


And Eve wept and said: ‘My lord 2 
Adam, rise up and give me half of thy trouble 
and I will endure it; for it is on my account that 
this hath happened to thee, on my account thou 


Incident from Eve’s tale in Apoc. Mos. xv. 


Xxxiv. I. was wroth. Condensed from story in Apoc. Mos. viii, xxi-xxiii. 


confirmed. confortavd II III. 


I in margin mandavi. 


seventy Apoc. Mos. viii. 2(A BC). The ‘Cant’ (see Meyer 211) has ‘ sixty and two’. 


2. tappointed for chastisementt. MSS. obscure. 
all our race. 


that one only DBEC. 


2. guarding ABC: ‘watching’ DE: Arm. ‘looked to 


Read omne genus nostrum with II III: 


Meyer ‘all our generations’ (omnes nostras generationes). 


your mother for her to render worship’. Cf. Jub. iv. 22, 


Chagiga 16a, Ber. 60b. Ginzberg calls these angels ‘virtues’ (cf. Vita xxi). 


Lord. C adds ‘as their fashion (rvmos) was’; a gloss. 


and I was far from her. 
of which ... not to eat. 
vill. I. paradise. 


C only. 
C only. 


A B+‘when we had eaten and placed His throne i 


Adam ... thou. D adds gloss from Gen. iii. 12. 
builder. This saying occurs in Targ. Jer. on Gen. iii. oy S10) 
2. tome. DBE only. 


seventy-two D E, Slav., Mishna Neg. i. 4, but ‘seventy’ A BC, Vita; 


probably a correction. 


ix. I, distress (Avmy) C Arm. Slav.: D ‘stress’ (avdyxn). D has a long 


2. thy trouble DC Arm. A B ‘sickness’, 


latter is common symbolic number, 


gloss from Gen. iii. 19, 


142 


THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


VITA ADAE ET EVAE. 


my son Seth to the neighbourhood of paradise, 
and put dust on your heads and throw your- 
selves on the ground and lament in the sight of 
God. Perchance He will have pity (upon you) 
and send His angel across to the tree of His 


mercy, whence floweth the oil of life, and will give | the tree out of which the oil floweth, and bring it 
you a drop of it, to anoint me with it, that I may | me, and I shall anoint myself and shall have 


have rest from these pains, by which I am being | rest from my complaint.’ 
consumed.’ 


Then Seth and his mother went off to- 


wards the gates of paradise. And while they | and Eve saw her son, and a wild beast assailing 
were walking, lo! suddenly there came a beast him, and Eve wept and said: ‘Woe is me; if 2 
[a serpent] and attacked and bit Seth. And as | I come to the day of the Resurrection, all those 
soon as Eve saw it, she wept and said: ‘Alas, | who have sinned will curse me saying: Eve hath 
wretched woman that I am. I am accursed | not kept the commandment of God.’ And she 3 
since I have not kept the commandment of God,’ spake to the beast: ‘ Thou wicked beast, fearest 
And Eve said to the serpent in a loud voice: | thou not to fight with the image of God? How 
‘Accursed beast! how (is it that) thou hast not | was thy mouth opened? How were thy teeth 
feared to let thyself loose against the image of | made strong? How didst thou not call to mind 
God, but hast dared to fight with it?’ thy subjection? For long ago wast thou made 
The beast answered in the language of men: | subject to the image of God.’ Then the beast 4 
- ‘Is it not against you, Eve, that our malice (is | cried out and said: 
directed)? Are not ye the objects of our rage? ‘It is not our concern, Eve, thy greed and thy xi. 1 
Tell me, Eve, how was thy mouth opened to | wailing, but thine own ; for (it is) from thee that 
eat of the fruit? But now if I shall begin to | the rule of the beasts hath arisen. How was thy 2 
reprove thee thou canst not bear it.’ mouth opened to eat of the tree concerning 
which God enjoined thee not to eat of it? On 
this account, our nature also hath been trans- 
formed. Now therefore thou canst not endure it, 3 
if I begin to reprove thee.’ 
xxxix. 1 Then said Seth to the beast: ‘God the Lord Then Seth speaketh to the beast, ‘Close thy xii. 1 
revile thee. Be silent, be dumb, shut thy mouth, | mouth and be silent and stand off from the image 
accursed enemy of Truth, confounder and de- | of God until the day of Judgment.’ Then saith 2 
stroyer. Avaunt from the image of God till the | the beast to Seth: ‘ Behold, I stand off from the 
day when the Lord God shall order thee to be | image of God.’ And he went to his lair. 
brought to the ordeal.’ And the beast said to 


APOCALYPSIS Mosis. 
art beset with toils and troubles.’ But Adam 3 
said to Eve,‘ Arise and go with my son Seth 
near to paradise, and put earth upon your heads 
and weep and pray God to have mercy upon me 
and send his angel to paradise, and give me of 


XXXVli. I 


Then Seth and Eve went towards paradise, x, 1 


nN 


Go 


XXXVill. 1 


i} 


to 


xxxvi. 2. Oil of life. Cf. Apoc. Mos. ix. 3 (note). ; ; : 
eH I, [aserpent]. A age to Lae with tale of Fall. Originally this passage was midrash to explain beasts 
Sse Seth proves work is not Se¢hzte. Seth here is weak and fallible. Arm. version >. : 
| 3. how is it that, &c. II+(with A D of Apoc. Mos. x) ‘how were thy teeth made strong? 
| xxxvill. 2. the fruit. II1+ ‘which the Lord commanded thee not to eat % 
reprove. probationem 11 II1: Meyer comprobationem (‘ ordeal’). 
begin ... bearit. Meyer II 3.9: I>. : Rida: ; 
xxxix. I. confounder and destroyer (cuom/fusio perditionis). A Hebraism. 





and troubles. A omits. D adds gloss from Gen. iii. 
; h AC: Arm. Slav. D ‘ dust’. : ie a fey 
: eee i.e. the Tree of Life described in 1 En. xxiv. 3, 4; 2 En. vill. 3; Apoc. Paul. xlv; Test. Lev. xviii. 11; 
Rev. xxii. 2 "Naturally conceived as an ‘olive ’—the great wealth of Mediterranean peoples. See Ramsay, Paz/ine 
Ties, on ‘Wild and tame olives’, dtaaNe 
Paiy pete xli. 3. Cf. Apoc. Mos. xiii. 1. A play on Aas poise édeos. Cf. Bousset, 
Leal j y 27; 2 En. xxii. 8,9; Ps. Clem. Recognitions I. 45; 4 Ezra i. 12. 
sr ellen ee on Fil be Page ed (Aurpw6 éx) the trouble’: AB+‘I will show you the manner in 
i i in the former case ’—a gloss. : ; , 0 Pe, Sach, 
pede ee wild se iaree balsa is a Heme as on Gen. iii. 15. Vita xxxix+‘a serpent ’, and implies it was Satan 
(cmeix, 1). Slav. calls it ‘Cotur’ or ‘ Gorgo’, and adds it pursued him ‘ to devour him’. 
Eve saw. C+ ‘from afar’, 
ion AC D: B ‘Judgement’: Slav. ‘Second Advent ’. _ ‘ 
i eee ened CED: reel Slav. expand. Cf. Sanh. 106 b, Pesikt. 44 b (Ginzberg). 
xii. 2. lair C (xoirnv): ABD E ‘tent’ (oxyyjy). es 


THE BOOKS ‘OF 


VITA ADAE ET EVAR. 


Seth: ‘See, I leave the presence of the image of 
God, as thou hast said,’ Forthwith he left Seth, 
wounded by his teeth. 

But Seth and his mother walked to the regions 
of paradise for the oil of mercy to anoint the sick 
Adam: and they arrived at the gates of paradise, 
(and) they took dust from the earth and placed 
it on their heads, and bowed themselves with 
their faces to the earth and began to lament and 
2 make loud moaning, imploring the Lord God to 
pity Adam in his pains and to send His angel to 
give them the oil from the ‘tree of His mercy’, 

But when they had been praying and imploring 
for many hours, behold, the angel Michael ap- 
2 peared to them and said: ‘I have been sent to 

you from the Lord—I am set by God over the 

3 bodies of men—I tell thee, Seth, (thou) man of 

God, weep not nor pray and entreat on account 

of the oil of the tree of mercy to anoint thy 

father Adam for the pains of his body. 

‘For I tell thee that in no wise wilt thou be 
able to receive thereof save in the last days.’ 

2 [When five thousand five hundred years have 
been fulfilled, then will come upon earth the 
most beloved king Christ, the son of God, to 
revive the body of Adam and with him to revive 

3 the bodies of the dead. He Himself, the Son of 
God, when He comes will be baptized in the river 
of Jordan, and when He hath come out of the 
water of Jordan, then He will anoint from the 

4 oil of mercy all that believe in Him. And the 
oil of mercy shall be for generation to generation 
for those who are ready to be born again of 

5 water and the Holy Spirit to lifeeternal. Then 

the most beloved Son of God, Christ, descending 

on earth shall lead thy father Adam to Paradise 
to the tree of mercy. | 

‘But do thou, Seth, go to thy father Adam, 
since the time of his life is fulfilled. Six days 
hence, his soul shall go off his body and when 

} 


dk 


xis on 


xlii, 1 


xiii. 1 


z. wounded by his teeth II 17: I III tt. 

xli. 1. angel Michael. 
li. 27 (Ginzberg), 2 En. xxii. 6, 1 En. xx. 5. 

3. man of God = prophet. Cf. 2 Kings vi. 6, &c. 

xlii. 1. that. 

2. When five thousand five hundred years. . 
Nicodemus, xix (Greek work). 

jetovelis OL IGUL Ss. 





xill, I. there ABC: D>. 


Originally ‘ guardian angel of Israel’ (Dan. xii). 
Weber, Jiidische Theologie, 168. 
Jewish trait. 

The MSS. reading guza = Greek 6m = ‘that’. 


- tree of mercy. Christian interpolation from Gospel of 


ADAM AND EVE 


APOCALYPSIS MOSIS. 


And Seth went with Eve near paradise, and xiii. 1 
they wept there, and prayed God to send his 
angel and give them the oil of mercy. 


And God 2 
sent the archangel Michael and he spake to Seth: 
‘Seth, man of God, weary not thyself with 
prayers and entreaties concerning the tree which 
floweth with oil to anoint thy father Adam. For 
it shall not be thine now, 


but in the end of the times. 3 
Then shall all flesh be raised up from Adam 
till that great day,—all that shall be of the holy 
people. Then shall the delights of paradise be 4 
given to them and God shall be in their midst. 
And they shall no longer sin before his face, for 5 
the evil heart shall be taken from them and there 
shall be given them a heart understanding the 
good and to serve God only. 


But do thou go back to thy father. For the 6 
term of his life hath been fulfilled and he will 
live three days from to-day and will die. But 


Cf. Midrash Konen. in Bet ha-Midrasch 


oil of mercy A C Arm.: Slav. >: EB ‘mercy of mercy’ (2deos €déov) : (€Aeos edaiov) D ‘ mercy of oil” 3 probably 


not dittography, as Fuchs supposes, but play on words. 
2. floweth with oil C (Kabisch) : 


‘in which flows the oil’? D A B Tisch. : Ea te 


with prayers and entreaties (ciyduevos ém rj ixeoia) : a Hebraism. 


it shall not B C+‘ for’ (ydp). 
3-6. Then shall. . 


e2 - God only AB, Tisch., Fuchs). 
original, Cf. Apoc. Mos. xxviii. 3, 4 and cf. Jubilees xxiii. 26-9; Ezek. xxxvi. 27; 1 


This short Apocalypse certainly Jewish, perhaps 
En. v.4; Bamidbar rabba 


17; Schem rabba 41; Weber, /iidische T; heologie, 381, 400; Volz, Jiidische Eschatologie, 359. 


5. evil heart (yeser hara (Y20 “¥°)), 
See Introd. §§ 1, 5, 6, a 


6. will die C: Df. three days from to-day. C only. 


Prominent feature in later Jewish theology, 


as in St. Paul and 4 Ezra. 


144 


THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


VITA ADAE ET EVAE. 


it shall have gone out, thou shalt see great 
marvels in the heaven and in the earth and the 

2 luminaries of heaven. With these words, straight- 
way Michael departed from Seth. 

3 And Eve and Seth returned bearing with them 
herbs of fragrance, i.e. nard and crocus and cala- 
mus and cinnamon. 

xliv. 1 And when Seth and his mother had reached 
Adam, they told him, how the beast [the serpent] 

2 bit Seth. And Adam said to Eve: ‘ What hast 
thou done? A great plague hast thou brought 
upon us, transgression and sin for all our genera- 
tions: and this which thou hast done, tell thy 

3 children after my death, [for those who arise 
from us shall toil and fail but they shall be 

4 wanting and curse us (and) say, All evils have 
our parents brought upon us, who were at the 

5 beginning].’ When Eve heard these words, she 
began to weep and moan. 


APOCALYPSIS Mosis. 
when his soul is departing, thou shalt behold the 
awful (scene of) his passing.’ 

Thus spake the angel and departed from them. xiv. 1 
And Seth and Eve came to the hut where Adam 
was laid. And Adam saith to Eve: ‘ Eve, what 2 
hast thou wrought in us? Thou hast brought 
upon us great wrath which is death, [lording it 
over all our race].” And he saith to her, ‘ Call all 3 
our children and our children’s children and tell 
them the manner of our transgression.’ 





APOCALYPSIS MOSIS. 


Eve's Account of her Fall. 


Xv. I Then saith Eve to them: ‘ Hear all my children and children’s children and I will relate to you 
2 how the enemy deceived us. It befell that we were guarding paradise, each of us the portion 
3 allotted to us from God. Now I guarded in my lot, the west and the south. But the devil went to 
Adam’s lot, where the male creatures were. [For God divided the creatures ; all the males he gave 
to your father and all the females he gave to me.| 
xvii I And the devil spake to the serpent saying, “ Rise up, come to me and I will tell thee a word 
2 whereby thou mayst have profit.” And he arose and came to him. And the devil saith to him: 
3 “I hear that thou art wiser than all the beasts, and I have come to counsel thee. Why dost thou eat 
of Adam’s tares and not of paradise ? Rise up and we will cause him to be cast out of paradise, even 
4 as we were cast out through him.” The serpent saith to him, “I fear lest the Lord be wroth with 
5 me.” The devil saith to him: “Fear not, only be my vessel and I will speak through thy mouth 
words to deceive him.” 


iii inari f Heaven. Cf. Apoc. Mos. xxxv, xxxvil. | : ; ; , 4 
a5 Be Gee cranes, From tee tale in Apoc. Mos. xxix = Slav. Vit. xxv—inconsistent with Vita x—xii; 
Slav. Vita xxviii-xxx. II1+ Christian gloss from ae crucis eer he 
i : III referent filits nostris: Meyer suggests refert. — : 
ge ee 7s Me ride eee Apoc. Mos. xiv. 3. lt shows intention of editor to omit Eve’s tale (Fuchs). 
3. toil and fail. Play on words in Latin: szfficiant ...deficiant. Perhapsa gloss. 
4. All. MS. prefixes guonéam ; perhaps for 6ru = ‘that’. Cf. xlii. 1 (note). 





ee ; ty dvoSev airs hoBepdy) ABD: C >: a 
Pee ee act Ch Anon Neat Vita xviii. 1. With St. Paul (2 Cor. xi. 3, 1 Tim. ii. 14) 
and 2 En. xxx. 18, our author makes Eve primary cause of sin; 4 Ezra ili. 21 lays guilt on Adam. 
which is death ABCDE,,,: Arm. >. ae v. 14, 4 0 eee: 
ing i »] C >. Probably an interpolated gloss. 
ce caper Seer E, Eve Tes herself ; in Slav. she is asked to tell her tale by her sons. 
2. the porti tted. Cf. Vita xxxii. , 
is eee te recuen: Both Hebrew (WM2) and Greek (dqus) words for ‘serpent’ are masculine. 
a [For God .. . to me.] AD only have this explanation. Cf. B. C is corrupt. Arm. >. 
sic ther <C:D. ; 
Be the eeseag oe Conflict of A. and E.’ i. 17; Ber. rabba, xix; Weber, /Z7. 219-20.' Slav. + ‘thou 
art beloved before God, Eve will believe thee’. 
mayst have profit ABE epee: or, 
Gy a : ehold’. ; ek : 
‘ Be eae are cor sikh thee’ (du:Aéw) : Arm, ‘unite with’: A B+ ‘yet dost thou worship the less ! 
i iv. 3. A gloss from Vita. ae 
pele 1a Ciradieg. A B+ ‘through his wife’ (a gloss). 
5. deceive him C: A ‘deceive them’. 


If 
11052 145 


THE: BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


xvii, 1 And instantly he hung himself from the wall of paradise, and when the angels ascended to 
2 worship God, then Satan appeared in the form of an angel and sang hymns like the angels. And 
I bent over the wall and saw him, like an angel. But he saith tome: “ Art thou Eve?” And I said 
3 to him, “I am.” ‘ What art thou doing in paradise?” And I said to him, “God set us to guard and 
4 to eat of it.” The devil answered through the mouth of the serpent: “Ye do well but ye do not eat 
5 of every plant.” And I said: ‘* Yea, we eat of all, save one only, which is in the midst of paradise, 
concerning which, God charged us not to eat of it: for, He said to us, on the day on which ye eat 
of it, ye shall die the death.” 
xviii, 1 Then the serpent saith to me, “ May God live! but I am grieved on your account, for I would not 
have you ignorant. But arise, (come) hither, hearken to me and eat and mind the value of that tree. 
2, 3 But I said to him, “I fear lest God be wroth with me as he told us.” And he saith to me: “ Fear 
not, for as soon as thou eatest of it, ye too shall be as God, in that ye shall know good and evil. 
4 But God perceived this that ye would be like Him, so he envied you and said, Ye shall not eat of 
5,6 it. Nay, do thou give heed to the plant and thou wilt see its great glory.” Yet I feared to take 
of the fruit. And he saith to me: “ Come hither, and I will give it thee. Follow me.” 
xix. 1 And I opened to him and he walked a little way, then turned and said to me: “I have changed my 
2 mind and I will not give thee to eat until thou swear to me to give also to thy husband.” (And). I said, 
“ What sort of oath shall I swear to thee? Yet what I know, I say to thee: By the throne of the 
3 Master, and by the Cherubim and the Tree of Life, I will give also to my husband to eat.” And 
when he had received the oath from me, he went and poured upon the fruit the poison of his wicked- 
ness, which is lust, the root and. beginning of every sin, and he bent the branch on the earth and I took 
of the fruit and I ate. 
xx. I “And in that very hour my eyes were opened, and forthwith I knew that I was bare of the right- 
 cousness with which I had been clothed (upon), and I wept and said to him: “ Why hast thou 
3 done this to me in that thou hast deprived me of the glory with which I was clothed?” But 
I wept also about the oath, which I had sworn, But he descended from the tree and vanished. 
4 And I began to seek, in my nakedness, in my part for leaves to hide my shame, but I found none, 
for, as soon as I had eaten, the leaves showered down from all the trees in my part, except the fig- 
5 tree only. But I took leaves from it and made for myself a girdle and it was from the very same 
_ plant of which I had eaten. 
XxX1. I And I cried out in that very hour, “ Adam, Adam, where art thou? Rise up, come to me and 
2 I will show thee a great secret.” But when your father came, I spake to him words of transgression 
3 [which have brought us down from our great glory]. For, when he came, I opened my mouth and 


xvii. I. he hung. E reads ‘the devil inside the serpent hung’, as Moslem fable in Weil, B. Z. der M. 
when. A B prefix ‘about the (‘ninth’ B) hour,’ 
form of an angel. Cf. 2 Cor. xi. 14. Points to old idea of a literal seduction; cf. Gen. vi. 1-6; 1 En. vi-xii, 
Ixxxvili-xc ; Sota ix. 9: Ber. rabba xxiv ; Jalk. Schim. Ber. xii. 
2. Slav. reads ‘I thought him an angel since he came from Adam’s district *—emphasizing this feature throughout ; 
Arm. weakens it. 
4. every plant BCD. ‘all plants’ A. 
5. die the death. A Hebraism; lit. ‘die with death’ (@avar@ amobaveiobe). 
xvlil. D breaks off here till xxxvi. 
1. I would not have youignorant. Arm. ‘I desire not your ignorance’: A B+‘for ye are as beasts’; a gloss: 
ABCE Slav. ‘since ye understand nothing’. 
3. ye.-.asGod C. 
4. God perceived ... envied you. With Tisch. AB: C =. 
is ce Arm. alters this Midrash on Gen. iii. 6 to ‘the glory of the Highest’ (Gnostic?): A B+long gloss 
Gen. iii. 6). 
xix. I. lopened. C Arm.: E>: B ‘he opened’: Arm.+ Gnostic gloss to the effect that Eve is without paradise 
—first brought in by the serpent. 
2. What sort of oath (roiov dpxov) C: A B E Arm.+*I know not’. 
3. poured upon. So Tisch. emends MSS. 
the root and beginning of every sinC: AB‘head’. Fuchs thinks this is play on words in Hebrew (tidy = WRI 
and kefady = WN = ‘head’). Idea is common among Rabbis, e.g. Aboda Zara 22b; 1 En. Ixix. 6; Slav. Bar. 
xc. 7; Apoc. Abraham xxiii; Gen. Rabb. xix. 6; Ab. R. Nathan v. 6. Cf. James i. uss 
he bent E Arm.: ABC ‘I bent’. 
I ate (Gen. iii. 6) C E Arm. Slav. 
xx. I. clothed (upon) (évdeduuévn) AB Tisch. Cf. 2 Cor. v. aye Ilse: Iba Koy 
3. which I had sworn C E. 
4. my part AB: Cr, 
9: very same plant ABC Slav. Ber. rabba xv; Schatzhéhle; Test. Adam. agree with our author that this was 
a fig-tree. Apoc. Abraham xxiii calls it a grape’; Beresch, xl. 8 ‘barley’; Samuel Ben Isaac ‘a date’. 
xxl. I. secret (uvorjpiov) C: Arm. Slav. mirabilia. 
2. [which have .. . glory]. Only AB Arm. A gloss. 


146 


XxXil. 


XXill, 


XXIV. 


XXV. 


XXVi. 


THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


the devil was speaking, and I began to exhort him and said, “ Come hither, my lord Adam, hearken 
to me and eat of the fruit of the tree of which God told us not to eat of it, and thou shalt be as 
4a God.” And your father answered and said, “I fear lest God be wroth with me.” And I said to 

5 him, “Fear not, for as soon as thou hast eaten thou shalt know good and evil.” And speedily 
I persuaded him, and he ate and straightway his eyes were opened and he too knew his nakedness. 

6 And to me he saith, “O wicked woman! what have I done to thee that thou hast deprived me of 
the glory of God?” 

1 And in that same hour, we heard the archangel Michael blowing with his trumpet and calling to 

2 the angels and saying: “Thus saith the Lord, Come with me to paradise and hear the judgement 
with which I shall judge Adam.” 

3 And when God appeared in paradise, mounted on the chariot of his cherubim with the angels pro- 
ceeding before him and singing hymns of praises, all the plants of paradise, both of your father’s lot 

4 and mine, broke out into flowers. And the throne of God was fixed where the Tree of Life was. 

rt And God called Adam saying, “ Adam, where art thou? Can the house be hidden from the presence 

2 of its builder?” Then your father answered ; “ It is not because we think not to be found by thee, 
Lord, that we hide, but I was afraid, because I am naked, and I was ashamed before thy might, 

3 (my) Master.” God saith to him, “ Who showed thee that thou art naked, unless thou hast forsaken my 

4 commandment, which I delivered thee to keep (it).’ Then Adam called to mind the word which 
I spake to him, (saying) “I will make thee secure before God”; and he turned and said to me: “ Why 

5 hast thou done this?” And I said, “The serpent deceived me.” 

1 God saith to Adam: “ Since thou hast disregarded my commandment and hast hearkened to thy 
wife, cursed is the earth in thy labours. 

2 Thou shalt work it and it shall not give its strength: thorns and thistles shall spring up for thee, 
and in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread. [Thou shalt be in manifold toils; thou shalt 
be crushed by bitterness, but of sweetness shalt thou not taste. | 

3 Weary shalt thou be and shalt not rest; by heat shalt thou be tired, by cold shalt thou be 
straitened : abundantly shalt thou busy thyself, but thou shalt not be rich; and thou shalt grow fat, 
but come to no end. 

4 The beasts, over whom thou didst rule, shall rise up in rebellion against thee, for thou hast not 
kept my commandment.” 

1 And the Lord turned to me and said: “Since thou hast hearkened to the serpent, and turned 

2 a deaf ear to my commandment, thou shalt be in throes of travail and intolerable agonies ; thou 
shalt bear children in much trembling and in one hour thou shalt come to the birth, and lose thy 

3 life, from thy sore trouble and anguish. But thou shalt confess and say: ‘Lord, Lord, save me, and 

4 I will turn no more to the sin of the flesh.’ And on this account, from thine own words I will judge 
thee, by reason of the enmity which the enemy has planted in thee.” 

t But he turned to the serpent [in great wrath] and said: “ Since thou hast done this, and become 
a thankless vessel until thou hast deceived the innocent hearts, accursed art thou among all beasts. 

3. my lord Adam. Aboth. R. Nathan i. 6 (Ginzberg) says Eve always addressed Adam as ‘lord’. 

6. what have I done C: Arm. A ‘what hast thou done ?’. 

that = kai, ? for vav conversive: Slav. reads ‘why’. See Introd. § 7. ' ; 

xxii, I. [with his trumpet] interpolation: in A Arm. only. To soften anthropomorphisms in Genesis. Cf. 
1 Thess. iv. 16; 1 Cor. xv. 52; cf. Bet ha-Midrasch ii. 61 (Jellinek). Ky 

2. judgement .. . judge (kpiyaros xpive) A Arm. (? Hebraism): for xpiparos C has ‘word’ (pyuaros): Slav. 
sententiam et quale tudictum. 

3. and mine. Slav. contradicts—plants in Eve’s part were withered. : i : 

4. was fixed (éornpifero) C. Cf. Targ. Jer. on Gen. vi. 9. This statement modifies 2 En. viii. 3 ‘that place on which 
God rests’, A Arm. E slight variants (e.g. edrpemi¢ero). 

xxiii. 1. ‘whereart thou’ C. ‘ where art thou hidden’ A. 

3. forsaken E A Tisch. (éykaréhees): Arm. ‘trangressed.’ 

4. secure AC E Arm. (dxivduvor). 

5. I said A+‘ remembered the word of the serpent and’. 

xxiv. I. in thy works E Arm.A: C ‘for thy sake’. 

2. Thou shalt be . . . taste AC; from Gen. iii. 18. 

Be eoed of aS, So Fuchs emends from AC ‘empty pains’ (év paraios): E ‘empty toils’, In Hebrew 

ban. 

= fos hoe Tisch. emends from rpémois (‘ways’) CA: Arm. E ‘with great sorrow’. 

3. no more E (ovkér) C ‘not’. : 

sin of the flesh A: B CE ‘thy flesh’: Arm. ‘against my body’! ; 
4. in thee. AB + ‘And thou shalt turn to thy husband and he shall rule over thee. 


xxvi. I. turned...andC. AB >. j ; 
ie thankless vessel (cxcidos dydpicrov) ABE: Arm. ‘offspring of wickedness’, perhaps = Hebrew 


byb3 x55 — «instrument of Belial’ (Fuchs). Cf. xvi. 8. iets 
s innocent hearts (mapeipévous 77] kapdia) AC: B mapiotapyévovs: Arm. ‘the upright in heart.’ E >. 


147 L 2 


XXVi. T, 


XXVIll, 


OID Ga dip 


XXX. 


XXX1. 


THE BOOKS: OF ADAM AND EVE 


2 Thou shalt be deprived of the victual of which thou didst eat and shalt feed on dust all the days of 

3 thy life; on thy breast and thy belly shalt thou walk and be robbed of hands and feet. There 
shall not be left thee ear nor wing, nor one limb of all that with which thou didst ensnare them in 

4 thy malice and causedst them to be cast out of paradise ; and I will put enmity between thee and 
his seed ; he shall bruise thy head and thou shalt bruise his heel until the day of Judgement. 

2 Thus he spake and bade the angels have us cast out of paradise: and as we were being driven out 
amid our loud lamentations, your father Adam besought the angels and said: : Leave me a little 
(space) that I may entreat the Lord that he have compassion on me and pity me, for I only 

3 have sinned.” And they left off driving him and Adam cried aloud and wept saying: “ Pardon me, 

4 O Lord, my deed.” Then the Lord saith to the angels, “ Why have ye ceased from driving Adam 
from paradise? Why do ye not cast him out? Is it I who have done wrong? Or is my judgement 

5 badly judged?” Then the angels fell down on the ground and worshipped the Lord saying, “ Thou 
art just, O Lord, and thou judgest righteous judgement.” 

1 But the Lord turned to Adam and said: “I will not suffer thee henceforward to be in paradise.” 

2 And Adam answered and said, “ Grant me, O Lord, of the Tree of Life that I may eat of it, before 

3 I be cast out.” Then the Lord spake to Adam, “ Thou shalt not take of it now, for I have com- 

 manded the cherubim with the flaming sword that turneth (every way) to guard it from thee that 

4 thou taste not of it; but thou-hast the war which the adversary hath put into thee; yet when 
thou art gone out of paradise, if thou shouldst keep thyself from all evil, as one about to die, when 
again the Resurrection hath come to pass, I will raise thee up and then there shall be given to thee 
theslree of Lite.” 

2 Thus spake the Lord and ordered us to be cast out of paradise. But your father Adam wept 
before the angels opposite paradise and the angels say to him: “ What wouldst thou have us to do, 

3 Adam?” And your father saith to them, “ Behold, ye cast me out. I pray you, allow me to 
take away fragrant herbs from paradise, so that I may offer an offering to God after I have gone out 

4 of paradise that he hear me.” And the angels approached God and said: “JAEL, Eternal King, 
command, my Lord, that there be given to Adam incense of sweet odour from paradise and seeds 

5 for his food.” And God bade Adam go in and take sweet spices and fragrant herbs from paradise 

6 and seeds for his food. And the angels let him go and he took four kinds: crocus and nard and 
calamus and cinnamon and the other seeds for his food: and, after taking these, he went out of 

7 paradise. And we were on the earth. 

1 Now then, my children, I have shown you the way in which we were deceived ; and do ye guard 
yourselves from transgressing against the good.’ 

1 And when Eve had said this in the midst of her sons, while Adam was lying ill and bound to die 

2 after a single day from the sickness which had fastened upon him, she saith to him: ‘How is it that 

3 thou diest and I live or how long have I to live after thou art dead? Tell me.’ And Adam saith 
to her: ‘ Reck not of this, for thou tarriest not after ine, but even both of us are to die together, 


2. hands and feet A+‘thy’: B+ long gloss explaining sin as sensual. 

The serpent = (Satan) has limbs in Apoc. Abrah. xxiii; Targ. Jon. on Gen. iii; Ber. Rabb. xix, xx; Jalk. Schim. 
ix, 11. Cf. Wisd. ii. 26; 2 En. xxxi. 3; and cf. Jubilees iii. 23 (Charles’ note). 

4. day of Judgement A BArm.: C ‘day of thy life’ (Gen. iii. 14). 

xxvii. 3. Pardon me Slav. +‘ Allow me food that I may live’. Text of Slay. in disorder ; 

4. driving Adam AB: Arm.E+‘why have ye hearkened to him ?’ 

XXvill. 2. before = zpé with genitive and infinitive. 

3. take of B Tisch. Arm.: C ‘taste of’. 

of it A B Arm.+ ‘and be immortal for ever’ (Gen. iii. 22). 

4. about to (vedo) C: AB ‘willing to’ (BovAduevos): Arm. ‘thinkest on death “i 
Apost. Const. vil, xxiv, emends to ‘thou wilt die” Cf Apoc. Mos. xiv ; 
Vita xxix, xli. (Christian.) 

xxix. 3. Behold AB: C ‘since’. 

so that = 6rws with future indicative (C). 
Cf. ‘Conflict’ I. xxiv. Slight variations in A BC Arm. Slav. 

4. Jael (A B) = ‘Jah-El’ (ox-m), Hebrew for ‘Lord God’: C >. Arm. has “Hojil’: E Slav. ‘Joel’, confused with 
angel in xxxii and xliv, Apoc. Abraham x. 20, xvii. 22. 

5. and seeds for his food E; cf. Slav. Vita xxv. 4, xxviii. Arm. omits the re 
A C says God let him take ‘fragrant herbs for his food’ (cf. Mishna Taani 
ili. 27: E seems to preserve original. 

6. four Arm.E: Slav. ‘three’: A B ‘both’. 
four as in our text are mentioned in Arm. A B C. 

7. were (eyevdueba). C ‘were present’ (rapayeydvapev) : Arm. 
gate of paradise’. Passage parallel to Vita i-x follows in Slav. 

xxx. I. children C: A Tisch. rexvia; diminutive. 

transgressing (mapaBaivev) C. AB ‘forsaking.’ 

xxxl. 2. have I to live B: C ‘dol desire 'to live’ (Aw): A >. 


148 


read xxvi after xxvii. 


Ginzberg, with Gen. rabba xx 
Haggada on Gen. iii. 17-22. Contrast 


quest, but says they were given: 
t 1.6): B says ‘for sacrifice’ only; cf. Jub. 


Jubilees mentions ‘ frankincense, galbanum and stacte’, The same 


‘saw ourselves placed on the earth’: Slav. ‘sat before 


THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


And jshe shall lief in my place. But when I die, anoint me and ] i 
4 angel of the Lord shall speak somewhat concerning me. For a a abt eee ‘Sue wiles 
Ate Ne agai sapere a arise ae, and pray to God till I give up my spirit into His hand 
e 1b me: or we know not how we ar ; ; i 
be meri ae aac ay to meet our Maker, whether He be wroth with us, or 
kl, I, 2 nd ve rose up and went outside and fell on the ground and began to say: ‘I h i 
O God, I have sinned, O God of All, I have sinned ct Thee. f have bed i ee ee: 
angels. I have sinned against the Cherubim. I have sinned against Thy fearful and unshakable 
Throne. I have sinned before Thee and all sin hath begun through my doing in the creation’ 
3 Even thus prayed Eve on her knees ; (and) behold, the angel of humanity came to her, and raised 
4 her up and said; ‘ Rise up, Eve, (from thy penitence), for behold, Adam thy husband hath gone out 
folds body. Rise up and behold his spirit borne aloft to his Maker.’ 
xin, I~ And Eve rose up and wiped off her tears with her hand, and the angel saith to her, ‘ Lift up thy- 
2 self from the earth.’ And she gazed steadfastly into heaven, and beheld a chariot of light, borne by 
four bright eagles, (and) it were impossible for any man born of woman to tell the glory of them or 
3 behold their face—and angels going before the chariot—and when they came to the place where 
4 your father Adam was, the chariot halted and the Seraphim. And I beheld golden censers, between 
your father and the chariot, and all the angels with censers and frankincense came in haste to the 
5 incense-offering and blew upon it and the smoke of the incense veiled the firmaments. And the 
angels fell down and worshipped God, crying aloud and saying, ‘JAEL, Holy One, have pardon, for 
he is Thy image, and the work of Thy holy hands.’ 
And I Eve beheld two great and fearful wonders standing in the presence of God and I wept for 
2 fear, and I cried aloud to my son Seth and said, ‘ Rise up, Seth, from the body of thy father Adam, 
and come to me, and thou shalt see a spectacle which no man’s eye hath yet beheld.’ 


<Xiv, I 


VITA ADAE ET EVAE. APOCALYPSIS MOSIS. 


xlv.1 And just as Michael the archangel had fore- Then Seth arose and came to his mother and xxxv. 1 

2 told, after six days came Adam’s death. When| to her he saith: ‘What is thy trouble? Why 
Adam perceived that the hour of his death was| weepest thou?’ (And) she saith to him: ‘ Look 2 

at hand, he said to all his sons: ‘Behold, I am| up and see with thine eyes the seven heavens 

nine hundred and thirty years old, and if I die,}| opened, and see how the soul of thy father lies 

3 bury me towards the sunrising fin the field of | on its face and all the holy angels are praying 

yonder dwelling.’ And it came to pass that| on his behalf and saying: “ Pardon him, Father 
when he had finished all his discourse, he gave | of All, for he is Thine image.”’ Pray, my child 3 

up the ghost. Seth, what shall this mean? And will he one 

day be delivered into the hands of the Invisible 
Father, even our God? But who are the two 4 





3. she shall lie A BC: Arm. E ‘ you shall be laid ’—change of person marks confused text. So again in xxxiv. I. 
touch AC: ‘see’ Arm. 
4. His own creature C: AB Arm. ‘the vessel He hath fashioned’: B+ gloss from John vi. 37. 
our Maker AB Arm.: C ‘him’ (atrév). 
pity us C: A>: B Arm. ‘turn to pity us’ (émorpéyy rod eAejoae Hpas). 
xxxii. 2. Ihave sinned. Eve’s prayer-text. SoC. EAB Slav. expand. Cf. Luke xv. 21. 
3. the angel of humanity. Michael (cf. Vita xli): Arm. B ‘angel of the lover of mankind’. 
4. thy penitence. B+ ‘and thy prayer’. 
his Maker C: AB+‘to meet Him’: Arm.+‘to be before Him’. 
xxxiii. I. with her hand Arm. FE: A BC ‘set her hand on her face’. Slav. >. 
2. gazed steadfastly (drevicaca) C: A jrévoey. Cf. Acts vil. 55. 
(and) it. Lit. ‘which’ (6A: @C). 
tell (cireiv) AC: Arm. ‘ write’. 
3. Only in A Tisch. 
B ends here. 
4. the firmaments. A only. See Introd. $9. Cf. xxxv. 2 (seven heavens). Cf. Charles, Introd. to 2 En. and 
notes on Test. Levi ii, iii. ye 
5. holy (dy/ov) hands C Tisch.: Arm. ‘ blameless hands’: A ‘hands’ simply. a, 
xxxiv. I. wonders (pvorjpia). Lit. ‘secrets’ C: Arm. Slav. wonders’ sey re standing in the presence of God’. 
xlv. 2. tin the field of yonder dwelling.+ IJ III 2 agro habitationzs ulhius. 1 magnum’ . 





xxxv. I. what is thy trouble? A: C >. 
z. soul. Arm. ahi Others read ‘ body’ wrongly (so Charles). holy angels A: C > ‘holy’. 
3. what shall this mean? C: AE Slav. >: Arm. ‘what shall I be?’ even our God A >. 
4. Textas C. A shorter. 

who are Arm. 

D begins again. 


149 


THE BOOKS OF 


VITA ADAE ET EVAE. 


(Then) was the sun darkened and the moon 
xlvi. I and the stars for seven days, and Seth in his 
mourning embraced from above the body of his 
father, and Eve was looking on the ground with 
hands folded over her head, and all her children 
wept most bitterly. And behold, there appeared 
2 Michael the angel and stood at the head of Adam 
and said to Seth: ‘ Rise up from the body of thy 
3 father and come to me and see what is the doom 
of the Lord God concerning him. His creature 
is he, and God hath pitied him.’ 
And all angels blew their trumpets, and cried : 
xlvii, 1 ‘ Blessed art thou, O Lord, for thou hast had pity 
on Thy creature.’ 


Then Seth saw the hand of God stretched out 
holding Adam and he handed him over to 
2 Michael, saying: ‘Let him be in thy charge till 

the day of Judgement in punishment, till the last 

years when I will convert his sorrow into joy. 
3 Then shall he sit on the throne of him who hath 
been his supplanter.’ 


xlviii. 1 


thou done? 
ment, there would now be no rejoicing among 
those who are bringing thee down to this place. 
Yet, I tell thee that I will turn their joy to grief 2 
and thy grief will I turn to joy, and I will trans- 
form thee to thy former glory, and set thee on 
the throne of thy deceiver. 
into this place to see thee sitting above him, 
then he shall be condemned and they that heard 
him, and he shall be grieved sore when he seeth 
thee sitting on his honourable throne.’ 





ADAM AND EVE 


APOCALYPSIS MOSIS. 


negroes who stand by at the prayers for thy. 
father Adam ?’ 


And Seth telleth his mother, that they are xxxvi. 1 


the sun and moon and themselves fall-down and 
pray on behalf of my father Adam. Eve saith 2 
to him: ‘And where is their light and why have 
they taken on such a black appearance?’ 
Seth answereth her, ‘The light hath not left 
them, but they cannot shine before the Light of 
the Universe, the Father of Light ; and on this 
account their light hath been hidden from 
them.’ 


And 3° 


Now while Seth was saying this to his mother, xxxvii. 1 


lo, an angel blew the trumpet, and there stood 
up all the angels (and they were) lying on their 
faces, and they cried aloud in an awful voice and 
said: ‘Blessed (be) the glory of the Lord from 2 
the works of His making, for He hath pitied 
Adam the creature of His hands.’ 
angels had said these words, lo, there came one 
of the seraphim with six wings and snatched up 
Adam and carried him off to the Acherusian lake, 
and washed him thrice, in the presence of God. 


But when the 3 


And God saith to him: ‘Adam, what hast xxxix. 1 
If thou hadst kept my command- 


But he shall be cast 3 


xlvi, 1. sun darkened, &c. Abbreviated from Apoc. Mos. xxxvi—ordinary setting to Jewish ‘ Apocalypse’. Cf. Matt. 


xxiv. 29; 2 En. xiv. 2-4; Test. Adam, &c. 


hands folded over her head. Fuchs compares 2 Sam. xiii. 19 for this attitude in mourning. 
her head. II 9 Meyer + ‘and leaning her head on her knees.’ 
most bitterly. Lit. ‘wept with most bitter weeping’, a Hebraism. 


3. what is the doom : guzd@ disfonat de eo, Meyer I II. 


slviil. 1. blew their trumpets. Lit. ‘ sang and spake with the trumpets ’. 
xlvili. 2. Judgement = azsfensationis Meyer II III. 1 defensionist. 
3. his supplanter. II guz supplantavit, WI seduxit, 1 plantavi cum +; Vita xlvii = Apoc. Mos. xxxix. 





xxxvi, I. that 677 D. So I read for odro. ‘these’ (A C Tisch.): Slav. >: Arm. ‘those men.’ 


3. Light of the Universe ACD; cf. 2 En. xiv. 2-4. 
Father of Light D Arm. only ; cf. James i. 17. 

A ends here. 

xxxvii. 2. Adam C Arm. Slav.: D >. 

3. carried him off D: C >. 


Acherusian. So Tisch. EC: D ‘Agerusian’: Slav. locum gerusi: Arm. axetporroinroy = (sea) ‘not made with 


hands’. Cf. Apoc. Pauli xxxi; 2 En. x. 2; ‘ Conflict’ I. vi. 17; Plato, Phaedo, 173.4. 


stream’ of 1 En, xiv. 19 seq., xxiii. 2. 
xxxix. This chapter displaced ; see Introd. § 1. 


Cf. Greek Acheron, and ‘fiery 


1. this place = ‘Acherusian lake’, E Arm, add gloss ‘I send him into the Gehenna of fire.’ 
2. transform theet . .. glory. So I read with Arm.: D ‘to thy beginning’: C +, 


3. grieved sore C: D > ‘sore’ (wod)d). 
honourable throne. D > ‘honourable’ (riiov). 


sitting ... throne. Cf. Isa. xiv. 12-18; Matt. xi. 23, xxiii. 12; Vita Adae XV, XVi. 


150 


THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


VITA ADAE ET EVAE. APOCALYPSIS MOSIS. 


And he stayed there three hours, lying down ii 
and thereafter the Father of all, eine on his ie 
holy throne stretched out his hand, and took 
Adam and handed him over to the archangel 
Michael saying : ‘ Lift him up into Paradise unto g 
the third Heaven, and leave him there until that 
fearful day of my reckoning, which I will make in 
the world.’ Then Michael took Adam and left 6 
him where God told him. 

But after all this, the archangel asked concern- xxxyviii. 
ing the laying out of the remains. And God 2 
commanded that all the angels should assemble 
in His presence, each in his order, and all the 
angels assembled, some having censers in their 
hands, and otherstrumpets. And lo! the ‘ Lord 3 
of Hosts’ came on and four winds drew Him and 
cherubim mounted on the winds and the angels 
from heaven escorting Him and they came on 
the earth, where was the body of Adam. And 4 
they came to paradise and all the leaves of para- 
dise were stirred so that all men begotten of 
Adam slept from the fragrance save Seth alone, 
because he was born ‘according to the appoint- 
ment of God’. Then Adam’s body lay there in 5 
paradise on the earth and Seth grieved exceed- 
ingly over him. 
civiii. 4 And the Lord said again to the angels Michael Then God spake to the archangel(s) Michael, x1. r 

and Uriel: ‘Bring me three linen clothes of | (Gabriel, Uriel, and Raphael): ‘Go away 2 
byssus and spread them out over Adam and | to Paradise in the third heaven, and strew 
other linen clothes over Abe! his son and bury | linen clothes and cover the body of Adam and 
Adam and Abel his son.’ “| bring oil of the ‘oil of fragrance’ and pour it 

5 And all the ‘powers’ of angels marched | over him. And they acted thus did the three 
before Adam, and the sleep of the dead was | great angels and they prepared him for burial. 

6 consecrated. And the angels Michael and | And God said: ‘Let the body of Abel also be 3 
Uriel buried Adam and Abel in the parts of | brought.’ And they brought other linen clothes 
Paradise, before the eyes of Seth and his mother | and prepared his (body) also. For he was unburied 4 

7 [and no one else], and Michael and Uriel said: | since the day when Cain his brother slew him ; 





xlviii. 4. and bury ... his son. II III only. ; ve 
5. thesleep. Soll III. Ihas dormitatio =‘ resting-place’. According to Schatzhéhle (Christian), Ibn Ater, Abdul 
Serag, Adam was buried at Jerusalem ; according to Jews, e.g. Ber. Rabba 58, Erubin 53a, Pirke R. Eliezer, and Vite = 
Adae (III and Slav.), at Hebron. Cf. Fabric.i. Io. (MSS. III +‘in a place called Calvary’ ; Christian.) 
powers = virtutes. See xxi, I. 
6. [and no one else] 1 >. A gloss. 





xxxvii. 5. third Heaven CD: Arm.E ‘second Heaven’: Slav. is confused and corrupt, and separates paradise 
from ‘third Heaven’. aie - t 
my reckoning C D: Arm. ‘day of renewal’: Slav. ‘my resurrection’. Cf. 2 En. viii. 1; 2 Cor, xil. 2; Apoc. 
Paul xviii. 2; Test. Levi iii; Chagiga 12 b. 
6. left him (ddjxeyvy D) DE Slav.; C + carndenper (katnduyer). ' E 
told him. D + ‘and all the angels sang an angels’ hymn marvelling at the pardon of Adam. 
xxxviii. 1. laying out of the remains C: D corrupt and obscure. 
3. Lord of Hosts (kipios otparta@v) C: D ‘mighty lord,’ kparatds Kuptos. Pe. ai! 
4. born according to the appointment of God C (da ro yevon Ojvat kad Opov Tov Geov) : D ‘he was there (€yévero 
éxeiae) : Charles emends to xafopay (‘to behold’ God). Arm. characteristically reads ‘ for the Lord wished to show him 
: Pree Adam’s body ... over him C only. May be right, as it leads on to xl (to glorify Seth). 
xl. 1. C has a fuller text and in v. 2 gives the names of four archangels. 
3. third heaven C: Arm. ‘second heaven’: D >. 
oil of fragrance. Cf. 2 En. viii. 
three great angels. C >. eae 

3. Let the body. C imperative: D infinitive mood. 
Abel. Arm.+ ‘righteous’. 


151 


THE ‘BOOKS OF ADAGE AND "BV E 


VITA ADAE ET EVAE. APOCALYPSIS MOsISs. 
‘Just as ye have seen, in like manner, bury | for wicked Cain took great pains to conceal (him) 
your dead.’ but could not, for the earth would not receive 


him for the body sprang up from the earth and 
a voice went out of the earth saying: ‘I will not 
receive a companion body, till the earth which 
was taken and fashioned in me cometh to me.’ 
At that time, the angels took it and placed it on 
a rock, till Adam his father was buried. And 
both were buried, according to the commandment 
of God, in the spot where God found the dust, 
and He caused the place to be dug for two. 
And God sent seven angels to paradise and they 
brought many fragrant spices and placed them 
in the earth, and they took the two bodies and 
placed them in the spot which they had digged 
and builded. 

And God called and said, ‘ Adam, Adam.’ And 
the body answered from the earth and said : ‘Here 
am I, Lord.’ And God saith to him: ‘I told 
thee (that) earth thou art and to earth shalt thou 
return, Again I promise to thee the Resurrec- 
tion; I will raise thee up in the Resurrection with 
every man, who is of thy seed.’ 





VITA ADAE ET EVAE. 


Eve's directions as to the Memorials of her life. 


xlix, 1 Six days after, Adam died; and Eve perceived that she would die, (so) she assembled all her sons 


2and daughters, Seth with thirty brothers and thirty sisters, and Eve said to all: ‘Hear me, my 
children, and I will tell you what the archangel Michael said to us when I and your father transgressed 
the command of God. 

3 _ On account of your transgression, Our Lord will bring upon your race the anger of his judgement, 
first by water, the second time by fire; by these two, will the Lord judge the whole human race. 

1,1 But hearken unto me, my children. Make ye then tables of stone and others of clay, and write 

2 on them, all my life and your father’s (all) that ye have heard and seen from us. If by water the 
Lord judge our race, the tables of clay will be dissolved and the tables of stone will remain; but if 
by fire, the tables of stone will be broken up and the tables of clay will be baked (hard).’ 


7. bury yourdead. A feature of Adam legends; cf. Fabric. i. 1-100. 

xlix. 3. by fire (Stoic). Greek idea adopted by Hellenist Jews, e.g. Szby/. Oracl. iii. 760. 

1. 2, baked hard. Well-known Jewish fable. Cf. Josephus, Amz. 1. xi; Bousset in ZVTW, 1902; Manetho, 
Syncell. Chron. x1; Jubilees, viii. 3 (Charles’ note). Egyptian derivation has been suggested SHO for 620 (Thoth.) ; 
doubtful (?). Probably all accounts are Jaradlle/, not dependent. 

In III (3, 5, 14, 17) and Jean is added the story of Solomon finding ‘the tables’, with a conclusion announcing the 


coming of Christ to judge the world. Of Greek origin (e.g. ¢adulas achiliacas = axetporoujrous). All MSS. explain 
this differently. Monkish scribes here knew but little Greek. 





4. the body sprang up ... saying. So 1 read with D. 
5. a Companion (éraipov) C: D (and so Fuchs) reads érepov, ‘another’. 
On arock. 1 En. xxii. 7 and Jub. iv. 29 prove early date of this legend. 
was buried D. C ‘died.’ 
6. and He caused . . . two D. 
7. placed them C: D >. 
digged and builded CD. 
xli. I. saith (Aéyer) C: D aorist. 
2. return. Cf. Gen. iii. 19. Arm. and Slav. have crude Christian glosses. 
3. every man C: D Arm. ‘every race of man’. (? Christian.) 


152 


5 


6 


iS) 


li. 


3 


I 


2 


3 


Even the fires of Gehenna were co 
‘Lord’s Day’ (Sunday). 


THE BOOKS OF 


VITA ADAE‘ET EVAE. 


When Eve had said all this to her children, 
she spread out her hands to heaven in prayer, 
and bent her knees to the earth, and while she 
worshipped the Lord and gave him thanks, she 
gave up the ghost. Thereafter, all her children 
buried her with loud lamentation. 


When they had been mourning four days, 
(then) Michael the archangel appeared and said 
to Seth: ‘Man of God, mourn not for thy 
dead more than six days, for on the seventh 
day is the sign of the resurrection and the rest of 
the age to come; onthe seventh day the Lord 
rested from all His works.’ 

Thereupon Seth made the tables. 


li. 2. Man of God. Cf. xli. 


ADAM AND EVE 


APOCALYPSIS MOsIs. 


After these words, God made a seal and sealed xiii. 1 
the tomb, that no one might do anything to him 
for six days till his rib should return to him. 
Then the Lord and his angels went to their place, 2 
And Eve also, when the six days were fulfilled, 3 
fell asleep. But while she was living, she wept 
bitterly about Adam’s falling on sleep, for she 
knew not where he was laid. For when the Lord 
came to paradise to bury Adam she was asleep, 
and her sons too, except Seth, till He bade Adam 
be prepared for burial; and no man knew on 
earth,except her son Seth. And Eve prayed (in 4 
the hour of her death) that she might be buried 
in the place where her husband Adam was. And 
after she had finished her prayer, she saith: ‘ Lord, 5 
Master, God of all rule, estrange not me thy 
handmaid from the body of Adam, for from his 
members didst thou make me. But deem me 6 
worthy, even me unworthy that Iam and a sinner, 
to enter into his tabernacle, even as I was with 
him in paradise, both without separation from 
each other ; just as in our transgression, we were 7 
(both) led astray and transgressed thy command, 
but were not separated. Even so, Lord, do not 8 
separate us now.’ 

But after she had prayed, she gazed heaven- 
wards and groaned aloud and smote her breast 
and said: ‘God of All, receive my spirit,’ and 
straightway she delivered up her spirit to God. 

And Michael came and taught Seth how to yliii, x 
prepare Eve for burial. And there came three 
angels and they buried her (body) where Adam’s 
body was and Abel’s. And thereafter Michael 2 
spake to Seth and saith: ‘Lay out in this wise 
every man that dieth till the day of the Resur- 
rection.’ And after giving him this rule; he 3 
saith to him: ‘Mourn not beyond six days, but 
on the seventh day, rest and rejoice on it, because 





the Lord rested. Motive here is, if possible, even more Jewish than the injunction. A symbol of Resurrection 





in Sanh. 97a (Ginzberg); contrast motive in Hebrews iv. 9. This motive impossible to a Christian ; cf. Jubilees 
il. 17-21. 


xlii. 1. sealed the tomb. Slav.+‘and made the sign of the Cross’, 

2. their place C: ‘the heaven’ D Arm. (an explanation). ; 

3. for she knew not. Motive for Eve’s grief same in all versions. ; re 
except Seth C: D says ‘all slept’. Cf. Apoc. Mos. xxxvil, which contradicts Vit. xlvi. 


4. prayed C+ ‘in the hour of her death ’. 

5. rule (adpxis) D: C aperns (‘ virtue’), 
thy handmaid. C only. ! 
didst thou make me. Cf. Gen. ii. 23; 1 Cor. x1. 12. 


6. enter into his tabernacle D. C ‘be buried with his body.’ 

8. C adds ‘and straightway she delivered up her spirit to God’: D >. 

xliii. 1. Michael came. C expands—makes Michael present at her death. 

2. the Resurrection. Arm.+‘and Advent’ (Christian gloss). ; ~ 

3. rest and rejoice onit D Arm. Slav.: after these words, however, Arm. reads ‘for on this day we rejoice, God and 


all his angels, besides all the spirits of his creatures, which may be upon the earth 2 Cf Priests peexxileo. best. 


ii, ii Ixvil. 2; Exod. xxxi. 13; Apoc. Zeph, xx; Sanh. 69b; Test. Sim. vill. 11; Jub. 11. 19-21; 


Abraham ii, iii, vii; 1 En. : d. . : ue ne 
4 Ezra ii. 23. Both the practice, the injunction, and the symbol are typical and commonplace in later Ju aism. 
oled on the Sabbath (Test. Abrah.). Apoc. Pauli xliv transfers this notion to the 


Aboda Zara says approach of Sa 


bbath saved Adam from much worse punishment. 


153 


THB BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE 


VITA ADAE ET EVAE. 
There follows in the following MSS,: IT 3, 5, 
19, 17, Jean; and Ar. 210, a long story of Solo- 
mon finding ‘ tabulas achiliacas,’ 


4. the angel DC E: Slav. § 
5. Doxologies are later Christian additions. 


APOCALYPSIS MOSIs. 


on that very day, God rejoiceth (yea) and we 
angels (too) with the righteous soul, who hath 
passed away from the earth.’ Even thus spake 4 
the angel, and ascended into heaven, glorifying 
(God) and saying: ‘Allelujah.’ 

[Holy, holy, holy is the Lord, in the glory of 5 
God the Father, for to Him it is meet to give glory, 
honour and worship, with the eternal life-giving 
spirit now and always and for ever. Amen.] 

[Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts. To 
whom be glory and power for ever and for ever. 
Amen. 

[ Then the archangel Joel glorified God; saying, 
‘Holy, Holy, Holy ord, heed and cartli are 
full of thy glory.’] 


archangel Joel’; see note on ‘ Jael’, xxix. 4. 
The first paragraph occurs in C, the second in Arm., the third in Slav. 


154 


THE MARTYRDOM OF ISAIAH 
INTRODUCTION 


§ 1. SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE BOOK. 


THE Martyrdom of Isaiah has not survived independently, but as one of the three constituents 
of the Ascension of Isaiah. In its present form we cannot be sure that the Ascension of Isaiah 
existed earlier than the latter half of the second century of our era. The three constituents of which 
it consists are the Martyrdom of Isaiah, the Vision of Isaiah, and the Testament of Hezekiah. The 
first of these with which we are here mainly concerned was of Jewish origin, and is of less interest 
than the other two, which were the work of Christian writers. 

The Vision of Isaiah—vi—xi. 40 of the Ascension of Isaiah—is important for the knowledge it 
affords us of first-century beliefs in certain circles as to the doctrines of the Trinity, the Incarnation, 
the Resurrection, the Seven Heavens, &c. 

The long-lost Testament of Hezekiah—ii. 13 6—iv. 18 of the same work—is of very great value 
for the insight it gives us into the history of the Christian Church at the close of the first century. 
Its descriptions of the worldliness and lawlessness which prevailed among clergy, of the covetousness 
and vainglory and growing heresies among Christians generally, agree with similar accounts in 
2 Timothy, 2 Peter, and Clement of Rome (ad Cor. iii, xxiii). 

The Martyrdom of Isaiah—i. 1-2 a, 6 d-13 a, ii. 1-8, 10—iii. 12, v. 1 c-14—is fragmentary. 
It opens with Hezekiah’s summons of Manasseh his son and of Isaiah into his presence in order that 
the former should receive his dying commands relative to his duty in the coming days (i. 1-2). 
But Isaiah assures Hezekiah that all his words will be of none effect inasmuch as Manasseh would 
become the servant of Beliar and he Isaiah would be sawn asunder by Manasseh, and that no action 
of Hezekiah’s could prevent his martyrdom (i. 64-13a@). On the death of Hezekiah Manasseh 
turned to evi! ways and became the servant of Beliar and caused Israel to sin in every form of witch- 
craft, and fornication and lawlessness (ii. 1-7). And Isaiah withdrew first to Bethlehem and then to 
the mountains beyond it, where he and the prophets with him spent two years mourning and fasting 
because of the apostasy of Israel (ii. 10-16). The false prophet Belchira discovers his retreat and 
accuses him before Manasseh on three grounds: that he had prophesied the destruction of Jerusalem, 
that he had claimed to see God, though Moses had said that no man could see God and live, and that 
he had called Jerusalem Sodom, and its princes and people Gomorrah (iii. 1-12). On account of 
these things Manasseh caused Isaiah to be sawn asunder with a wood saw, Belchira and the false 
prophets standing by and deriding him (v. 1 c-14). 





O72. SLICER. 


The Martyrdom of Isaiah has, as we have seen, been preserved to us only in a fragmentary form 
as part of the Ascension of Isaiah. The whole book was known under several names. (a) ’Améxpupov 
‘Hoatov is the designation given to it early in the third century by Origen in his commentary on 
Matthew xiii. 57 (Lommatzsch, iii. 49) wal “Hoatas d& mempicdar ind 70d aod iordpnrau. el be Tus ob 
mpootetat Tyy iotopiay bia Td ev TO AroKptpw “Hoatg avray peperOar muoTevoarw Tois év Ty mpos EBpatous 
ottw yeypappevos (Heb. xi. 37). See also Ep. ad A fric. 9, and the Cons titutiones Apostolicae vi. 20. 
(6) It was known in the fourth century as 16 “AvaBartxov “Hoatov according to Epiphanius, fTaer. x1. 2, 
who says that it was used by his Archontici and his Hieracites. Cf. also Ixvii. 3. In like manner 
Jerome (Comm. in Isaiam \xiv. 4) calls it his Ascensio Jsaiae. (c) Again it went by the name 
"Opaous “Hoatov as may be inferred from the texts of ES and L? of vi. 1. This designation appears 
in Montfaucon’s and Pitra’s list of Canonical and Apocryphal books, and was used by Euthymius 
Zigabenus in the eleventh century when anathematizing his Massaliani ( Victoria de Massal. Anath. iv). 
This title belongs specifically and probably originally only to vi.—xi. 40. (d) Finally, it is named 
the Avaéjcn "E¢exiov by Cedrenus I. 120-1. That such a work was incorporated in the Ascension 
might also be inferred from i. 20-5 a, which describe the contents of Hezekiah’s vision. This 
description is applicable to the Christian Apocalypse iti. 13 b—iv. 18 and to it alone. The fact, too, 
that Cedrenus quotes partially iv. 12, 14 and refers to iv. 15-18 of this very section points to the 
conclusion that such a book existed independently. 


155 


THE MARTYRDOM OF ISAIAH 


§ 3. THE VERSIONS. 


Since the Martyrdom of Isaiah was originally an independent work, we shall deal here only 
with the Versions of this work and not with those that reproduce the rest of the Ascension 
of Isaiah. : 

(a) The Greek Version. This version existed in two forms, G! and G?, as early as the third 
century. The former is lost, but its characteristics are reproduced by the Ethiopic (= E) and the 
first Latin Version (= L). Phrases and sentences of G* from every chapter of the Ascension of 
Isaiah, except iv, have been preserved by the ‘Greek Legend’. This work was found by von Gebhardt 
in a Greek MS. of the twelfth century, no. 1534 in the National Library at Paris, and published 
by him in the Z/WT 330-53. In my edition of the Ascension of Isaiah it is reprinted from 
Gebhardt’s text with one or two necessary emendations, and all the phrases taken directly from G! are 
printed in thick type, and the chapter and verse placed in the margin. Of G’ an actual fragment was 
discovered by Grenfell and Hunt in a papyrus of the fifth or sixth century. On this fragment see my 
edition, pp. xxviii-xxxi, and for the fragment itself, pp. 84-95. G" and G* are in turn derived from 
a lost archetype G, which was known in its original form to the writer of the Opus [mperfectum: see 
pp. xl-xlii of my edition. wet ; . 

(6) The Ethiopic Version. This is the only version that preserves in its entirety the Ascension 
of Isaiah. It is, as I have shown in my edition, derived from G'. It is a very faithful reproduction 
of the Greek. So closely does it follow the latter that it can almost always be retranslated without 
difficulty. Like every version, however, with a long history behind it, it has its defects. As yet 
only three MSS., adc, have been brought to Europe from Abyssinia. The first of these was 
edited by Laurence, Ascensio [saiae Vatis, Oxoniae, 1819, and the whole three by Dillmann, Ascensio 
Isaiae Aethiopice et Latine, Lipsiae, 1877, and by the present writer, Zhe Ascension of Lsatah 
translated from the Ethiopic Version, which, together with the new Greek Fragment, the Latin 
Versions, and the Latin Translation of the Slavonic, is here published in full, London, 1900. The 
last work is based on a fresh and more accurate collation of the MSS. 

(c) The Latin Versions. There were two Latin versions, one of which, L?, embraces vi—xi. 1-19, 
23-40, the other, L}, only ii. 14—iii. 13, vii. 1-19. The former was printed by Antonius de Fantis at 
Venice in 1522 from a MS. now unknown, and reprinted by Gieseler in 1832 and by Dillmann 
as an appendix to his edition in 1877, and by the present writer with critical notes and corrections 
in his edition of Igoo. 

The two smaller fragments, i.e. L!, which were first edited by Mai in 1828 from a sixth- 
century Vatican MS., were re-edited by the present writer from a fresh collation of the MS. 

A study of E, L', L’, the ‘Greek Legend’, and of the Slavonic Version (= S) which exists only 
for vi-xi proves that E L? and the ‘Greek Legend’ go back to a definite Greek text, which we might 
name G!, and that S L? go back similarly to G?. 


§ 4. RELATIONS OF THE VARIOUS VERSIONS. 


Some of these relations have already been briefly indicated in the preceding section. The student 
will find them dealt with at length in my edition, pp. xviii-xxxiii, xl-xlii.. As regards the Martyrdom 
of Isaiah the textual affinities of all the textual authorities can be shortly summarized in the 
following table :— 

G (= Greek Martyrdom of Isaiah as edited in the ‘ Ascension ’: 


not existing but known in its original form to the writer of 
the Opus Imperfectum). 





ape | 
G! (not existing but known to and G* (in part existing in the newly 





| used by the writer of the ‘ Greek recovered fragment ii. 4—iii. 12). 
| Legend’). 
E (= Ethiopic Version). L! (= Latin Version : 


il, 14—ili. 12). 
§ 5. THE EXTENT OF THE MARTYRDOM OF ISAIAH. 


All writers save Laurence recognize a plurality of authorship in the Ascension of Isaiah, and 
the independent origin of the Martyrdom of Isaiah, Ewald was the first to distinguish the works 
of three different authors. Ewald’s analysis was remodelled and issued in the following form 
by Dillmann :— 

i. The Martyrdom of Isaiah, of Jewish origin: ii. 1—iii. 12, v. 2-14. 

ii. The Vision of Isaiah, of Christian origin: vi. 1—xi. 1, 23-40. 

156 


INTRODUCTION 


_ ii. The above two constituents were put together by a Christian writer 
40-13 and appended xi. 42, 43. . 
iv. Finally a Christian editor incorporated the two sections iii. 13—v. 1 and xi. 2-22, and added 
also 1.°3, 4 @, v. 15, 16, xi. 41. 

Dillmann’s analysis has on the whole been accepted by Harnack, Schiirer, Deane, and Beer. All 
these scholars have been influenced by Gebhardt’s statement that in his ‘Greek Legend’ there is 
not a trace of iii. 13—-v. I, xi. 2-22, and that, accordingly, these sections were absent from the text when 
the ‘Greek Legend’ was composed. Thus according to Gebhardt, Dillmann’s analysis is confirmed 
by external evidence. 

But Gebhardt’s statement is wrong; for as I have shown in my edition the writer of the ‘Greek 
Legend was acquainted with both these sections, inasmuch as he incorporates phrases from iv. 2, 6 
8, 14, 19, xi. 19, 20. Hence Dillmann’s analysis can no longer be maintained. With the full 
discussion of the questions at issue we are not here concerned. It will be sufficient to state the 
conclusions at which the present writer has arrived in his edition, and these are: ‘The conditions of 
the problem are sufficiently satisfied by supposing a single editor, who had three works at his disposal, 
the Martyrdom of Isaiah of Jewish origin, and the two independent works, the Testament of 
Hezekiah (= iii. 13 0—iv. 18), and the Vision of Isaiah (= vi—xi. 40), of Christian origin. These he 
reduced or enlarged as it suited his purpose, and put them together as they stand in our text. 
Amongst the obvious editorial additions are i. 2 J—6 a, 134, ii. 9, iii. 13 a, iv. 1a, 19—Vv. 1a, PS ho: 
xi. 41-3. 

We have herein given the extent of the Testament of Hezekiah, and the Vision of Isaiah, but 
that of the Martyrdom requires investigation. According to Dillmann the latter consists of ii. 1—iii. 12, 
v. 16-14. But with this view the present writer cannot agree. Other fragments survive in Chapter i. 
Thus in ii. 1 the words ‘he did not remember the commands of Hezekiah’ suggest the questions : 
What commands are these? and when were they given? Now we find the probable answer to the 
latter question in i. r, 2a, in which Hezekiah summons Manasseh before him in the presence of 
Isaiah and Josab. The answer to the former question is still preserved in our text, though obscurely, 
owing to editorial additions. Thus in i. 6 4 we learn that Isaiah gave certain commands to Manasseh. 
These are referred to ini. 7, ii. 1. What these commands were is not recorded in our book, but 
they are found in the Latin fragments preserved in the Opus [mperfectum, which go back xot to our 
text but to the original Martyrdom. ‘There we find the explanation of many difficulties in our text. 
Thus in the first place we discover the reason for Isaiah summoning Manasseh in the twenty-sixth 
year; for the Latin supplies it: ‘cum aegrotasset Ezechias in tempore quodam.’ In the next place 
the object with which Hezekiah summoned Manasseh is not, as in our text, to become the depository 
of certain visions i. 2 0-6 a, but to receive directions as to his religious duties and the government of 
the kingdom: ‘ Vocavit Ezechias filium suum Manassen et coepit ei mandare, quod debeat Deum 
timere, quomodo regere regnum et alia multa.’ But the final editor of the Ascension of Isaiah, whose 
interests were centred in the visions, omitted these words, and attributed quite a different object to 
Hezekiah’s summons of Manasseh. Hezekiah, he tells us, in i. 2. 6, summoned Manasseh ‘in order 
to deliver unto him the words of righteousness which the king himself had seen’ (i.e. iii. 13 6—iv. 18), 
and also those which Isaiah the son of Amoz had given to him (vi—xi. 40). Thus i. 26-6 a was 
added by the final editor to introduce the Testament of Hezekiah and the Vision of Isaiah. 

We have now seen that i. 1, 2 a, 6 are derived from the original Martyrdom, but still more of 
this chapter comes from this source—indeed from 60 to the close. This follows from the Latin 
passage in the Opus Imperfectum which either quotes or implies a knowledge of i. 7, 10, 12, 13. _ This 
passage, wherein I have italicized the words that are drawn from our book, runs as follows: ‘ Provi- 
dentia autem Dei sic eum dispensavit vocari, quia (ii. 1) obliturus fuerat omnem conversationem patris 
sui sanctam et omnia beneficia Dei pro merito ecius collata in ipsum, et (i. 8, ii. 4) stimulatus ab 
insurgente diabolo... . Denique cum aegrotasset Ezechias in tempore quodam, et venisset ad eum 
Esaias propheta visitandum, (i. 1, 6 4) vocavit Ezechias filium suum M anassen et coepit et mandare, 
quod debeat Deum timere, quomodo regere regnum et alia multa. (i. 7) Et dixit ad cum Esaias : 
vere quia on descendunt verba tua in cor eius, sed et me ipsum oportet per manum ets inter fice : 
(i. 10,12) Quod audiens Ezechias volebat filum suum inter ficere, dicens : Quia melius est me sine 
filio mori quam talem filium relinquere, qui et Deum exasperet €t sanctos cius persequatur. Tenuit 
autem eum vix Esaias propheta, dicens, (i. 13) irritum faciat Deus consilium tuum hoc. (Printed 
with Chrysostom’s works, vi, pp. xx—xxi.—Ed. Montfaucon.) 


§ 6. THE DATE. 


The Martyrdom is quoted by the Opus Imperfectum, Ambrose, Jerome, Origen, Tertullian, and 
in all probability by Justin Martyr (Deal. c. Tryph. CXX. 14, 15 mept tov Odvarov Hoatov dv mpiovt Evdivy 
éxpioare). It was not improbably known to the writer of the Epistle tothe Hebrews (xi. 37). This 

157 


who prefixed i. 1, 2, 





THE MARTYRDOM OF ISAIAH 


brings us, if the last reference is trustworthy, to the first century A.D. And this appears to be the 
right date; for it is unlikely that works written by Jews in the second century should attain to 
circulation in the Christian Church. 


§ 7. AUTHORSHIP AND ORIGINAL LANGUAGE. 


The author was a Jew. The details as to the death of Isaiah at the hands of Manasseh are 
found in the Talmud (Febamoth 49 5) in a form closely related to that in our text. Thus he 1S 
told that Rabbi Simeon ben ‘Azzai found in Jerusalem an account of the death of Isaiah at the 
hands of Manasseh. Manasseh condemned Isaiah to death because he had claimed to see God 
(Isa. vi. | sqq.), whereas according to the Law it was declared that no man could see God and live 
(Exod. xxxiii. 20). The same passage tells also of Isaiah taking refuge in a cedar tree, and of the 
cedar being sawn in sunder and Isaiah within it. Another version of the same legend is given in the 
Jerusalem Talmud (Sanh. x), and still another in Targum on Isaiah quoted by Jolowicz (Die 
Fimmelfahrt und Vision des Prophets Fesajas, p. 9). See Fewish Encyc., viii. 636. 

It is very probable that the original was written in Hebrew. The Jewish origin of the legend 
points in this direction, and particularly its recurrence in the Talmud. The following facts also lend 
confirmation to this hypothesis. In ii. 1 there is a paronomasia of the words ‘Manasseh . . . did 


not remember’ = when retranslated into Hebrew: nw3nw2. Again in i. 8 Malchira is probably 
a transliteration of ya 379 or yy~aNdn as S. A. Cook has pointed out. In iii. 2 we have the familiar 
Hebraism kai éyeveto ev 7@ édOciv . . . wai. Finally, ‘wooden saw’, i.e. mplwy éddwvos in v. IT, ele 


appears to be a mistranslation of yy wn, which means a saw for sawing wood. In the Greek Legend 
ili, 14 it is described as zpiwv ofdnpos. 


§ 8. THE MARTYRDOM oF ISAIAH IN JEWISH AND CHRISTIAN LITERATURE 
AND THE ORIENTAL INFLUENCES APPARENT IN IT. 


The legend of the Martyrdom of Isaiah took its origin most probably in 2 Kings scx 20. 
Although Josephus does not mention it, it was certainly a Jewish tradition. In Sanh. 103 dit is said that 
Manasseh put Isaiah to death ; and in Jebamoth 49 4 that Isaiah was put to death by Manasseh because 
he declared that he had seen God. There, as in our text, Isaiah is charged with contradicting 
the words of Moses in Exod. xxxiii. 20. His death also by being sawn in sunder is also recounted. 
This account is probably drawn ultimately from the Semitic original of our text. Another form of 
the Legend appears in Jerusalem Talmud (Sanh. x). 

The legend was known in the Apostolic age, if, as is generally assumed, we have in Heb. xi. 37 
(éxpic@noav) a reference to the specific mode of Isaiah’s martyrdom. But, even if this is doubtful, 
there is the evidence of the Ascenston (i. 1, 2 a, 6—iii. 12, v. I b-14) which cannot be much later than 
the middle of the first century A.D. In the next century Justin Martyr most probably quotes from 
our text (see note on v. 11), while somewhat later frequent references and quotations are found 
in Origen. 

But though the legend is undoubtedly Jewish, it appears to have been derived from Eastern 
sources. According to the Zamyad Yast 46 (S.B.E. xxiii. 297), Bundahis xxxi. 5, xxxiv. 4 
(op. cét. v. 131,150) Yima reigned 6163 years and was then dethroned for his blind pride in accepting 
divine worship and sawn in two by the serpent of three heads, Azhi Dahaka. In the Persian work 
‘The History of King Djemchid and the Devas’ which Larionoff translated into French from the 
Persian (Fournal Aszat. pp. 59-83, 1889) we find a nearly related legend. When Djemchid’s throne 
was seized by Zohak, the man of serpents, he fled into the wilderness. One hundred years later 
Ahriman and Biver (i.e. Zohak) having come upon him there, God caused a tree to open itself, in 
order that Djemchid might conceal! himself therein. Notwithstanding, through the help of Iblis they 
discovered his hiding-place and had the tree sawn in twain, and so Djemchid was killed. This legend 
appears to have directly influenced the Talmudic accounts of the martyrdom of Isaiah exactly in 
the points wherein they differ from that in our text. 


§ 9. BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

For complete bibliography see the present writer’s edition of the Ascension of Isaja, u ill — 

(a) The chief editions of the texts of the Ancient Versions will be found ee § OOS Sie ee 

(2) Critical Inguirtes (dealing with the Ascension of Isaiah as a whole and with its parts). Laurence, Ascensio 
Isaiae Vatis, 1819, pp. 141-80; Nitzsch, Stud. und Krit., 1830, Pp. 209-46; Liicke, Linlectung in die Offenbarung 
des Johannes, 1852, pp. 274-302 ; Dillmann, Ascensto Isadae, 1877, Pp. V-xvili; Stokes, art. ‘Ascension of Isaiah’ in 
Dict. of Christian Biography, 1882, iii. 298-301 ; Deane, Pseudepigrapha, 1891, pp. 236-75; Harnack, Gesch. der 
altchristl. Litteratur, i. 854-6; ii. 573-9, 714; Clemen, ‘Die Himmelfahrt des Jesaja,” Z/WT, 1896, pp. 388-415 ; 
1897, Pp. 455-65 ; Robinson, ‘Ascension of Isaiah’ in Hastings’ Bible Dictionary, ii. 499-501 ; Beer A fpok. und 
ES 11d E Oq23% mags Jewish Encyc., 1904, vi. 642-3. : ; 

c) Laiuons, Laurence, Ascensto Isaiae Vatis, 1819; Dillmann Ascensio Isaiae, 1877; Char z 

of Isaiah translated Jrom the Ethiopic Version, which, Pee with the New Greek Pier Bp ig ak 
and the Latin Translation of the Slavonic Version, is here published in Sull, 1900. i i 


158 


THE MARTYRDOM OF ISAIAH 


li And it came to pass in the twenty-sixth year of the reign of Hezekiah king of Judah that he 
2 called Manasseh his son. Now he was his: only one. And he called him into the presence of 
Isaiah the son of Amoz the prophet; and into the presence of Josab the son of Isaiah. 
6b, 7 And whilst he (Hezekiah) gave commands, J6sd4b the son of Isaiah standing by, Isaiah said to 
Hezekiah the king, but not in the presence of Manasseh only did he say unto him: ‘ As the Lord 
liveth, whose name has not been sent into this world, [and as the Beloved of my Lord liveth], and as 
the Spirit which speaketh in me liveth, all these commands and these words shall be made of none 
effect by Manasseh thy son, and through the agency of his hands I shall depart mid the torture of 
8 my body. And Sammael Malchira shall serve Manasseh, and execute all his desire, and he shall 
9 become a follower of Beliar rather than of me. And many in Jerusalem and in Judaea he shall 
cause to abandon the true faith, and Beliar shall dwell in Manasseh, and by his hands I shall be 
10 sawn asunder.’ And when Hezekiah heard these words he wept very bitterly, and rent his garments, 
11 and placed earth upon his head, and fell on his face. And Isaiah said unto him: ‘The counsel of 
12 Sammael against Manasseh is consummated: nought shall avail thee.’ And on that day Hezekiah 


I. 1. ‘in the twenty-fifth year’, according to the Greek Legend. 

2. Isaiah the son of Amoz the prophet. Amoz 7X the father of Isaiah seems here to be confused with Amos 
the prophet DYDY. The LXX uses "Ayes for both, and the Asc. Isa. iv. 22 and Megilla 10” both regard Isaiah as 
a prophet’s son. According to the latter the father of Isaiah and King Amaziah were brothers. 

Jés4b, i.e. Shear-jashub, Isa. vii. 3. 
the son of Isaiah. The editorial addition 2-6? that here follows is omitted as being of Christian origin. See 
my edition, p. 2. 

6. commands. Cf. ii. 1. 

7. and as the Beloved . .. liveth. This is an addition by the Christian editor who thus converts a reference to 
the transcendence of God into a doctrinal statement about the Trinity. 

depart. +‘from life’, Greek Legend, i. 8. 

8. Sammael °N'5D. Originally an archangel, he enticed the serpent to tempt Eve in order to make the earth his 
kingdom, Jalkut Shim Beresh. 25. He became a chief Satan, Debarim rabba, 11; and the angel of death, Targ. Jer. 
on Gen. iii. 6. See Weber’s /i#d. Theologie, 169, 218, 219, 253. : : 

Malchira. This appears to be a surname of Sammael, cf. Asc. Isa. xi. 41 ‘Sammael Satan.’ But it also appears 
as a variant of the name Balchira in v. 8 below. S. A. Cook in the Journal of the Royal Astatic Society, Jan. 


1901, p. 168, suggests yard or PIMINOD, ‘evil king’ or ‘evil angel’. Beer in Kautzsch’s Pseudepigr. des A. T. 
suggests that that Bechira (see ii. 12) = Bevir, the other name of Zohak, the man of serpents, the associate of Ahriman 
in the persecution of Djemchid. ; 
serve Manasseh. The idea of demons being at the behest of men seems out of place here. On the other hand 
Belchira’s service of Manasseh is equally unsuitable. : ; Fc 
Beliar. Cf. i.9; ii. 4; iii. 11; v. 4 (ac). E corruptly reads ‘ Berial’. He is the chief of the evil spirits, and the 
opponent of Christ, 2 Cor. vi. 15; cf. Jub. i, 20, XV. 335 Sib. Or. ii. 167 (to come as Antichrist), ili. 63-73, (to proceed 
from the emperors of Rome, peas signs and deceiving the elect, and finally to be burnt up); Test. xii Patr. Jasszm. 
a see Leucycl. Bibl. 525-7. Bs 
ne eas peltion to iy They are alike in taking possession of Manasseh, ii. 1 andi. 9, i. 11. But 
Sammael is inferior, as he exerts himself to make Manasseh subject to Beliar i. 8 (ii. 1, 4). 
9. Beliar. ‘Satan,’ Greek Legend i. 9. 
to. Cf. Gk. Leg. oe ee 
: tan meee WN. 
cs igen ae ” on this day and’ 4c, ‘on those words’ a; ‘and in that hour’ Gé. Leg. 


I-Il. 1. We may compare for the diction as well as the sense of many clauses in I-II. I the Opus LOU im 
Matthaeum Homil. J (printed with Chrysostom’s works, vol. VI, pp. xx-xxi, Montfaucon). Providentia eee fe He 
eum dispensavit vocari, quia obditurus fuerat omnem conversationem patris sui (ii. 1) sanctam et... : Zu aes a 
insurvente diabolo (i. 8, ii. 4) . . .: Denique cum aegrotasset Ezechias in tempore quodam, Pinas n A ae 
propheta visitandum, vocavit Ezechias filium suum Manassen et coepit et mandare (i. 1, ) aac fs Jeum 
timere, quomodo regere regnum et alia multa. — Et dixit ad eum ELsaias: vere quia non aps verba is tm cor 
eius,; sed et me ipsum oportet per manum etus inter fict (i. 7). Quod audiens Ezechias ies ebat fultum Sum ie pare 
(i. 12) dicens: quia melius est me sine filio mori quam talem filium relinquere, qui et ee exasperet € eh Cc pes 
persequatur. Tenuit autem eum vix Zsazas porn dicens : irritum faciat Deus consilium tuum (i. 13) hoc, videns 
I i igi i Deum quam filium suum. 
ee oer: le Oe atte ‘niece of Isaiah and Hezekiah see Berachoth, Io a. ‘What is the meaning 
of the words ‘“‘ Thou shalt die and not live?” “Thou shalt die in this world and not live in the next world. He said: 
“ Wherefore is all this?” He answered him: “ Because thou hast not preached fruitfulness and IETS, ; He 
rejoined: ‘‘ Because it was revealed to me by the Holy Spirit that unprofitable children would bins rom me. 3 e 

lied : “What concern hast thou in the secrets of the All Merciful? Thou shouldst have done what was commande 
ao . 1d the Holy One, blessed be He, may do what pleases Him.” He replied thereto: Give me thy daughter: 
ba ae my merits and thine together will bring it about that profitable children may spring from me.” Then replied 
he: “The judgment is already determined regarding thee. 


159 


THE MARTYRDOM OF -ISAIAH ‘1. 13—2. "12 


13 resolved in his heart to slay Manasseh his son. And Isaiah said to Hezekiah : [‘ The Beloved hath 
made of none effect thy design, and] the purpose of thy heart shall not be accomplished, for with this 
calling have I been called [and I shall inherit the heritage of the Beloved]. 

21 And it came to pass after that Hezekiah died and Manasseh became king, that he did not 
remember the commands of Hezekiah his father but forgat them, and Sammael abode in Manasseh 

2 and clung fast to him. And Manasseh forsook the service of the God of his father, and he served 

3 Satan and his angels and his powers. And he turned aside the house of his father which had been 

4 before the face of Hezekiah (from) the words of wisdom and from the service of God. And Manasseh 
turned aside his heart to serve Beliar; for the angel of lawlessness, who is the ruler of this world, is 
Beliar, whose name is Matanbtichas. And he delighted in Jerusalem because of Manasseh, and he 
made him strong in apostatizing (Israel) and in the lawlessness which was spread abroad in Jerusalem. 

5 And witchcraft and magic increased and divination and auguration, and tornication, [and adultery |, 
and the persecution of the righteous by Manasseh and | Belachira, and] Tobia the Canaanite, and John 
6 of Anathoth, and by (Zadok) the chief of the works. And the rest of the acts, behold they are written 
7 in the book of the Kings of Judah and Israel. And when Isaiah the son of Amoz saw the lawless- 
ness which was being perpetrated in Jerusalem and the worship of Satan and his wantonness, he 
8 withdrew from Jerusalem and settled in Bethlehem of Judah. And there also there was much 
9 lawlessness, and withdrawing from Bethlehem he settled on a mountain in a desert place. [And 
Micaiah the prophet, and the aged Ananias, and Joel and Habakkuk, and his son Jésdb, and many 
of the faithful who believed in the ascension into heaven, withdrew and settled on the mountain. | 

10 They were all clothed with garments of hair, and they were all prophets. And they had nothing 
with them but were naked, and they all lamented with a great lamentation because of the going 

it astray of Israel. And these eat nothing save wild herbs which they gathered on the mountains, and 

having cooked them, they lived thereon together with Isaiah the prophet. And they spent two years of 
days on the mountains and hills. [And after this, whilst they were in the desert, there was a certain 
man in Samaria named Belchira, of the family of Zedekiah, the son of Chenaan, a false prophet 
whose dwelling was in Bethlehem. Now {Hezekiaht the son of Chandni, who was the brother of 
his father, and in the days of Ahab king of Israel had been the teacher of the 400 prophets of Baal, 


I 


nN 


13. [‘ The Beloved hath . . . Beloved’]. Editorial additions like 2°63. 


II. 1. Manasseh...forgat. Cf. for the play on the words Gen. xli.51; alsothe Opus Imperf., and Gk. Leg. iii. 2. 
commands of Hezekiah. See i. 6. 
Sammael. See i. 8 (note). 
2. Gk, Leg. iii. 2. A Jewish legend makes Manasseh remove the sacred name from the scriptures. 
3. So the Ethiopic text. Cf. G&. Leg. iii. 3 e&ékdwve mdvra tov olkoy Tov matpos adrov amd THs Tod Beod Narpelas Kal 
mpookvynoews. Beer not so well renders ‘ changed in the house . . . all that had been’, &c. 
from, supplied as in G&. Leg. iil. 3. 

4. Beliar the angel of lawlessness. Cf. Asc. Isa. iv. 2 ‘lawless king’; 2 Thess. ii. 3 ‘the man of lawlessness ” 
(= the Antichrist). 

Beliar the ruler of this world. - Cf. John xii. 31, xvi. 11; 2 Cor. iv. 4; also Eph. vi. 12 xoopoxpuropas rod oxdrous 
Tov al@vos Tovtov, also ii. 2. y = 

Matanbiichiis. ac. ‘ Metanbakas’ b. In v. 3 it occurs as Mechémbéchtis. v Vouos2f ISA mJ. 

in apostatizing. But év dwoordce UG’. Cf. 2 Kings xxi. 9. 

5. See 2 Chron, xxxiii. 6 (LXX) exAnSoviero kat épappakevero kai oiwvifero, also 2 Kings xxi. 6. Cf. Gk. Leg. iii. 3. 
and adultery. > & and Gé. Leg. iii. 3. 
persecution. Cf. 2 Kings xxi. 16. 

Belachira and. > &. A premature mention, see il. 12. 
Anathoth. See Lzcycl. Lidl. in loc, 
Zadok. & only. 

6. 2 Kings xxi. 17, &c. 

7. wantonness E; rounnv &; dooriav Gh. Leg. iii. 8. 

g. An editorial addition from Asc. Isa. vi. 7; ‘withdrew ... mountain’ is from ver.8 here ; ‘ his son’ and ‘many 

of the faithful . . . heaven’ are the editor's own. 

Il. herbs. Cf. 2 Kings iv. 38 ff. This asceticism was a preparation for visions and revelations. Cf. Dan. x. 2 Bas 
Ariza, 1X.) 205 Xl. 5 Ue Se 

12-16. Belchira and his history. 12-16 is an insertion and interrupts the narrative of ii. 11—iii. 1. 

12. Belchira, li. 5, 12, 16; ill. 1, 6, 12; v. 2, 3, 4,5, 12.. The Greek Papyrus gives four different forms BeAtxerap 
Bedxetpa, Bexerpa, and MeAyeipa. The Gk. Leg. gives Bexerpas (ili. 10), the Latin Bechira. The Ethiopic varies even more. 
The most probable original is Melchira or Melchiah. See i. 8 (note). Beer prefers Bechira. But the G&. Lee. often 
mentions a false prophet MeAxias. Perhaps there was a confusion between the demon’s and the false prophet’s names 
Or more probably the tempter and tormentor of the prophet is regarded as an impersonation of the devil. See v.9 Io. 
Isaiah calls him AvdéBoNos in GA. Leg. iii. 18. Ambrose on Ps, cxviii. uses diabolus. See v. 4 (note). Te 

Zedekiah, the son of Chenaan. See I Kings xxii. 11. 
Bethlehem. ‘Bethany’ G. 
tHezekiaht the son of Chanani E. Read ‘Zedekiah,’ as in Gk. Frag. For the variation cf. Chron. Pasch. 
98 B joav pevdorpodnra Eexias . . . kai dda and 96C wevdompopijra: Bedexias . . . Kat GdXox rerpaxdoro1. ; 
the 400 prophets of Baal. Cf. Chron. Pasch. Zc. Really the fellow-prophets of Zedekiah in 1 Kings xxii. 6 
are nominally prophets of the Lord, and he is not connected with the 4co of Baal in 1 Kings xviii. 22. io 
160 


THE MARTYRDOM OF ISAIAH 2, 13—3. 10 


13 had himself smitten and reproved Micajah the son of Amada the prophe icai 
been reproved by Ahab and cast into prison. And he was) with bedekiak the boeken ee 
14 with Ahaziah the son of Ahab, king in Samaria. And Elijah the prophet of Téb6n of Gilead was 
reproving Ahaziah and Samaria, and prophesied regarding Ahaziah that he should die on his bed 
of sickness, and that Samaria should be delivered into the hand of Leba Nast because he had slain 
15 the prophets of God.. And when the false prophets, who were with Ahaziah the son of Ahab and 
16 their teacher Gemarias of Mount +Joelt had heard—now he was brother of Zedekiah—when 
they had heard, they persuaded Ahaziah the king of {Aguaront} and slew Micaiah. 

1 road Belchira recognized and saw the place of Isaiah and the prophets who were =I him ; for 
he dwelt in the region of Bethlehem, and was an adherent of Manassch. And he prophesied falsely 
in Jerusalem, and many belonging to Jerusalem were confederate with him, and he was a Samaritan. 

2 And it came to pass when Alagar Zagar, king of Assyria, had come and captured Samaria and 
taken the nine {and a half) tribes captive, and led them away to the mountains of the Medes and the 

3 rivers of Tazén ; this (Belchird) while still a youth, had escaped and come to Jerusalem in the days 
of Hezekiah king of Judah, but he walked not in the ways of his father of Samaria ; for he feared 

4 Hezekiah. And he was found in the days of Hezekiah speaking words of lawlessness in Jerusalem. 

5 And the servants of Hezekiah accused him, and he made his escape to the region of Bethlehem. 

6 And they persuaded... And Belchira accused Isaiah and the prophets who were with him, 
saying: ‘ Isaiah and those who are with him prophesy against Jerusalem and against the cities of 
Judah that they shall be laid waste and (against the children of Judah and) Benjamin also that they 
shall go into captivity, and also against thee, O lord the king, that thou shalt go (ound) with hooks 

7, 8 and iron chains’: But they prophesy falsely against Israel and Judah. And Isaiah himself hath 
g said: ‘I see more than Moses the prophet.’ But Moses said: ‘No man can see God and live’: 
10 and Isaiah hath said: ‘I have seen God and behold I live.’ Know, therefore, O king, that he is 
lying. And Jerusalem also he hath called Sodom, and the princes of Judah and Jerusalem he hath 


they were 


smitten, &c. 1 Kings xxii. 24. 

Amada = Imlah. 
. 13. And he was. 4’ supplies. : 

Ahab, king in Samaria. Alamerem balala’aw E; ’Add(u) év Zeppoua Ge. For ‘Alam’=‘ Ahab’ see &? 
ii. 15. balala’aw = probably basala’aw, i.e. BaciMéws. The ‘-erem’ is explicable from év Seypopua tk? as ‘in Samaria’. 

14. Elijah is introduced here unexpectedly. 

of Téb6n of Gilead. Cf. 1 Kings xvii. 1 (LXX) 6 GceoBeirns ex OeaBav ths Tadadd, and Josephus, Azz. viii. 13. 2 
ex oAews OeceBavns ths Tadadiribos xwpas. This Thisbe is mentioned in Tobit i. 2. For the omission of 6 GeaBeirns 
cf. MS. A of the LXX. The Massoretic punctuation in 1 Kings xvii. 1 of ‘SWN = ‘of the sojourners of ’. 

prophesied regarding Ahaziah. 2 Kings i. 1-6. 

Leba Nasr. Corrupt for Salmanassar. Cf. 2 Bar. Ixii. 6 and 4 Ezra xiii. 4o. 

15. Gemarias #1; Jalerjas E; *Ia\\apias &&?; corruptly Joel E; Iodad Ge; Efrem 2". Here again the Latin 
version gives the easier reading. S.A. Cook, Journ. R. Asiatic Soc., Jan. 1901, p. 168, suggests that Joel is a 
corruption of Ebal and Efrem of Gerizim, or that Rephaim (Joshua xv. 8) and Jeruel (2 Chron. xx. 16) are referred to. 
Probably, however, Joel is corrupt for Israel, for which %& boldly substitutes the familiar phrase ‘ Efrem’ after ‘mount’. 

16. now he %'; now ibchira E (a); now Beyepd G2, &' makes Gemarias the brother of Zedekiah, E and &’ 
make Belchira, though in ver. 12 he is said to be his nephew. 

+Aguaront E; Gomorrha &? %'. Probably }W was misread 719Y (Cooke). If so, restore ‘Samaria’. 


III. 1. And Belchira recognized. ¢k? i. 
2. Alagar Zagar. i.e. Salmanassar. Cf. ii. 14. 
and a half. @?21. Cf. 2 Bar. Ixii. 5; Ixxvii. 19; Ixxviii. 1; 4 Ezra xii. go (Syr. and Arab.). > anda 
half E. 
mountains x? %'; ‘boundaries (?)’ E. Cf. LXX and Mass. in 2 Kings xvii. 6. 
Taz6n = Gozan. 2 Kings xvii. 6. ; f 
5. they persuaded (h?; ‘he persuaded’ E. Who the ‘they’ are is uncertain. Perhaps the false prophets 
persuaded Belchira. 
6. those E; ‘the prophets’ GH. 
against the children of Judah and. Restored from i’. 
with hooks and iron chains. Cf. 2 Chron. xxxiii. 11 (LX X ‘bonds’ not ‘ hooks’). Ue 
7. Judah +‘and Jerusalem’ %'; ‘and Benjamin they hate, and their word is evil against Judah and Israel’ G’. 
8-9. Cf. Origen, Jz Jesaiam Homil. i. 5‘ Aiunt ideo Isaiam esse sectum a populo quasi legem praevaricantem et 
extra scripturas annuntiantem. Scriptura enim dicit: “ Nemo videbit faciem meum et vivet.” Iste vero ait: “‘ Vidi 
Dominum Sabaoth.” Moses, aiunt, non vidit et tu vidisti? Et propter hoc eum secuerunt et condemnaverunt ut 
impium.’ Ye. 
9. No man, &c. Exod. xxxiil. 20. 
I have seen spe Ae he oe ee 
5 i ing. . ‘they are lying prophets’ E. , : 
Sp eal . Sodom, a CE ones ie Cf. Jerome, Comm. tn Tes. i. 10 ‘aiunt Hebraei ob duas causas 
interfectum Isaiam: quod principes Sodomorum et populum Gomorrhae €0s appellaverit, et quod, Domino dicente ad 
Mosen Non poteris videre faciem meam, iste ausus sit dicere Vidi dominum sedentem super thronum excelsum et 


elevatum.’ Cf. Jebam. 49 4. 


1105.2 161 M 


THE MARTYRDOM OF ISAIAH 3. 1o—5. 14 


declared to be the people of Gomorrah. And he brought many accusations against Isaiah and the 

11 prophets before Manasseh. But Beliar dwelt in the heart of Manasseh and in the heart of the 

12 princes of Judah and Benjamin and of the eunuchs and of the councillors of the king. And the 
words of Belchira pleased him [exceedingly], and he sent and seized Isaiah. : 

5 1b,2 And he sawed him asunder with a wood-saw. And when Isaiah was being sawn in sunder 

Balchira stood up, accusing him, and all the false prophets stood up, laughing and rejoicing because 

3 of Isaiah. And Balchira, with the aid of Mechémbéchtis, stood up before Isaiah, [laughing] 

4 deriding; And Belchira said to Isaiah: ‘ Say: “I have lied in all that I have spoken, and likewise 

5 the ways of Manasseh are good and right. And the ways also of Balchira and of his associates are 

6, 7 good.”” And this he said to him when he began to be sawn in sunder. But Isaiah was (absorbed) 

g ina vision of the Lord, and though his eyes were open, he saw them <not). And Balchira spake 

thus to Isaiah: ‘Say what I say unto thee and I will turn their heart, and I will compel Manasseh 

g and the princes of Judah and the people and all Jerusalem to reverence thee.’ And Isaiah answered 

and said: ‘So far as I have utterance (I say): Damned and accursed be thou and all thy powers and 

10, 11 all thy house. For thou canst not take (from me) aught save the skin of my body.’ And they 

12 seized and sawed in sunder Isaiah, the son of Amoz, with a wood-saw. And Manasseh and 

13 Balchira and the false prophets and the princes and the people [and] all stood looking on. And to 

the prophets who were with him he said before he had been sawn in sunder: ‘Go ye to the region 

14 of Tyre and Sidon; for for me only hath God mingled the cup. And when Isaiah was being 

sawn in sunder, he neither cried aloud nor wept, but his lips spake with the Holy Spirit until he 

was Sawn in twain. 


11. Beliar. See i. 9 (note). 
i2. exceedingly. FE only. 


V. 2. wood-saw. See note on ver. II. 

3. Balchira, with the aid of Mechémbéchiis. So all MSS. But the verbs following are in the plural. For 
Mechémbéchis see ii. 4. 

laughing, a doublet. 

4-8. Balchira 4 (or ‘ Beliar’ ac) tempts Isaiah. 

4. Cf. Ambrose, Comm. on Ps. exviii (ed. Bened. vol. i. 1124): ‘ferunt quod Esaiae, in carcere posito cum mole 
imminentis urgeretur exitii, dixisse diabolum: Dic quia non a Domino locutus es, quae dixisti, et omnium in te mentes 
affectusque mutabo, ut qui indignantur iniuriam absolutionem in te conferant.’ y 

7. saw...not. Negative supplied as in Asc. Isa, vi. 10. 

8. Balchira 4c. Milchiras’ a. See ii. 12 (note). 

g. So far... accursed 4. ‘So far as I am concerned, accursed—that is to say—’ a. The curse is against the false 
prophet as man (‘house’) and as an emissary of Satan (‘powers’). Cf. xard0eya oor, MeAxia evdorpodira, diaBore, 
Gk. Leg. iii. 18. Cf. also Matt. xvi. 23. 

II. a wood-saw. For the sawing asunder of Isaiah cf. Justin Martyr, Dzadl. cum Tryph. cxx. 14,15; Tert. De 
Patientia, 14 ‘ His patientiae viribus secatur Esaias et de Domino non secat’; Scorpiace 8. A‘ wooden saw’ E, Gk. Leg. 
iii. 19, Justin, Dad. c. Tryph. cxx. 14,15 wept rov Odvatov ‘Hoaiov, dv pion Evdivo empicare, &c., is a misunderstanding of 
YY VW, which is a saw for sawing wood, whether of iron or any other metal. Gs. Leg. iii. 14 has mpiow ovdnpa. 

1z, and—an intrusion. 

13. the cup. Cf. Matt. xx. 22. 

14. neither cried aloud nor wept. Cf. ‘patientiae viribus,’ Tert. 2. c. 


162, 


BOOK OF ENOCH 
INTRODUCTION 


§ I. SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE Book. 


IT is seldom that authors attain to the immortality which they hope for, and it is still more 
seldom that anonymous authors achieve this distinction. And yet it is just such a distinction that 
the authors of the Book of Enoch have achieved. That such should be ultimately his lot was the 
deep-rooted conviction of one of this literary circle. He looked forward (civ. 11-12) to the time 
when his writings would be translated into various languages, and become to the righteous ‘a cause 
of joy and uprightness and much wisdom’. This hope was to a large degree realized in the centuries 
immediately preceding and following the Christian era, when the currency of these apocalyptic 
writings was very widespread, because they almost alone represented the advance of the higher 
theology in Judaism, which culminated in Christianity... But our book contained much of a question- 
able character, and from the fourth century of our era onward it fell into discredit ; and under the 
ban of such authorities as Hilary, Jerome, and Augustine, it gradually passed out of circulation, 
and became lost to the knowledge of Western Christendom till over a century ago, when an Ethiopic 
version of the work was found in Abyssinia by Bruce, who brought home three MSS. of it, from one 
of which Laurence made the first modern translation of Enoch. It was not, however, till recent 
years that the Book of Enoch and similar works have begun to come into their own owing to their 
immeasurable value as being practically the only historical memorials of the religious development | 
of Judaism from 200 B. C. to 100 A. D., and particularly of the development of that side of Judaism, 
to which historically Christendom in large measure owes its existence. 

The Book of Enoch is for the history of theological development the most important pseudepi- 
graph of the first two centuries B.C. Some of its authors—and there were many—belonged to the: 
true succession of the prophets, and it was simply owing to the evil character of the period, in which 
their lot was cast, that these enthusiasts and mystics, exhibiting on occasions the inspiration of the 
O.T. prophets, were obliged to issue their works under the aegis of some ancient name. The Law 
which claimed to be the highest and final word from God could tolerate no fresh message from God, 
and so, when men were moved by the Spirit of God to make known their visions relating to the 
past, the present, and the future, and to proclaim the higher ethical truths they had won, they could 
not do so openly, but were forced to resort to pseudonymous publication. ‘ ; | 

To describe in short compass the Book of Enoch is impossible. It comes from many writers | 
and almost as many periods, It touches upon every subject that could have arisen in the ancient 
schools of the prophets, but naturally it deals with these subjects in an advanced stage of develop-, 
ment. Nearly every religious idea appears in a variety of forms, and, if these are studied in relation \ 
to their contexts and dates, we cannot fail to observe that in the age to which the Enoch literature 
belongs there is movement everywhere, and nowhere dogmatic fixity and finality. And though at | 
times the movement may be reactionary, yet the general trend is onward and upward. _In fact the 
history of the development of the higher theology during the two centuries before the Christian era 
could not be written without the Book of Enoch. ae 

From what has been already said it is clear that no unity of time, authorship, or teaching is to | 
be looked for. Indeed, certain considerable portions of the book belonged. originally not to the ' 
Enoch literature at all, but to an earlier work, i.e. the Book of Noah, which probably exhibited in 
some degree the syncretism of the work into which it was subsequently incorporated. This Book 
of Noah clearly embraced chapters vi-xi, liv. 7—lv. 2, 1x, Ixv—lxix. 25, cvi—cvii.? 


1 Nearly all the writers of the New Testament were familiar with it, and were more or less influenced by it in 
thowgitt Gi tichion. It is quoted as a genuine production of Enoch by St. Jude, and as Scripture by St. Barnabas. 
The authors of the Book of Jubilees, the Apocalypse of Baruch, and 4 Ezra, laid it under contribution. With the 
earlier Fathers and Apologists it had all the weight of a canonical book. ; Lp. 

2 Portions have been preserved in Jubilees vii. 20-39, x. I-15, but the date of this Noachic literature is at latest 


-Maccabean. 
nS 16 5 M 2 


BOOK OF ENOCH 


As regards the Enoch elements, the oldest portions of it are likewise pre-Maccabean, i.e. 
xii-xxxvi, and probably xc. 1-10, xci. 12-17, i. e. the Apocalypse of Weeks. The Dream Visions, 
i.e. Ixxxiii-xc, were in all probability written when Judas the Maccabee was still warring, 
165-161 B.C., Ixxii-Ixxxii before 110 B.C., the Parables, xxxvii-Ixxi and xci-civ, 105-64 Bit. 

The authors of all the sections belong to the Chasids or their successors the Pharisees. 

Conflicting views are advanced on the Messiah, the Messianic kingdom, the origin of sin, Sheol, 
the final judgement, the resurrection, and the nature of the future life. There is an elaborate 
angelology and demonology, and much space is devoted to the calendar, and the heavenly bodies 
and their movements. Babylonian influences are here manifest and in a slight degree Greek. 

The Book of Enoch, like the Book of Daniel, was written originally partly in Aramaic and 
partly in Hebrew. From an Aramaic original is derived vi-xxxvi, and possibly Ixxxiii—xc, while 
the rest of the book comes from a Hebrew original. To determine these questions categorically is 


a task of no little difficulty, seeing that for four-fifths of the text we have only a translation of 


a translation, and that such close affinities exist between Hebrew and Aramaic. For the 
resemblances between the two languages are so great that frequently retranslation from the Ethiopic 
into either is sufficient to explain corruptions in the former. There has accordingly been great 
divergence of opinion on this question, but in the opinion of the present writer, who has spent 
considerable time on the problem, the balance of evidence is decidedly in favour of the view 
above stated. 

In the course of his studies it suddenly dawned upon the writer that much of the text was 


| originally written in verse. This discovery has frequently proved helpful in the criticism of difficult 


passages, and the recovery of the original in a multitude of cases. 


$2. THE TITLE, 


Our book appears under various titles, which may be briefly enumerated as follows: 

1°. Enoch. Jude 14 empopjrevoey .. « EBdopos amd "Addy ’Evay dEyav. 

Ep. Barn. ix. 3 @s Evay déyeu. 

Clem. Alex. Eclog. Proph. (Dindorf iii. 456) 6 Aamir d€yer uoddéwv 7’ Evdy : also in ili. 474. 

Origen, Zz Joannem vi. 25 os év tO “Evdyx yéypanrar: Contra Celsum v. 54 tov ev TO "Evax 
VEY PAppLevarv. 

Tertullian, De Cultu Fem.ii. 20 ‘ut Enoch refert’ ; De /dol. iv ‘Enoch praedicens’ xv ; ‘ Spiritus 
. « + praececinit per... Enoch. 

Anatolius of Laodicaea (cited by Eus. 1. £. vii. 32. 19 ra év T@’Evox pabijpara). 

2°, The Books of Enoch. This is probably the oldest title. The fifth section of the book itself 
opens with the words: xcii. 1 ‘The book written by Enoch’. cviii. 1 begins : ‘ Another book which 
Enoch wrote. In1xxxii.1 Enoch says to Methuselah: ‘ All these things Iam recounting to thee... 
and given thee books concerning all these: so preserve . . . the books from thy father’s hands.’ xiv. 1 
‘The book of the words of righteousness’. The third section, i. e. xxii. 1, begins ‘The book of the 
courses of the luminaries’. These passages imply a plurality of books. 

But though apparently the oldest title, it has not the oldest independent attestation. Itis found 
in the following works: 

T. Jud. xviii. 1 (@. A S*) év BiBrous "Eveyx Tod dixatov, 

T. Lev. x. 5 (A) = kades yéyparrat év BiBAots ’Evdy. 

Origen, Contra Celsum v. 54 ta enmvyeypappéva tod “Evax BiBdrta: Ln Num. Homil. xxviii. 2 
‘In libellis qui appellantur Enoch’. . 

Pistis Sophia ‘ea in secundo libro teu, quae scripsit Enoch’. 

Syncellus (Chronographia, ed. Dind.), i. 19 é« rod mpérov BiBAlov rod ’Evdy. The same phrase 
recurs ini. 20,48. Cf. i. 42 éx tod mpérov Adyou ’Evdyx. “Here and in the preceding work the division 
of Enoch into books is clearly recognized. There were five such divisions or books ; see § 6. 

3°. Book of Enoch. This title is found in: 

T. Levi x. 5 (a, deg) xaOas mepiexes 7 (> @bf) BiBros ’Evay 0d duxaiov. 

Origen, De Princ. i. 3. 3 ‘In Enoch libro’: iv. 35 ‘in libro suo Enoch ita ait’. 

Hilary, Comment. in Ps. cxxxii. 3 ‘ Fertur id de quo etiam nescio cuius liber exstat’. 

ae De Viris illustr. iv ‘De libro Enoch qui apocryphus est’. 

Syncellus, of. cit. i. 60 ws &v TH BiBA® atrod "Evax péperar. B is ti 
one of the books of Enoch, and so ee under 2°. is meiner atime 

3°. Words of Enoch. This title has the oldest external attestation. Jub. xxi. 10, ‘For thus 
ole Aas it written in the books of my forefathers and in the words of Enoch, and in the words 
of Noah. 

164 


INTRODUCTION 


ne le Benj. ix, I amd Aoyiwy (= Adywv B-d) ’Evadx rod duxaiov. This title finds some justification 
in I Enoch i, 1 ‘ words of the blessing of Enoch’ ; xiv. 1 ‘ book of the words of righteousness.’ 


4°. Writing of Enoch: 
T. Lev. xiv. 1 (8 A), éyvwv and ypapijs Evdx. See also in T. Sim. v. 4, T. Naph. iv. 1. ° 


Tertullian, De Cultu Fem. i. 3 ‘scio scripturam Enoch . . . cum Enoch eadem scriptura etiam 
de domino praedicarit, 


§ 3. ITs CANONICITY. 


The citations of Enoch by the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs and by the Book of 
Jubilees shows that at the close of the second century B.C., and during the first century B.C., this 
book was regarded in certain circles as inspired. When we come down to the first century A.D., 
we find that it is recognized as Scripture by Jude. See under § 2, 1° In the next century this 
recognition is given amply in the Ep, Barnabas xvi. 5 Aéyer yap 7 ypady ; by Athenagoras, Legatio 
pro Christianis 24 % tots mpopyras exmepornra: (referring to Enoch); in the third century by Clem. 
Alex. Eclog. Prophet. ii, see § 2, 1°; by Irenaeus iv. 16. 2 ‘Enoch... placens Deo... legatione ad 
angelos fungebatur’; by Tertullian, De Cultu Fem. i. 3, De Idol. xv, see § 2, 1°; by Zosimus of 
Panopolis, quoted in Syncellus (Dind. i. 24) rodro oty epacav ai apxata: cal ai Oetar ypapat, Ste dyyedot 
Ties eTMeOUpnoay Tov yuvarkGyv. After the third century the Book of Enoch fell into discredit and 
gradually passed out of circulation. 


4s DHE MoS, 


a. Hume No. 4. Large quarto. 40 foll. 3 cols. 105 chapters. Latter half of eighteenth century. Enoch 
only. 
b. Bodley, No. 5. Large quarto. 141 foll. 3 cols. Eighteenth century (?). Enoch (98 chapters), Job, 
Isaiah, Twelve Minor Prophets, Proverbs, Wisdom, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Daniel. 
c. Frankfort MS. Rupp. II 1. 34x30 cm. 181 foll. 3 cols. Eighteenth century. In several hands. 
Enoch (98 chapters), Job, Octateuch. 

Curzon MS. Quarto. gr foll. 2 cols. Enoch (102 chapters), Job, Daniel, 4 Ezra, Sirach. 

Curzon MS.. Small quarto. tor foll. 2cols. Marginal notes from another hand. Enoch (98 chapters ?), 
Samuel, Kings, and Apocryphal book. 

jf. British Museum. Add. 24185 (Wright’s Catalogue, 1877, No.5). 2 cols. of 23 lines. Nineteenth century. 
Enoch only. 106 chapters. 

Brit. Mus. Orient. 485 (Wright, No. 6). 190 foll. 23x19 cm. 2 cols. of 23 or 24 lines. First half of 
sixteenth century. Enoch (without division into chapters), Book of Jubilees. On foll. 1688-177 
a duplicate of chapters xcvii. 6°-cviii. 10 is inserted from another MS. akin to g._ See next MS. 

ww. This MS. consists only of xcvii. 6>-cviii. 10, and is found in foll. 1688-1774 of g. It is inserted between 
the last word and the last but one of xci. 6. It is written by the same scribe, but the text though 
belonging to the best type differs from g. 

h. Brit. Mus. Orient. 484 (Wright, No. 7). 3 cols. of 50 or 51 lines. Eighteenth century. Enoch (108 
chapters), Octateuch, Jeremiah, Daniel, Ezekiel, 1-4 Ezra, Tobit, Judith, Esther, Sirach. 

7. Brit. Mus. Orient. 486 (Wright, No. 8). 3 cols. of 29 lines. Eighteenth century. Chapters i-lx. 13 
missing. Nos. of remaining chapters erased. Enoch, Samuel, Kings, Jeremiah, Sirach. 

k. Brit. Mus. Orient. 490 (Wright, No. 12). 3 cols. of go lines. Eighteenth century. Enoch (107 chapters), 

. Job, Daniel, 1 Ezra, Isaiah, Twelve Minor Prophets. ; 

1. Brit. Mus. 24990 (Wright, No. 13). 3 cols. of 31 lines. Eighteenth century. Enoch (divided into 
chapters, but no numbers supplied), Job, Books ascribed to Solomon, Isaiah, Twelve Minor Prophets, 
Daniel. 

m. Brit. Mus. Orient. 491 (Wright, No. 15). 219 foll. 40x32 cm. 3 cols. of 27 lines. Eighteenth century. 
Enoch (without division into chapters), Job, Twelve Minor Prophets, Tobit, Judith, Esther, Maccabees. 

n. Brit. Mus. Orient. 492 (Wright, No. 16). 3 cols. of 30 lines. Eighteenth century. Enoch (87 chapters), 
Books ascribed to Solomon, Jeremiah, r Ezra, Canticles, Sirach, Judith, Esther, Tobit. ery it 

9. Brit. Mus. Orient. 499 (Wright, No. 23). 3 cols. of 31 lines. Eighteenth century. Sirach, Daniel, Enoch 
(x06 chapters), Isaiah, Twelve Minor Prophets. 

p. Formerly in the possession of Lord Crawford—now in the Rylands Collection. 67 foll. 39x33 cm. 
3 cols. Seventeenth century. Enoch and other books. 

g. Berlin MS. Peterm. I. Nachtr. No. 29 (Dillmann’s Cat. 1). 167 foll. 17x14cm. 2 cols, of 13 to 14 
lines. Sixteenth century. Without division into chapters. Enoch only. — ’ 

ry. Abbadianus 16 (vid. Cat. raison. de mss. éhiop. appartenani a A, d’ Abbadie, Paris, 1859). Nineteenth 
century. Enoch (77 chapters) and other works. This is a poor MS., but it exhibits a few good 
readings. 

5. i edianie 30. Eighteenth century. Enoch and other works. This is a poor MS., but has some 
notably good readings. 


®& 


Og 


165 


BOOK OF ENOCH 


/, Abbadianus 35. 40x35 cm. 3 cols. of 38 to 39 lines. Seventeenth century. There are many erasures 
and corrections and marginal notes. The latter belong to the later type of text, and are designated 
as t?. The division into chapters is marked in the margin on the first few folios. Enoch, Job, 
Samuel 1 and 2, Kings, Chronicles, Books ascribed to Solomon, Prophets, Sirach, 1-4 Ezra, Tobit, 
Judith, Esther. 

wu. Abbadianus 55. 191 foll. 51x39 cm. 3 Cols. of 48 to 50 lines. 
century. Enoch (without division into chapters) and other works. 
after chapter 1xxxill. 

v. Abbadianus 99. 70 foll. 23x17 cm. 2 cols. Nineteenth century. Copy made for M. d’Abbadie 

from a MS. in high estimation among the native scholars. This MS. has all the bad characteristics of 
the later type of text, but has some excellent readings. Enoch only. 

Abbadianus 197. 157 foll. 26x23 cm. 3 cols. of 29 lines. Seventeenth or eighteenth century, Enoch 

(98 chapters) and other works. 

x. Vatican MS. 71 (cf. Mai, Script. veterum nova collectio, Romae, 1831, tom. v. 2, p. 100). 27 foll. 3 cols. 

of 32 lines. Seventeenth century. Enoch only. 98 chapters. 

Munich MS. 30. 61 foll. 25x15 cm. 2 cols. of 20 to 28 lines. Seventeenth century. Division into 

_ chapters only at the beginning. Enoch only. 

z. Paris MS. 50 (see Zotenberg’s Cat.). Seventeenth century. Enoch (division into chapters only at the 
beginning) and other works. 

ze. Paris MS. 49. Eighteenth century. Copy of 4. 

a. Garrett MS. 17x12cm. 2 cols. of 22 lines. Nineteenth or end of eighteenth century. Enoch only. 


2. Westenholz MS. 71 foll., of which first and last two are empty. 2 cols. of 24 lines. Eighteenth century. 
106 chapters. Enoch only. 


Possibly as early as the fifteenth 
Text of Enoch much abbreviated 


wv. 


Relations of the Ethiopic MSS. 


(a) There are two forms of text, a, 8, of which 8 is late and secondary. a is represented by 
g,guigtu (and in some degree by z), while 8, which owes its origin to native scholars of the sixteenth 
and seventeenth centuries, is represented by all the remaining MSS. The result of their labours has 
been on the whole disastrous, as these revisers had neither the knowledge of the subject-matter nor 
yet critical materials to guide them as to the true form of the text. The attestation, however, of 
neither group is uniform; especially is this so with a, which only once perhaps in twenty cases is 
undivided in its testimony. Thus it appears that the recension was not the work of a few years, 
ee Sp rather a process which culminated in such a text as we find in #8, and particularly in 
the -v. 

(6) B or groups in 8 at times preserve the original text, where a is secondary. 

(c) The character and affinities of the chief MSS. 

g. Of the MSS. of a, g is decidedly the best all-round MS. It has been made the basis, 
so far as any single MS. can, of my text. It, however, exhibits much strange orthography and bad 
grammar. 

1£- This MS. (already described under Lzhiopic MSS.) shows certain idiosyncrasies in ciii. 9-15, 
where it uses the first person over against the third in the other MSS. On the whole it is most 
nearly related to g. 

m. This MS. is in some respects the weakest of the older group. It attaches itself so closely to 
&, that we must assume its having come under its influence. In the majority of its unique readings 
1& is unaccompanied by 77, which, however, has many affinities with it. 

g. Though teeming with errors in the way of additions, corruptions, and omissions, this MS. 
contains a larger number of unique original readings than any other used in our text. It approxi- 
mates more closely to g,gm than to ¢u. 

_. 4. This is a most interesting MS. as it gives the older type of reading in the text, and the later 
either over erasures or in the margin with the rejected words in the text bracketed. The corrector 
has not, however, done his work thoroughly. Moreover, in some cases the correction represents a 
return to the older text. ¢ is closely connected with z. 

i preterm seg ee oes wa aa after hatin The omissions are capriciously made ; 
the entire destruction of the oe Still, as 2 Bay al abl MS. 1 faith ee ae 
aon : , as 2 1s a valuable MS. I faithfully record its omissions and 

z. Of the B class of MSS. x is by far the best. Indeed, though embodying in the main the 
second type of text, it attests more unique and original readings in i-xxxii than m or ¢ or uw. Also 
at times, it alone of the 8 class supports various MSS. of the first class in the true reading. 


166 


INTRODUCTION 


§5- THE ANCIENT VERSIONS. 
THE GREEK VERSIONS. 


_ The Greek Versions have only in part been preserved. Chapters i-xxxii. 6 and xix, 3-xxi. 9 
in a duplicate form were discovered in 1886-7 at Akhmim by the Mission Archéologique Francaise 
at Cairo, and published by M. Bouriant in 1892. They are designated G8, and as G8! and G2? in the 
case of the duplicate passage. Large fragments have been preserved in Syncellus—vi-x. 14, xv. 8— 
Xvi. I; and viii. 4-ix. 4 in a duplicate form. These are designated G*, and as G*!, G*? in the case 
of the duplicate passage. Another fragment is found in a Vatican Greek MS., No. 1809, written 
in tachygraphic characters. For Greek quotations from 1 Exach, see § 10 (0, c). 


The relations of the G* and G§ to each other and to E (the Ethiopic Version). 


(2) G* is more original than G&. Though closely related these two fragments exhibit marks of 
independence. G* has in several passages a different and undoubtedly better order of text. Thus 
it rightly places vii. 3-5 of G8 (or rather its equivalent of vii. 3-5) after viii. 3 of Gt. Again in viii. 3 
G§ is very defective compared with G*. The additional matter in G* could not have been written by. 
a Greek, as in every instance the office constitutes when translated into Aramaica play on the name 
of the angel who discharges the office. Similarly in vi. 7 the order of the angels’ names is different, 
and G* is here again preferable to GSE. Moreover, in viii. 4; ix.g; x. 2, 4, GS has a fuller and 
more original reading than G§ E. Finally G* preserves several right readings over against GSE. See 
x aT, £4. 

(2) Relations of Gsand G8 to E, E and Gare more closely related than E and G’, or G* and 
Gs. They have the same corruptions over against the reading of G* in x. 7, 11, 14; xiv. 8, 18; 
RU. OS xvi ys XU. 45) XXV. 5S Xxviil. 2. 

On the other hand, E preserves certain original readings lost by GS and vice versa. 

(c) From the above facts it follows that G8’ and E spring from a common ancestor which 
we may designate x, and that this + and G® proceed ultimately from the same original, the first 
Greek translation of the Book of Enoch, though the evidence postulates the existence of duplicate 
renderings in this translation, x adopting one rendering and G* the other. In some cases x adopted 
both, which were reproduced respectively by G? and E. In some cases there may have been variants 
in the Semitic original. Hence the genealogy of the above documents might be represented thus: 


Original Greek Translation from the Semitic 
| 


| | 
6 G3 








THE LATIN VERSION. 


The Latin Fragment, which constitutes a very imperfect reproduction of cvi. 1-18, was 
discovered in 1893 in the British Museum by Dr. James. In the same year he issued it in the 
Cambridge Texts and Studies, 11, No. 3, Apocrypha Anecdota, pp: 146-50. This MS. seems to 
point to a Latin translation of Enoch, and shows no signs of being an excerpt from a collection 
of excerpts. 

For Latin quotations see under § 10 (c). 


THE ETHIOPIC VERSION. 


The Ethiopic Version has been preserved in twenty-nine MSS. of which fifteen are to be 
found in England, eight in France, four in Germany, one in Italy, and one in Americas Of these 
MSS. there are only three of which my knowledge is indirect and slight, g and z, z*. Of these 
2» is of no account as it is an exact transcript of 0. 

The division of Enoch into chapters was made apparently in the sixteenth century. The 
division into 108 chapters was made by Dillmann without MS. authority, and has been followed 
by all subsequent scholars. This division is indeed found in one MS., i.e. Z, but it was unknown 
to Dillmann when he made his text. Moreover, the chapters in h vary frequently in length from 


those in Dillmann’s text. 
167 


BOOK OF ENOCH 


§ 6. THE DIFFERENT ELEMENTS IN THE BOOK OF ENOCH. 


The Book of Enoch was intended by its final editor to consist of five Sections, like the 
Pentateuch, the Psalms, Proverbs, Sirach, and many other Jewish works. These consist of 
i-xxxvi, xxxvii-lxxi, lxxii-Ixxxii, ]xxxiii-xc, xci-cviii. Behind this apparently artificial. division 
lies a real difference as to authorship, system of thought, and date. When I edited my first 
edition of Enoch in 1893 it was necessary for me to go at great length into the differentiae marking 
these divisions, since the accepted criticism of the day regarded i—xxxvi, lxxii—civ as forming the 
groundwork, and proceeding from one and the same author. Since that ‘date this. impossible 
hypothesis has vanished from the field of criticism. My task here is, thereforé, no longer of a polemical 
nature, but simply to determine so far as possible the extent, character, and date of the various 
independent writings embodied in this work. The various sections will now be dealt with in the 
order of their occurrence. 

Fragments of the Book of Noah. But before we enter on the criticism of the various elements 
in the book, we should observe first of all that it contains fragments of an earlier work—entitled 
the Book of Noah. Of the existence of this book we know independently from the Book of 
Jubilees x. 13, xxi. 10, and later sources. But even if we had possessed no independent reference 
to such a book, we could have had no doubt as to its existence; for the contents of chapters Ix, 
Ixv—lxix. 25 prove conclusively that they are from this source ; also cvi-cvii. Furthermore, vi—xi! 
are derived from the same work. These latter chapters never refer to Enoch, but to Noah. More- 
over, where the author of Jubilees in vii. 20-25 describes the laws laid down by Noah for his 
children, and Noah’s accounts of the evils that had brought the Flood upon the earth, he borrows 
not only the ideas, but at times the very phraseology of these chapters. Finally, we may observe 
that chapters Ixxxviii-lxxxix. 1 presuppose a minute acquaintance with chapter x. liv. 7-lv. 2 
probably belong to the same source. The Noachic fragments preserved in this book are thus: 
vi-xi, liv—lv. 2, Ix, Ixv—lxix. 25, cvi-cvii. 

These facts throw some light on the strange vicissitudes to which even the traditional legends 
were subject. Thus it would appear that the Noah saga is older than the Enoch, and that the 
latter was built up on the débris of the former. 

Having now disposed of the earlier materials utilized by the writers of the different Sections 
of Enoch, we shall now proceed to deal with the five Sections or Books in the order of their 
occurrence. 


SECTION I, i-xxxvi. We have already seen that vi-xi belonged originally to the Book of 
Noah ; xii—xvi, on the other hand, are a vision or visions of Enoch in which he intercedes on behalf 
of Azazel and the Watchers. | These visions are preserved in a fragmentary form, and not in 
their original order—a fact which is most probably due to the editor of the whole work, since the 
same dislocation of the text recurs in Ixxviii-Ixxx and xci-xciii. The original order of xii—xvi was, 
so far as the present fragmentary text goes: xiv. 1... xiii. 1-2, xiii. 8, Mil. 8, Xilie4-10,.xivo2— 
Xvi. 2, xii. 4-6 || xvi. 3-4. xii. 1-2 is an editorial introduction. 

__ This portion of our text began obviously with the words: xiv. 1 ‘The book of the words of 
righteousness, and of the reprimand of the eternal Watchers’. Then came a request on the part 
of Azazel that Enoch should intercede for him. This request was acceded to on the part of Enoch, 
who in a vision received Gdd’s judgement on Azazel. But both the request and the vision are 
lost. In xiii. 1-2, however, the answer to Azazel’s request is given in the divine doom announced 
by Enoch. Next Enoch is besought by the Watchers to intercede for them, xiii. 3, xii. 3, Xili. 4-7. 
Thereupon Enoch has a vision regarding them, xiii. 8, which he recounts to them, xiii. 9-10, 
Xv. 2-xvi. 2. Finally the section closes with the message of doom, which Enoch is bidden to take 
to the Watchers, xvi. 3-4. Of xvi. 3-4 there is a doublet, xii. 4-6, which is more original than 
XVi. 3-4. 

xvii-xix stand by themselves, exhibiting, as they do, strong traces of Greek influences in their 
description of the underworld, and yet showing a close affinity to xx-xxxvi, since xviii. 6-g is 
a doublet of xxiv. 1-3, xviii. 11 of xxi. 7-10, xviii. 12-16 of xxi. 1-6 ; XixX. 2, moreover, reflects the 
same view as x. 14. 

XX-XXxXvi come apparently from one and the same author: the functions ascribed to the arch- 
angels in xx are tolerably borne out in xxi-xxxvi. But since only four of the seven archangels 


mentioned in xx are dealt with in XXi-xxxvi, it is possible that a considerable passage was 
early lost, ; 


* Even these chapters are composite; for the i isti i i 
. 3 fo. y are a conflation of two distinct cycles of myths relating respectivel 
c BE and Azazel (see my second edition, pp. 13-14 notes), and this conflation was anterior to the date of the 
ream Visions, which presuppose the existence of these chapters in their present form, or at all events of chapter x. 


168 


INTRODUCTION 


I-v now call for treatment. These chapters are connected. in phraseology with every section 
of the book save Ixxii-Ixxxii. (See my edition, p. 2 sq.) Thus the phrase ‘ he took up his parable’ i. 2 
suggests a connexion with xxxvii-lxxi, but this may be a mere coincidence, since the writer is here 
consciously influenced by Num. xxiii-xxiv, where the phrase recurs several times. These chapters 
moreover, appear to be of composite origin. ii-v seem to be a unity. But I see no satisfactory 
solution of the problem. 
_ To sum up. i-xxxvi may be analysed into the following independent elements, i-v, v—xi, 
Xli-Xvi, xvii-xix, Xxx-xxxvi. When the Book of Jubilees was written we shall see that vi-xxxvi 
had already been put together. 


_ SECTION II. xxxvii-lxxi. As all critics are now agreed that the Parables are distinct in 
origin from the rest of the book, [ will simply. refer the reader here to my edition, pp. 65 sq., for | 
-some of the grounds for this conclusion. 

XxXxvii-]xxi have been handed down in a fragmentary condition, and many of the problems 
they suggest can only be tentatively solved or merely stated. 
; xxxvii-Ixxi consist in the main of three Parables, xxxviii-xliv, xlv—lvii, lviiitxix. These are | 
introduced by xxxvii and concluded by Ixx, which describes Enoch’s final translation in terms 
of that of Elijah. 1xxi, which contains two visions received in his lifetime, belongs to one of | 
the three Parables. We have already seen that liv. 7-lv. 2, lx, Ixv-Ixix. 25, are interpolated from 
the ancient Book of Noah. a 

Behind the Parables there appear to lie two sources, as Beer suggested though he did not work 
out his suggestion. The one was the ‘Son of Man’ source, in which the angelic interpreter was 
‘the angel who went with me’: i.e. xl. 3-7, xlvi-xlviii. 7, lii. 3-4, xi. 3-4, lxii. 2—-Ixiii, lxix. 26-9, 
Ixx-Ixxi, and the other ‘ the Elect One’ source, in which the angelic interpreter was ‘the angel of 
peace’: i.e. xxxviii-xxxix, xl. 1-2, 8-10, xli. 1-2, 9, xlv, xlviii. 8-10, I-lii, 1-2, 5-9, liti-liv. 6, 
lv. 3-Ivii, Ixi. 1-2, 5—13, Ixii. 1. “See my.edition, pp. 64-5. 


SECTION III. 1Ixxii-Ixxxii. Chapter xxii introduces a scientific treatise. In this treatise the 
writer attempts to bring the many. utterances in the O.T. regarding physical phenomena into one 
system. The sole aim of his book is to give the laws of the heavenly bodies, and this object 
he pursues undeviatingly to Ixxix. 1, where it is said that his treatise is finished. Through all these 
chapters there is not a single ethical reference. The author’s interest is scientific, and, like the 
author of Jubilees in vi. 32-6, he upholds the accuracy of the sun and stars as dividers of time, 
Ixxiv. 12. And this order is inflexible and will not change till the new creation, Ixxii. 1. But in 
ixxx. 2-8 the interest is ethical and nothing else, and though it recognizes an order of nature, this order 
is more conspicuous in its breach than in its observance. Ixxx. 2-8 appears then to be an addi- 
tion. Nor, again, can Ixxxi belong to Ixxii-Ixxxii. Whereas the blessing of Ixxii-]xxix, ]xxxii is 
for the man who knows the right reckoning of the years, the blessing of 1xxxi. 4 is for the man ° who 
dies in righteousness’. 1xxxi is of the nature of a mosaic and may come from the hand of the editor 
of the complete Enoch. Finally 1xxxii stood originally before Ixxix. 6- “Such Gs they... eeketen 
of every luminary which Uriel .. . showed unto me’. After the long disquisition on the stars 
in lxxxii, the first words in Ixxix. 1 come in most appropriately: ‘I have shown thee everything, 
and the law of all the stars of the heaven is completed. It Ixxxii did net precede, these words could 
not be justified. For like dislocations cf. xii-xvi, Xci-XClil. 

Thus the original order of this Section was: Ixxii-Ixxviii, Ixxxii, lxxix. For a full discussion 
of this Section and its independence of i-xxxvi and the knowledge it implies of the Calendar, 
see my edition, pp. 147-50. 


SEcTION IV. Ixxxiii-xc. This is the most complete and self-consistent of all the Sections, 
and has suffered least from the hand of the interpolator. For passages that have suffered in the 
course of transmission see xc. 19, which I have restored before xc. 14: also Ixxxix. 48.. “In. xc, 
yu. 13-15 are a doublet of vv. 16-18. 

‘ixxxiii-xc is of different authorship to vi-xxxvi. (1) The descent of the Watchers in 
Ixxxvi. 1-3 differs from that in vi. (2) The throne of judgement is in Palestine in xc. 20-6, but in 
the N.W. in the midst of the Seven Mountains in xviii. 8, xxv. 3. (3) The scene of the kingdom in 
Ixxxiii-xc is the New Jerusalem set up by God Himself: in i-xxxvi it is Jerusalem and the 
earth anchanged though purified, x. 18, 20. (4) Ixxxiii-xc are only visions assigned to Enoch's 
earlier and unwedded life: vi-xxxviare accounts of actual bodily translations and are assigned to his 
later life. If these two Sections were from one and the same author, and that an ascetic, exactly 
the converse would have been the case. For other grounds see my edition, pp. 179 sq. 

169 


BOOK OF ENOCH . 


Identity of authorship appears, therefore, to be impossible ; but the similarities in phraseology 
and idea (see of. cit.) prove that one of the authors had the work of the other before him. Of the 
two Sections there is no room for doubt that Ixxxiii—xc is the later. 


SECTION V. xci-civ. Critical Structure. This Section is in the main complete and self- 
consistent. It has, however, suffered at the hands of the editor of the entire work in the way of 
direct interpolation and of severe dislocations of the text. We have already seen his handiwork in 
the case of xii-xvi and Ixxviii-Ixxxii. The dislocations of the text are a remarkable feature in this 
Section, and I cannot see any adequate explanation. The editor incorporated an earlier work—the 
Apocalypse of Weeks—into his text, xciii. 1-10, xci. 13-17, the former part dealing with the first 
seven weeks of the world’s history and the latter with the last three. Taken together these 
form an independent whole. But this is not all. Since this Section is of different authorship. to 
the other Sections of the book it is obvious that it began originally with xcii. 1, ‘ Written by 
Enoch the scribe, &c. On xcii follows xci. 1-10, 18-19 as a natural sequel, where Enoch summons 
his children to receive his parting words. Then comes the Apocalypse of Weeks: xciii. I-10, 
xci.12-17. Thus the original order of the book is xcii, xci. 1-10, 18-19, xciii. I-10, xci. 12-17, XCiv. 

Relation to vi-xxxvi. At first sight the evidence for the unity of authorship of these two 
Sections is very great. They have many phrases in common. In each there are references to 
the law, the eating of blood, and to the regularity of nature. There is no hint of a Messiah in either. 
There are other resemblances but they are seeming and not real. On the other hand, in vi-xxxvi 
the Messianic kingdom is eternal, in xci-civ it is temporary, if the Apocalypse of Weeks is taken 
to be a constituent part of xci-civ. In the former the final judgement is held before the establish- 
ment of the kingdom, x. 12, xvi. I, in the latter at the close of the temporary kingdom (xciii. 1-10, 
xci. I-10). Whereas the resurrection in vi-xxxvi is a resuscitation to a temporary blessedness, 
X. 17, xxv. 5, in the latter it is not to the temporary kingdom spoken of in xci. 13, 14, xcvi. 8, but 
to one of eternal blessedness subsequent to the final judgement, c. 4,5. Whereas the resurrection 
in vi-xxxvi is a resuscitation in a physical body, in xci—civ it is a resurrection in a spiritual body, 
xcii. 3, 4, civ. 2, 6. In the latter there is a resurrection of the righteous only: not so in the 
former. For other grounds see my edition, 219 sq. 

Relation to \xxxiii-xc. In xci-civ the Messianic kingdom is temporary in duration but not so 
in Ixxxiii-xc: in the former the final judgement is consummated at the close of the kingdom, 
in the latter at its beginning. In xci-civ there is a resurrection of the righteous only ; in Ixxxiii-xc 
of the righteous and the apostate Jews. The kingdom to which the righteous rise in xci-ciy is 
not the temporary kingdom on the earth but the new heaven, but in Ixxxiii-xc it is the Messianic 
kingdom on the earth. 

cv. This chapter appears to be an independent fragment. 

cvi-cvii. These chapters have already been dealt with as part of the Book of Noah. 

cviii. This chapter forms an appendix to the entire work added not by the editor but by 
a subsequent writer to confirm the righteous in the face of repeated disappointment in their 
expectations. 


§ 7. DATES OF THE DIFFERENT ELEMENTS. 


I will here deal with these elements in the order of their age. 


Book of Noah. ‘This book was, as we have seen already, laid under contribution by the author 
of the Book of Jubilees and by the general editor of Enoch. Part of it is embodied in ViI-XXXVi, 
and this part is presupposed as already existing by Ixxxiii-xc. Now, since Ixxxiii-xc cannot be 
later than 161 B.C., it follows that we have here the zerminus ad quem of this work. 

vi-xxxvi. Since vi-xvi, xxiii-xxxvi were known to the author of the Book of Jubilees (see 
my edition, p. lxix) this Section must have been written before the latter half of the second 
century B.C. Since, further, 1xxxiii-xc, written before 161 B.C., show a minute acquaintance with 
x, the date of vi-xi must be put back to the first third of that century. Many other points in 
Ixxxili-xc (see my edition, p. 179) point to the acquaintance of the author of Ixxxiii-xc with 
vi-xxxvi. Again, since vi-xxxvi makes no reference to the persecution of Antiochus, the zerminus 
ad quem is thus fixed at 170 B.C. The fact that vi-xxxvi were written in Aramaic is in favour of 
pre-Maccabean date ; for when once a nation recovers, or is trying to recover, its independence, we 
know from history that it seeks to revive its national language. 

Ixxxiii-xc. The fourth and last of the four periods into which Ixxxiii-xc divide history 
between the destruction of Jerusalem and the establishment of the Messianic kingdom began 
about 200 B.C. (see my edition, pp. 180 sq., 206 sqq.), and marks the transition of supremacy over 
Israel from the Graeco-Egyptians to the Graeco-Syrians, as well as the rise of the Chasids. The 

170 


aia INTRODUCTION 


Chasids, s i i 

a = oe by the lambs that are born to the white sheep, xc. 6, are already an organized 
E y e Maccabean revolt. But certain of these lambs became horned, i.e. the Maccabean 
etieges a ie “eu : ae Maccabaeus, xc. 9. As this great horn is still warring at the 

e of the rule of the shepherds, xc. 16, this section must h i 
ives ace he : ; ave been written before the death of 
i ese I-10, ae aes Lt etitiie Apocalypse of Weeks—may have been written before the 
abean revolt. ere is no reference in it to the persecution of Antiochus. B i 

wholly doubtful. ed ae 
| 3 Ixxii-Ixxxii. This section is referred to in Jubilees iv. 17, 21, where the author tells how 
| Enoch wrote a book of the order of the months, the seasons of the years, and the rule of the sun. 
\ Hence the terminus ad quem is 110 B.C. or thereabouts. 

_ xci-civ. In Ixxxili-xc the Maccabees were the religious champions of the nation and the 
friends of the Chasidim. Here they are leagued with the Sadducees and are the foes of the 
Pharisaic party. This section was written, therefore, after 109 B.C., when (?) the breach between 
John Hyrcanus and the Pharisees took place. Buta later date must be assumed according to the 
literal interpretation of ciii. 14, 15, where the rulers are said to uphold the Sadducean oppressors 
and to share in the murder of the righteous. This charge is not justified before 95 B.C. As for 
the later limit, the Herodian princes cannot be the rulers here mentioned ; for the Sadducees were 
irrevocably opposed to these as aliens and usurpers. The date, therefore, may be either 95-79 B.C. 
or 70-64 B.C., during which periods the Pharisees were oppressed by both rulers and Sadducees. 
In my edition of Jubilees, pp. lxix—Ixxi, I have given various grounds for regarding xci-civ as 
dependent on Jubilees. 

xxxvii-Ixxi, From a full review of the evidence, which is given and discussed in the notes of 


my edition on xxxviii. 5, it appears that the kings and the mighty so often denounced in the | 


Parables are the later Maccabean princes and their Sadducean supporters—the later Maccabean | 


princes, on the one hand, and not the earlier; for the blood of the righteous was not shed as the 
writer complains (xlvii. 1, 2, 4) before 95 B.C.: the later Maccabean princes, on the other hand, and 
not the Herodians; for (1) the Sadducees were not supporters of the latter, and (2) Rome was not 
as yet known to the writer as one of the great world-powers—a fact which necessitates an earlier 
date than 64 B.C., when Rome interposed authoritatively in the affairs of Judaea. Thus the date 
of the Similitudes could not have been earlier than 94 B.C. or later than 64 B.C. But it is possible 
to define the date more precisely. As the Pharisees enjoyed unbroken power and prosperity under 
Alexandra 79-70 B.C., the Parables must be assigned either to the years 94-79 or 70-64. 


§ 8. THE PoETICAL ELEMENT IN I ENOCH. 


In the course of editing the Ethiopic text of 1 Enoch I was fortunate enough to discover 
that no small proportion of it was written originally in verse. But the full extent of the poetical 
element was not recognized till the completion of the present edition. This discovery not only adds 
to the interest of the book, but also illuminates many a dark passage, suggests the right connexions 
of wrongly disjoined clauses, and forms an admirable instrument of criticism generally. Our 
recognition of this fact enables us to recognize the genuineness of verses which had hitherto been 
regarded as interpolations, and to excise others which were often in themselves unmeaning or at 
variance with their contexts. The very first chapter is the best witness in these respects. There we 
find that i. 6-9 consists of nine stanzas of three lines each. E had lost two of the lines of stanza 
seven, but happily these had been preserved by G&. Again, in vi. 4-9 we have eight stanzas of four 
lines each. The order of the lines has been disarranged as will be seen in vi.6—7, but here the parallelism 
enables us to effect their restoration. Ch. 51 would without a recognition of the poetical character 
be in many respects inexplicable. In other passages it enables us to recognize certain lines as ditto- 
graphs: cf. lix. 6%, Ixxi. 3°, Ixxx. 7°, Ixxxii. 2”, xciv. 7%. 


§ 9. ORIGINAL LANGUAGE OF CHAPTERS VI-XXXVI—ARAMAIC ; OF I-V, 
XX XVII-CIV—HEBREW. 


That 1 Enoch was originally written in a Semitic language is now universally admitted. But 
what that language is is still, as regards portions of the book, a question of dispute. In the past, 
Murray, Jellinek, Hilgenfeld, Halévy, Goldschmidt, Charles (formerly), Littmann, and Martin have 
advocated a Hebrew original, while at various times an Aramaic original has been maintained by 
De Sacy, Lévi, Eerdmans, Schmidt, Lietzmann, Wellhausen, and Praetorius. Ewald, Dillmann 

171 


BOOK OF ENOCH 


Lods, Flemming could not come to a decision between Hebrew and Aramaic. But of the above 
scholars only three have really grappled with the subject, i.e. Halévy, Charles, and Schmidt, and 
three different theses are advanced by them. While Halévy maintains a Hebrew original, and 
Schmidt an Aramaic, the present writer, as a result of his studies in editing the Ethiopic text and the 
translation and commentary based upon it, is convinced that neither view can be established, but 
that each appears to be true in part.’ In other words, like the Book of Daniel, part of 1 Enoch 
was written originally in Aramaic and part in Hebrew. The proofs of this thesis amount in certain 
sections almost to demonstration : in the case of others only to a high probability. The results of 
the present study of this problem tend to show that chapters vi-xxxvi were originally written in 
Aramaic, and xxxvii-civ, and probably i-v in Hebrew. 


Chapters i-v. Probably from a Hebrew original. ‘These chapters, as we have shown elsewhere, do not 
come from the same author or period as vi—xxxvi. 

i. 1. In E the text = é@pac rdvtas rods rovypovs whereas G£ has é&Gpar révras tovs éxOpovs. The former, 
as the context shows, as well as Pss. Sol. iv. 9 (see note on p. 4 of the Commentary), is original, the latter not. 
Now the former = pyin-bp, the latter = pvyn-}55, a corruption of the former. The same corruption is found 
in the LXX of Prov. xx. 22. Since E and Gs are in the main derived from the same Greek translation, this 
fact, unless due to a sheer blunder of a copyist, points to the presence of alternative readings in the margin of 
the Hebrew archetype, which were reproduced by the Greek translator. Other facts point in the same 
direction : see note on y. g below. 

1. 9, In ‘He cometh with ten thousands of His holy ones’ the text reproduces the Massoretic of 
Deut. xxxili. 2 in reading NDN = épyera:, whereas the three Targums, the Syriac and Vulgate read TAN = per 
aitov. Here the LXX diverges wholly. The reading NnN is recognized as original. The writer of i-v 
therefore used the Hebrew text and presumably wrote in Hebrew. 

v. 60. ey tpiv KATUPaTOVTaL TAVTES Ol KaTapwmevoL = oddpya-b5 vbbp D212 is, so far as I am aware, 
a Hebrew idiom, and not an Aramaic. See note on p. 12 of my Commentary. 

v. 9b. Here G# reads dudprwow, but E = xpiOjcovrar = UN (cf. Prov. xxx. 10; Isa. xxiv. 6; Jer. 
ii, 3, &c.). Here the parallelism shows that Gs is right. Here, as in i. 1 above, we can explain the double 
rendering by assuming that one of these readings stood in the text and the other in the margin. 

Since none of the evidence favours an Aramaic original, and whatever linguistic evidence there is makes 
for a Hebrew, we may provisionally conclude in favour of the latter. 


Chapters vi-xxxvi. The evidence in favour of an Aramaic original of these chapters is practically 
conclusive. : 

(@) Aramaic words transliterated in the Greek or Ethiopic. Amongst the many Semitic words trans- 
literated in these versions the following are Aramaic and Aramaic only: in G& dovxd, xviii. 8, i. €. NOW, pavdo- 
Rapa, xxviii. 1, and BaBdypd, xxix. 1, i.e. NID. Another Aramaic form is xepouBiv, xiv. 11, 18, xx. 7, but this 
form is indecisive as it is found not infrequently in the LXX. In E manzeran? for manzerin, x. 9,1 oP tbe: 
’alwa, xxxi. 2 (see note i Joc.) = xbnx. The Hebrew form is m»>an. 

Other transliterations are Bérovs, x. 19, i.e. M3, which is both Hebrew and Aramaic: xaABavy, XXx1. 1, 
i.e, m329n Hebrew or xna5m Aramaic. On the other hand there are two Hebrew words transliterated: thus 
gappav, Xxxi. 1 = "¥, which is not found in Aramaic but which is rendered in Aramaic by OP: and yf, 
XXVll. 2 = N= ‘valley’, which is a pure Hebrew word, the Aramaic being xd. These last two cases are 
somewhat strange, but, since 8%) is here used as a proper name, its use in an Aramaic document may be 
justified. 

(4) Aramaic constructions. In xix. 2 we have the peculiar Greek ai yovatkes aitov TOV mwapaBdavrwv 
dyyéAwv. This is a literal reproduction of the Aramaic idiom jon 4 woNdSp “4 pmw3. The same construction 
recurs in E ix. 8 which = ovvexouuyOnowv per adrév pera Tov Onredy = NWI Dy nny xd2v. Here Gs, it is 
true, has omitted perd tHv OyAedv. This omission was probably due to the unintelligibility of the construction 
to a Greek scribe. GS, however, preserves the missing clause but wrongly connects it with the following verb— 
this change being due no doubt to an attempt to normalize the Greek. Thus Gs reads cuvekxoinOnoay per” 
avTav Kal év Tais Onrias éudvOnoav. Here the xaé should be restored after Onretaus. In vi. 8 we have a third 
instance of this idiom, though ina corrupt form: ofroé eiow dpyat abrav tov dexd(Swv) = NMADYT PAWN. This 
Aramaic idiom has found its way into the O.T. as in Cant. iii. 7. | 

(c) Some of the proper names with which paronomasias are connected postulate an Aramaic original. Thus 
in G8 viii, 3 we have 6 8 Tpitos edidake Ta onucia THs yns. Now the 6 tpitos in Vi. 7 1s ’Apaind = Seopa, 
where PN is Aramaic for ‘earth’. Thus this angel naturally taught the signs of the earth: *nx spow Span 
NPIN. Again in G8 viii. 3 we have 6 8 eikoards ediSake To onpea THs ceArvyns, Where 6 cikootés according to 
G® vi. 7 is Sapuji = Symp. Here snp is Aramaic for ‘moon’. Again in viii. 3 the 6 dy800s in 6 éy8oos 


: This view was first advanced in my edition of the Ethiopic text, pp. xxvii-xxxiii. 
* Here G8 has patnpéous and cannot account for E. Hence E here, as in i. 1, v. g? above, presupposes another 
reading than that in G8, this reading being in the text or margin of the Greek translation. 


192 


INTRODUCTION 


edidake depookoriay is in G8 vi. 7 “Efexupd (G8 Zakir) = Spy. pow (= dp), it is true, is Hebrew as well 
as Aramaic. 

In xiii. 7 it is said that ‘the angels were mourning in Abilene’, i.e. porana ybax. In Gs vi. 7 the play 
on Hermon is possible both in Aramaic and Hebrew (see note zz foc.), but the play on Jared in the same 
verse is only possible in Hebrew. Whence we may infer that this paronomasia originated in Hebrew and is 
only reproduced in this Aramaic document. Finally in E Gs x. 7 the command is given to Raphael: taca 
vt Ae ia NYANT DT, in which there is an obvious play on Raphael’s name. But though Ndldeke states that 

NB ist gemeinsemitisch ’ (ZDM/G, 1886, xl. 723, quoted by Schmidt) it is not found in the Targums and 
later rabbinical literature. Here, therefore, the play may be due to a pre-existing Hebrew document or 
myth, just as we are obliged to make the same presupposition in the case of ‘ Jared’ above. 

(@) Text restored through retranslation into Aramaic. In this section there are many corrupt passages, 
as might be expected, which can be restored through retranslation either into Aramaic or Hebrew, owing to the 
close affinities of these languages. This may be the case in ix. 4 N'D90 (i.e. rv BaciAéov E) corrupt for xyody 
= roy adver, or D951 for pdy : similarly in x. 7 érdragav E G$ = $738, which is both Hebrew and Aramaic, 
and corrupt for 98 = efrov G8.' In x. 17 7a od BBara abrdv = NNW, wrongly vocalized for fiNN2Y, or = 
ona’ corrupt for O12¥. xiv. 8 xarecrovdalov Kat +eGopdBalovt. Here the second verb is impossible. 
The clause in Aramaic = pbnay pny. Now the pael nony = GopvBalew, tapacceyv, OF cvvTapdcocev in 
Dan. iv. 2, 16; v. 9, 103 vil. 15, 28, and is rendered by Theodotion by the latter two verbs. On the other 
hand, the LXX renders the same Aramaic verb by xataore’Sew in iv. 16; v.6. Thus the translator of the 
LXX, who, as we know from the rest of his translation of the Aramaic section of Daniel, was very familiar 
with Aramaic, assigns to the part of the Aramaic verb the same meaning as the piel and hiphil of the Hebrew 
bmn. Hence we may assume that the pael in Aramaic could mean xataczevdew or OopvBagew. Thus we could 
explain @€opéBafov as a mistranslation in this context of bm. It is also possible that the two verbs are 
alternative renderings of one and the same verb in the Aramaic. This would have been possible also if the 
original had been Hebrew; for yon pointed as a piel would mean xareorovdalov and eGopvBalov as a niphel. 
In xiii. 2; xv. 4, 11; xxix. 2 also the text can be restored by either language. (See notes 27 loc.) 

But there are other passages that apparently defy restoration save through retranslation into Aramaic. 
In ix. 10 évéBy 6 otevaypos adrav Kat ov dvvatar tééedAOeivt, the é&eAOeiv is meaningless, but by retranslation we 
discover the origin of the corruption. é&Adety = pp3105 corrupt for ppand = ‘cease’. The lamentations 
‘cannot cease because of the lawless deeds which are wrought on the earth’. 

In x. 7 (where see note) the variations of the versions can be explained through the Aramaic, where E 
has twice ‘earth’ (= yj), GS has once yj and once wAyy7, and Gs’ zdny7n both times. The variations could, 
of course, have originated in G, but yj and wAny can be readily accounted for as renderings of AYN, which, 
punctuated as NVI = yh, and as SYIS = wAny7. 

In xvii. 7 E = 7 Opy trav yrodov = xbap "py. The phrase was derived most probably from Jer. xiii. 16 
Awan. But Gs reads dvéuous tov yvodov = xdap smn. Here, as we have seen several times already, the 
Greek translator appears to have found 1p in the text and ‘nm in the margin (or vice versa), and to have 
rendered both, one of which was preserved by G8 and the other by the Greek ancestor of E. ; 

In xviii. 2 the text iov ros récoapas avepous tiv ynv Baordlovras Kal 70 orepéwpa (GS E) is quite 
impossible. The winds do not bear the earth. By retranslation into Aramaic we see that Ti ‘yay arose 
in the Aramaic through a dittography. The clause =; 20D NYIN YIIN NN NN, where NYS is a ditto- 
graph of yx. The winds bear the firmament, not the earth. 

In xxviii. 2 tAjpns d€vSpwv Kat dérd Tov orepydrov. It would be absurd to speak of a plain as being ‘full 
of trees and seeds’. Here émd rv orepydrov = pyr, corrupt for pyr (cf. Dan. i, 12, 16; Mishna, Av/. 
ii. 25 iii. 2) = Kal trav purevpdtwv. Or the wrong phrase may be due to a wrong punctuation of the Aramaic 
word by the Greek translator. See note 7x loc. ; 

In xxxi. 3 drav tp(Bwow refer to certain fragrant trees mentioned in the preceding verse. These trees 
yielded a fragrant odour when burnt. (See note 7 loc.) Hence I assume that ppt? (= tpiBwow) is corrupt 
for not = kavowow. 


Chapters xxxvii-lxxi from a Hebrew original. In support of this view Halévy (0p. cit. pp. 364 sqq-) 
criticized over a dozen of passages from the Parables and the interpolations with a view to showing that the 
meaning of the text could not be recovered unless by retranslation from a Hebrew original. Unhappily 
Halévy based his work on the corrupt text of Dillmann, and most of his conclusions have thereby been 
invalidated. Some, however, are of permanent value. On the other hand Schmidt (0.7. and Semitic Studies, 
ii. 336-43) strongly contests this view, and maintains the hypothesis of an Aramaic original. I have studied 
carefully his ingenious essay, but this study has served to confirm me in the belief in a Hebrew original, which 
I assumed in my edition of 1893, and supported by arguments in my text of 1908. The preparation of my 
new edition has served to bring fresh evidence on this question to light. 


1 Here again the two readings in the Greek versions can be best explained by variants in the margin of the 
Semitic original. See footnote p. 173, and the paragraphs on xiv. 8 (ad /im.), Xvil. 7. 


173 


BOOK OF ENOCH 


First of all I will give (@) @ dist of passages which can be restored on the hypothesis of either a [Hebrew or 
an Aramaic original ; (b) passages which are believed to presuppose an Aramaic only ; and (c) passages which 
postulate a Hebrew original. 

(a) Passages which can be restored on the hypothesis of a Hebrew or an Aramaic original. 
‘Till the present day such wisdom has never been given by the Lord of Spirits.’ Here the Ethiopic has 
Emgédma = ek rpoowrov or eurporbey = "IED, ‘from before,’ or practically ‘by’, as I have rendered it. This 
late use of 128519 is found in Esther i. 19; iv. 8; 1 Chron. xxix. 12. The same idiom is found in Aramaic, 1. e. 
pap-ya:: cf. Dan. vi. 27 ((| iii. 29 °2). The same idiom recurs in lxv. 10, and possibly in xlviil. 2, 3, 6. 

xl. 9. The play on the names of Raphael and Gabriel is found in Hebrew ; it is possible in Aramaic in 
the case of Gabriel, but a play on Raphael has never been found in Aramaic. In fact, N57 is not found in 
the Targums. 

xlv. 3. ‘Shall try their works.’ For ‘try’ the text reads ‘choose’. Now, as I pointed out in 1908, 
this = "Inv, corrupt for ja’: or, if the original had been Aramaic, we had to suppose that the translator 
followed the wrong meaning of "m2. Schmidt accepts the latter supposition. 

xlvi. 4>. ‘Shall traise upt the kings . .. from their seats.’ A dittograph of this verse reappears in 
xlvi. 52 ‘shall put down the kings from their thrones’. Here ‘raise up’ = Siwy is corrupt for 22% = ‘ put 
down’. This restoration is possible either in Hebrew or Aramaic. 

liv. ro. ‘And when.’ Here the text reads ‘and because’, but the context requires ‘when’. The 
wrong rendering can be explained either from Hebrew or Aramaic (see note 7 oc.). 

lv. 3. In my note I have restored the text by means of Hebrew: but it is possible also through Aramaic, 
since DIp7}1 can also mean ‘ because of’, 

Ixv. 11, See note zz doc. 

Ixvi. 2. Here the text reads ‘hands’ O° 7 or N19 corrupt for D197 or ND", 

Ixviii. 2. Text reads ‘ provokes me’ = 93137) or ‘3PIN'. 

Ixix. 1. As in Ixvili. 2. 

lxix. 4. The corruption can be explained either by Hebrew or Aramaic. 

lxix. 13. Zask. Here ‘number’ = }29 (or 83°99 as Schmidt points out) which seems corrupt for }3y 
(or N2*3y) = ‘ task’. 

Ixxi. 1. Same corruption as in Ixix. 4. 

(6) Phrases and passages which are adduced by Schmidt in support of an Aramaic original. Some of these 
have been dealt with already under (a), i. e. xxxvii. 4; xl, 93; xlv. 3; Ixv. 11; Ixviii. 2; lxix. 13, in which cases 
Schmidt suggests that the corrupt passages in question can be best explained by an Aramaic original, though 
possible also by a Hebrew original. His suggestions on li, 3, xli. 5 are unnecessary, as the corruptions are native 
to E, and that on lil. 9, as we shall see later, is untenable, and his transformation of xxxviii. 2 ‘ whose elect works 
hang upon the Lord of Spirits’ into ‘ whose worship has been rendered solely to the Lord of Spirits’ is wholly 
uncalled for, since there is no difficulty in the phrase which recurs twice in xl. 5, xlvi. 8, and has a parallel in 
Judith viii. 24. The plurals Sairafén, Kirdbén, Afnin in Ixi. 10, lxxi. 7 are certainly Aramaic in form, but 
oepadeiy which occurs only twice in the O.T., i.e. in Isa. vi. 2, 6, appears both times in the oldest MSS. of the 
s A of the LXX in this form, in Isa. vi. 2 and in B in vi. 6. The Aramaic form yepouBelv is often found in 
the LXX. Hence this evidence for an Aramaic original is without weight. 

But ‘the most convincing evidence . . . of an Aramaic original is furnished by the Ethiopic translations 
of the term “Son of Man”. They are walda sab’é xlvi. 2, 3, 4; xlviii. 2; Ix. 10: walda bést Ixii. 5 ; Ixix. 
29%,>; lxxi. 14: and walda ’€guala *éma héjaw lxii. 7, 9, 14; Ixili. rz; Ixix. 26, 27; Ixx. 1; Ixxi. 17... . Of 
these the last is the most peculiar. Literally it means “the son of the offspring of the mother of the 
living” . . . and is a rendering of of dvOpw7rou, of viol rév dvOpdruv and especially of vids évOpdérov.’ Schmidt 
then proceeds to emphasize the importance of these different renderings in the Parables, whereas in the N.T. 
it is the last that is uniformly used as a rendering of 6 vids tod évOpdrov, and observes: ‘ before lxii he uses 
no other term than walda sab’é, the equivalent of the Aramaic xwi 73. Later he employs four times the 
phrase walda b’ési which corresponds to the Aramaic 81327 773... . This title is found in the Palestinian 
Lectionary, the Curetonian Fragments, and the Sinaitic text’. From the above evidence Schmidt concludes 
that, if the translator had ‘a Greek text before him in which the N.T. title 6 vids rod évOpdémrou was uniformly 
used ’, it would be scarcely conceivable that he would have used three distinct Ethiopic expressions to render 
it, and ‘these of such a nature as to correspond exactly to the three different Ethiopic terms’. He holds 
therefore, that ‘the conclusion seems inevitable that he translated directly from the Aramaic. . . . General 
considerations strengthen this conclusion. If the Parables of Enoch were translated from a Greek text one 
would certainly expect to find somewhere a quotation from it or a reference to it in early Christian literature’ 
But Schmidt can find none. 

The last argument I will answer first. The reader has only to refer to the list of parallels between the 
N.T. books and the Parables on pp. 180 sq. in order to learn that the Parables did influence, and that directl 
the writers of the N.T. Further, Tertullian’s words, when discussing the authenticity of 1 Enoch cannot 6 
adequately explained, unless as bearing on passages in the Parables referring to the Son of Man: ‘ Cum Enoch 
eadem ee etiam de domino praedicarit, a nobis quidem nihil omnino reiiciendum est quod pertineat ad 
nos. , . . A Iudaeis potest iam videri propterea reiecta, sicut et cetera fere quae sonant Christum’ (De Cultu 


174 


XXXVI. 4 


INTRODUCTION 


fem. i. 3). ‘The Noah Apocalypse, moreover, which is interpolated in the Parables, is referred to in Origen 
C ontra Celsum v. 52 ods (i. €. Tovs dyyédovs) yevérOau Kaxovs, ka Kordlec bar deopoits troBdnbévras ev yi: bbe. a 
Tas Jeppas myyas civar 7a, éxeivov daxpva (I En. Ixvii. 6, 11, 12). This evidence necessitates the existence of 
a Greek Version of the Parables. 

Let us turn now to the next argument. The Ethiopic must have been made direct from the Aramaic 
because of the three forms in which the title ‘Son of Man’ is given in the Ethiopic, since these, according to 
Schmidt, correspond exactly to the three forms in Aramaic. But here I must join issue. We have, unless 
I have failed wholly in this study, seen that the evidence adduced by Schmidt for an Aramaic original is quite 
inconclusive, and that on the contrary the evidence so far points, though not conclusively, to a Hebrew 
original. For this conclusion other evidence will be adduced later. We are not, therefore, predisposed to 
accept such an extraordinary thesis as that the Ethiopic must have been made directly from the Aramaic. 
Before dealing directly with the titles in question we might point to two facts which render this thesis not 
merely improbable, but incredible. 1°, No known Ethiopic version has been made directly from the Aramaic. 
2°. The Book of Enoch, by its artificial division into five books, like the five books of the Pentateuch, the five 
books of the Psalms, the five Megilloth, the five books in Proverbs, in Ecclesiasticus, the five divisions in the 
Pirke Aboth, and the five books of the Maccabean wars by Jason of Cyrene (see Hawkins *, Horae Synopticae, 
p. 164), was after its kind a carefully edited work in which the fragments of a literature were put together 
with just as much fitness and insight as that of the Proverbs or the Pirke Aboth. This five-fold division was 
thus a well-known Jewish device, and, since according to the use of the book made by the N.T. writers it 
existed in its completed form in the first half of the first century a.D., if not nearly a century earlier, we cannot 
understand how an Ethiopic translator in the sixth or seventh century a. D. could have used the Greek version 
for the four books of Enoch, i—xxxvi, Ixxii—lxxxii, Ixxxiii-xc, xc-cvili, and an Aramaic for the fifth, i. e. the 
Parables, xxxvii-Ixxi. It is very probable that the entire book was translated early in the first century of the 
Christian era into Greek. That the Semitic original was early lost is to be inferred from the fact that no 
evidence of any kind testifies to its existence after the birth of Christianity, whereas multitudinous evidence 
attests the existence of the Greek version. 

We may, therefore, safely relegate to the limbo of impossibilities the hypothesis that chapters xxxvii-lxxi 
of the Ethiopic version were translated directly from the Aramaic. 

We have now to consider what Schmidt terms ‘the most convincing evidence of an Aramaic original’, 
i.e, the Ethiopic translations of the term ‘Son of Man’. The Ethiopic translation was made, as we have just 
seen, from the Greek. Hence whatever explanation we give of the three forms must be justified by a Greek 
retranslation. This fact at once discounts any attempt to find a Greek prototype for éguala ’émahéjaw 
‘ offspring of the mother of the living’, This Ethiopic phrase is used indifferently as a rendering of dv@pwzos, 
vids dvOpurov, dvOpw7rot, viol avOpworuwv, dvyp. And the full form walda ’€guala “Emahéjaw = vids dvOpeov in 
Dan. vii. 13, Ps. Ixxix. 18, in Ezekiel about ninety times, Rev. i. 13, xiv. 14, and in the Gospels always = 6 
vids Tod dvOpaurov. In itself the Ethiopic phrase can mean ‘son of man’ or ‘the Son of Man’. But if the 
translator wished to make it clear that the latter title was used, he could do so by prefixing a demonstrative 
pronoun as a rendering of the Greek article 6. This is done in every instance in the Parables save three. In 
the course of eight verses in Ixxxix. 42-9 the Greek article is so rendered eleven times, 

Let us now examine the other two titles walda sab’é and walda b’ési. sab’é distinctively = dvOpw7ros 
(though in a few cases it = dvyp). Thus walda sab’é = vids dvOpwrov. It can also = 6 vids Tov avOpw7rov, but 
to make this unmistakable the translator could prefix the demonstrative pronoun as the equivalent of 6. 

Next comes walda b’ési. b’ési = dévyp generally, but as Dillmann (Lex. 519) puts it, it stands creberrime 
for dvOpwros. In fact in the Ethiopic Version of our book it is used as a rendering of dv@pw7os in i. 2, xv. I. 
If more of the Greek version had survived we should no doubt find many other instances. 

The result of the above examination comes to this. The above three renderings do not presuppose three 
different forms in the Greek, They most probably presuppose merely one, i. €. 6 vids tod dvOparov, but walda 
b’ést may presuppose 6 vids rot dvdpds. But I think the latter improbable. In Ixii. 5; Ixix. 29 (075); Ixxi. 14 
b’ési may be a rendering of dvOparov as in 1. 2; XV. I. 

This change of rendering may seem surprising, but we have a perfect parallel in the Curetonian and 
Sinaitic versions of the Syriac N.T.*| Thus whereas in the Peshitto breh dé-nasa (SUNT m3) occurs 
uniformly as a rendering of 6 vids 70d dévOpwrrov, in the Curetonian version we have b’reh de-gabr4 (N7237_ 773) 
in Luke vii. 34; ix. 26; xxii. 48, and in the Sinaitic version b’reh de-gabra in Mark viii. 38; Luke vii. 34 ; 
John xiii. 31, and elsewhere in both these versions b’reh de-na8a. In the Palestinian Lectionary there is still 
another way of rendering the phrase, but this does not concern us here. We have, however, learnt from these 
versions that differences in the manner of rendering the title ‘Son of Man’ in these versions does not imply 
any difference in the original Greek. Similarly we conclude that the three renderings of this title in the 
Parables do not presuppose corresponding variations in the Greek, but are due to the translator. 

If, then, these variations in the Parables are due to the translator or translators it follows that these 
translators were Aramaic-speaking gs since. the phrases walda b’ési and walda sab’é are respectively 

i ’reh de gabra and b’reh dé-na8a. 
voids we conclude that 6 vids 10d dvOpu7ov stood in all cases in the Greek version of the 


: hmidt in Lucyc, Bibl. iv. 4714. ra) 
: The Ge cites in ae Ethiopic version of the O.T. are probably due to Aramaean missionaries. 


175 


BOOK OF ENOCH 


Parables. That this Greek phrase represents the Hebrew otNnj3, we shall further conclude from the 
evidence given in the next section. 

(c) Passages which postulate a Hebrew original. ; 

xxxix. 75, ‘The righteous . . . shall +be strong+ (a-m : ‘be beautifult’ 7, §) as fiery lights’. Neither 
reading is satisfactory. a— = pin’ which may be corrupt for M7}! = ‘shine’: cf. Dan. xii. 3 O°33)33... 7". 

xlvi. 7. ‘These are they who +judget the stars of heaven.’ Here, as I have shown, the text appears to be 
based on Dan. viii. ro, and should be read (see my note 2 /oc.) as follows :— 

‘These are they who raise their hands against the Most High, 
And cast down the stars of heaven, 
And tread them upon the earth.’ 
Thus ‘judge’ = 3") which the context shows to be corrupt for 11")* = ‘ cast down’. 

xlvii. 4b. ‘Because the number of the righteous had been offered.’ As the context shows (see my 
note zz Joc.) these words mean that the number of the righteous, i.e. the martyrs, is complete: cf. Rev. 
vi. 10, 11. Now a reads’ qaréba = jyyexe = FP, which in Mishnaic Hebrew = ‘has been offered’. This 
meaning is not found in the qal of this verb in Aramaic. 

lii. 9. ‘All these things shall be [denied and] destroyed from the surface of the earth.’ Here there were 
two alternative Greek renderings of 1193’. One was originally in the text, and the other in the margin, but 
subsequently both were incorporated into the text. Or the dittograph was native to the Hebrew, i.e. wns’ 
and n>’. Schmidt attempts to explain the corruption from an Aramaic basis by assuming that finn an’ stood 
in the original, and that this received the two renderings in the text. But No. does not mean ‘to destroy ’. 
Moreover, the Ethiopic word kéhéda here, which means ‘to deny’, occurs again in xlv. 1; xlvi. 7; xlviii. 10, 
in which three passages Schmidt says it goes back to the Aramaic 153. Thus his proposal is satisfactory in 
no respect. 

lx. 6. I have followed wz in the text, but the parallelism is in favour of regarding the text as corrupt in the 
word ‘worship’. This word is wholly unsatisfactory. It = \nnw’, which may be corrupt (or NN’) =‘ pervert’ 
or ‘corrupt’). Thus we recover an excellent parallelism :— 

‘For those who corrupt the righteous law, 
And for those who deny the righteous judgement, 
And for those who take His name in vain.’ 

Ixv. 10o®. ‘Their judgement has been determined upon and shall not be withheld by me for ever.’ 

For ‘withheld’ the text reads od XoywOjoerar or apiOunoerar. The Ethiopic word can mean either. 
The former rendering (as in lii. 84) is generally followed here. It is, however, unsatisfactory. The true 
reading, as I pointed out in my text, can be recovered by retranslation into Hebrew. od doywOyjoerar = 


avr x, corrupt for WM N? = ‘shall not be withheld’. Here Schmidt follows the other possible meaning of 
the Ethiopic word épiOuyocera. = NIDN'—a corruption of yn. 

Ixy. 10%. ‘ Because of the sorceries which they have searched out and learnt, the earth and those who 
dwell upon it shall be destroyed.’ Instead of ‘sorceries’ the Ethiopic reads ‘ months’= p'yisn, which Halévy 
rightly recognized as a corruption of n'w1n =‘sorceries’. It is true that on an exceptional occasion Aramaic- 
speaking Jews used N'wn instead of their own word xm. Hence the evidence for a Hebrew original is 
slightly weakened here. ; 

The text of this passage as known to Halévy and originally to myself was corrupt, and Schmidt rightly 
objected to this text even when emended as follows : ‘ because of the sorceries which they have searched out and 
(through which) they know that the earth . . . will be destroyed.’ Schmidt observes that it ‘is a strange idea 
that the terrible judgement of the flood would come because men had succeeded in discovering that the earth 
with its inhabitants would be destroyed.’ This observation is just, but the remedy lies in the MSS. ¢¢u, 
which omit the ‘that’. The omission of this word restores the meaning of the whole verse. See note 
on p. 131 of my second edition of Enoch. : 

From the above evidence we infer a Hebrew original. As in the Hebrew chapters of Daniel, so here 
there were possibly many Aramaisms. : 


Chapters \xxii-lxxxii. From a Hebrew original. 1 

Ixxvi. 1, 14. Here the word in the text ‘winds’= nin, which should have been rendered ‘ quarters ’. 
This restoration is possible both in Hebrew and Aramaic. 

Ixxvii. 1. In this verse there is a play on the four quarters of the earth. It is possible to recover this 
play by liege a into either Hebrew or Aramaic in the case of the ‘east’ and ‘north’: D7? or OVP and 
PAY or PBY. | es 

But this is not so in the case of the south and west. As regards the first the text reads ‘ the south, because 
the Most High will descend there, yea there . . . will He . . . descend’= 02.7793 D113, This is possible 
only in Hebrew. be 

Ixxvii. 2. ‘And the west quarter is named (lit. ‘ its name’) diminished because there all the luminaries 
wane.” nysnnn>s yanN ow > NN Ow Mayen nam. 


; u a ie a Spemes oe two forms stood in the Greek version, i.e. 6 vids tod dvOpdrov and 6 vids Tov 
aySpés, and that these were due to the translators, who in this case also would be Aramaicespeaking Tew: is i 
highly improbable. 520 Se Sirade : Peer: a a 


176 


INTRODUCTION 


n Singitiees 1. Of the two ames of the sun which are transliterated, though corruptly, in this verse, one is 
ebrew and not Aramaic; i.e. Orjares = 020 48. The other, Tomas, i.e. 9, is Hebrew and Aramaic : 
but if it is Corrupt from An, as Halévy conjectures, it is Hebrew. i 
a Ixxvill. 2. Of the four names of the moon which are here transliterated, three are Hebrew only, Asonja, 1. e. 
HAN, Ebla, i.e. 7229, and Benasé, i.e. 7DI3. 
Ixxx. 5. See note 77 Joc. > all 
Ixxxii. to. See note 7 Joc. 
Txxxlie tse Tamaint and Sun.’ These two names are one, i.e. 20°F winY ‘the southern sun’. This is 
Hebrew, and not Aramaic. 
Chapters \xxxii-xc. From a Hebrew (or Aramaic?) original. 
Ixxxix. 44. The emendation suggested here is possible both in Hebrew and Aramaic. 
xc. 13*, 16%. In the duplicate version which we have of these verses, ‘shepherds’ in xc. 13 corresponds 
to ‘ravens’ in xc. 16. The latter is right. The corruption can be explained from a Hebrew background, 
DO’, corrupt for DF, or from an Aramaic pyr, corrupt for jay. 
xc. 13", 16>. In the former ‘cried to’ corresponds to ‘were gathered together’ in the latter. Now the 
former = éxpaov = %P¥N or PY), and the latter PY} or YS) in Hebrew. But this explanation is impossible 
in Aramaic ; for though pyt and pyy occur in the sense of ‘to cry’, no mood of this verb is used in the sense 
of ‘to assemble’. For this word they use wi. 
xc. 18. covered them, The Ethiopic expression here is not good Ethiopic, but reproduces the Greek 
éexdAvyev ex’ adrovs, which in turn is a literal rendering of omy np> (Hebrew), or pmdy (or ‘D3) NBM in 
Aramaic. 
xc. 27. ‘I saw those sheep tburning and their bones burning+.’ This clause is obviously corrupt. In 
‘bones’ there appears to be a mistranslation of the late Hebrew pyy or the Aramaic p73, which literally mean 
‘bone’ or ‘bones’, but which when compounded with a suffix =‘self’ or ‘selves’. The participle is then 
a doublet. Hence we have nay Anyy nein jyym NN) =‘I saw these very sheep burning.’ This is possible 
also in Aramaic. 
xc. 38. ‘The first among them became the lamb.’ ‘The lamb’= nbn, which was corrupted into nbn, 
as Goldschmidt has pointed out, whence the Ethiopic text ‘the word’. This explanation is possible also in 
Aramaic. 
Chapters xci-civ. From a Hebrew original. 
xcili. 5. Text reads ‘after him’= y nx, which I take to be corrupt for 1n’n¥ =‘ his posterity ’. 
xcili. 8>, The Ethiopic has a peculiar form, and = doeBijcovoew Kapdiar révtwv éxd Ths codias, which is 
pure Hebrew = Anan od> 395 yu. Cf. Ps. xviii. 22, MOND snywn. 
xcv. 18. ‘Oh, that mine eyes were [a cloud of] waters.’ The bracketed word is either an intrusion and 
= py, a dittograph of 2» =‘eyes’, or j2y is corrupt for }y =‘fount’, the corruption being due to the 
occurrence of the phrase ‘cloud of waters’ in xcv. 1%. Hence ‘Oh, that mine eyes were a fount of waters’. 
This is possible also in Aramaic. 
XCvl. 5. ‘Who devour the finest of the wheat 
And drink wine in large bowls.’ 
For the emended phrase E has here the extraordinary words ‘strength of the root of the fountain’= icyiv 
pigns mnyns = PY Ap'y M2, corrupt for j%. *PW23 (Amos vi. 6). See my note zm” oc. 
xcvi. 6. From every fountain. E reads ‘at every time’= ny~533, corrupt for py-bap. 
xcvii. 8>—9. We have here a remarkable series of rhyming verses which arise on retranslation into Hebrew. 


8 wwy Wy 92 wqwnAY nwyn 
wd vAIN b WDDN FDN ADD 'D 
amp 5) a NI DN DIN 
IN WE e yyayiw oma ondr 


xcvill. 42>, See note 7m Joc. : 
xcix. 6. Here E = eis jépay aiuaros ddvaAecrrov, but in Tertullian (De Jdo/. iv) the phrase appears as 


‘in diem sanguinis peradztionis’= cis huépav aiparos dmwdcas = sxd pt ond, where 1x5 is corrupt for ay? 


= ddvadreirrov, ' ' 41 
xcix. 16. E (,g) reads ‘the spirit of His indignation’= 5X nv, corrupt for 1BX In =< His fierce 


indignation.’ 
c. 6%, See note 27 doc. : 0 ae : 
ci. 4. E reads ‘kings ’= ‘250, corrupt for nby, ‘sailors’. This is also possible in Aramaic. 
§ 10. (2) INFLUENCE OF 1 ENOCH ON JEWISH LITERATURE. 


In the Book of Fubilees, written before 105 B.C., the older Sections of 1 Azoch are drawn upon, 
but in the later Sections the converse relation may be assumed :— 


JSubtlees. 1 Enoch. 
i. 11. ‘sacrifice . . . to demons’. xix. I. ‘sacrificing to demons as gods’. 
16. ‘the plant of uprightness ’. xciii. 2. ‘the plant of uprightness’. 
077 N 
1105-2 7 


BOOK OF 


Jubilees. 


29. ‘the heavens... shall be renewed ... the 
powers of the heaven... the luminaries be renewed’. 
ii. 2. ‘the spirit... of snow. . . of hoar-frost’. 


iil, 10. ‘the heavenly tablets’, and passzm. 
iv. 15. ‘Jared; for in his days the angels of the 
Lord descended on the earth’. 
‘the Watchers’. Cf. x. 5 
20. ‘he took to himself a wife . . 
22. ‘testified to the Watchers’. 
‘unite themselves, so as to be defiled with the 
daughters of men’. 
23. ‘we conducted him into the Garden of 
Eden’. 


. Edni’. 


26. ‘the Mount of the East’. 
vy, «. ‘they bare:. >... giants”. 

6. ‘He bade us to bind them in the depths of 
the earth. (Ch v6; x7. 

g. ‘that each should slay his neighbour’. 

ro. ‘And their fathers were witnesses (of their 
destruction), and after this they were bound in the 
depths of the earth for ever, until the day of the great 
condemnation when judgement is executed’, &c. 


11, 12. ‘He tdestroyedt all ... And He tmadet 
. a new and righteous nature’, &c. 

29. ‘the (i.e. the seven) floodgates of heaven were 
restrained ; and . . . all the mouths of the abysses 
of the earth were opened, and the water began to 
descend into the deep below.’ 

vil. 22. The Giants, the Naphil, the Eljo. 


‘they devoured one another’. Cf. v. 2, 9. 

23. ‘shed much blood . . . the earth was filled 
with iniquity ’. 

29. ‘into Sheol shall they go, and into the place 
of condemnation shall they descend, and into the 
darkness”. Cf. -xxii.22. 

39. ‘the seventh in his generation’. 

vill. 12. ‘the middle of the earth’ (Shem’s lot). 
x. 1. ‘the unclean demons began to lead astray . . . 
and destroy them’. 





xll. 2. ‘What help and profit have we from those 
idols ?’ 

4. ‘who causes the rain and the dew to descend 
on the earth’. 

xv. 32. ‘But over Israel He did not appoint any 
angel or spirit for He alone is their ruler’. Contrast 
1 En. Ixxxix. 59. 

‘He will... require them at the hands of His 
angels’. 

xvi. 26. ‘ plant of righteousness ’. 

xxii. 17. ‘worship evil spirits ’. 

Xxx. 22. ‘the book of life’. Cf. xxxvi. ro. 

xxxll. 18, 19. Jacob’s seed are to rule and judge. 

XXxVil. 20. ‘the boar’ (= Esau). 





178 


ENOCH 
1 Enoch. 


xci. 16. ‘a new heaven shall appear, and all the 
powers of the heavens shall give sevenfold light’. 
lx. 18. ‘the spirit of the snow’. 
17. ‘the spirit of the hoar-frost’. 
Ixxxi. I, 2, xCili. 2, cili. 2. ‘the heavenly tablets’. 
vi. 6. (the angels) ‘descended in the days of Jared’. 


i. 5, xll. 2-4. ‘the Watchers’. 
Ixxxv. 3. ‘Before I took . . . Edna’. 
xii. 3-6, xlll. I-10, xlv. 4-7, Xv. 2 sqq. 


x. 11. ‘united themselves with women so as to 
have defiled themselves with them’. Cf. xv. 3, 4. 
lx. 8. ‘. .. the garden where the elect and righteous 


dwell, where my grandfather was taken up, the seventh 
from Adam’. 

XVUL_ 750. Ch exivieg ee 

vii. 2. ‘they bare great giants’. 

x. 12. ‘bind them fast...in the valleys (emended) 
of the earth’. 

x. 9. ‘that they may destroy each other in battle’. 

x. 12. ‘And when their sons have slain one 
another, and they have seen the destruction of their 
beloved, bind them fast for seventy generations in 
the valleys of the earth, till the day of their judgement 
and of their consummation, till the judgement that is 
for ever and ever is consummated ’. 

x. 15, 16. ‘destroy all... and let the plant of 
righteousness and truth appear’, &c. 

Ixxxix. 7. ‘those (1.e. the seven) water torrents were 
removed from that high roof and the chasms of the 
earth were levelled up and other abysses were opened. 
8. Then the water began to run down into these’, &c. 

vii. 1. (Syncellus’ Greek Version). The Giants, 
Nephilim, the Eliud. 

Ixxxvil. 1. ‘devour each other’. Cf. vii. 5, x. 9, 12. 

ix. 1. ‘much blood being shed . . . all lawlessness 
being wrought upon the earth’. 


cil. 7, 8. ‘their souls shall be made to descend 
into Sheol . . . and into darkness . . . and a burning 
flame .. . grievous judgement’. 


xclil. 3. ‘the seventh in the first week’. 

xxvi. 1. ‘the middle of the earth’ (Palestine). 

xix. 1. ‘their (i. e. the angels’) spirits assuming many 
different forms are defiling mankind and shall lead 
them astray’. Cf. also xv. 8, 11; xvi. 1. 

xcix. 7. ‘shall get no manner of help from them’. 


ci. 2. ‘withholds the rain and the dew from descend- 
ing on the earth’. 

Ixxxix. 59. ‘And He called seventy shepherds and 
cast those sheep to them’. 


XCq £7, 22. 


x. 16. ‘plant of righteousness’. 

xcix. 7. ‘worship impure spirits and demons’. 
xlviil. 3. ‘the books of the living’. 

xCV. 3; xcvi. tr. The righteous rule and judge. 


Ixxxix. 12, 42, 49, 66. ‘wild boar’, ‘wild boars’ 
(= Edom). 


INTRODUCTION 


In the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, written between 109 and 105 B.C., there are nine 


direct references to Enoch. 


L. Lev. x. 5. ‘the house which the Lord shall 
choose . . . as is contained in the book of Enoch 
the righteous’. 

xvi. 1. ‘I have learned (+‘in the book of Enoch’ 
BAPS) .. . for seventy weeks,’ &c. 

xiv. 1. ‘I have learned (‘from the writing of Enoch’ 
BAP S*), &e/ 


The other six, Z: Sim.v.4; ZT. Jud. xviii. 1 (8 AS! 
TL. Benj. ix. 1, cannot be traced directly to any passage i 


in BS’. 





ni En. 


1 Zn. Ixxxix. 50. ‘the house for the Lord’, &c. 


Ixxxix. 59 sqq. ‘seventy shepherds’. 


Cl Ga 7. 


)3 Zi Zed. iti. 4 (BS); ZT. Dan. v. 6; T. Naph. iv. 1; 
In Z. Zed. iil. 4 a reads ‘ Moses’ for ‘ Enoch’ 


There are also parallels in the Zestaments to 1 Enoch, e.g. : 


T. Reub. v. 6, 7. The Watchers, the women, and 
the giants. 
T. Lev. iii. 4. ‘the Great Glory’ (a 6 A® $3). 
xvl. 2. ‘make void the law and set at naught... . 
by evil perverseness ’. 
xvill. §. ‘The heavens shall exult in his days 
And the earth shall be glad. . . 


And the angels of the glory of the presence of 


the Lord shall be glad in him’. 


LT. Naph. iii. 5. ‘the Watchers also changed the 
order of their nature ’. 


1 Ln. vi-ix. 2. 


MVe 205) Cl 3, 
KCI 2-14 Civ. O10. 


li. 4. ‘And in those days shall the mountains leap 
like rams, 
And the hills also shall skip like lambs satisfied 
with milk, 
And the faces of [all] the angels in heaven shall 
be lighted up with joy’. 


Vike 2) 


Possibly 1 Exoch was used by the author of the Assumption of Moses, written between A.D. 7 


and 30. 
Ass. Mos. 
x. 3. ‘He will go forth from His holy habitation, 
4. And the earth shall tremble : to its confines shall 
it be shaken: And the high mountains shall be made 
low, and the hills (emended) shall be shaken and fall’. 


1 Enoch. 
i. 4. ‘will come forth from His dwelling ’. 
1. 5, 6. *. . . unto the ends of the earth. The 
high mountains shall be shaken And the high hills . . . 
made low’, 


The affinities of 2 Baruch with 1 Enoch are more numerous. 


2D ar. 
“oC omens’. 
xili. 8. ‘the judgement .. . no respect of persons’. 
xxiv. 1. ‘the books shall be opened’. 
xxix. 4. Myth of Behemoth and Leviathan. 
5. ‘the earth shall yield its fruit ten thousandfold ’. 


Xxxv. 2. Become ye springs, O mine eyes, and ye, 
mine eyelids, a fount of tears’. 

li. ro. ‘they shall be made like unto the angels, 
and be made equal to the stars’. 


liv. 2. ‘For whom nothing is too hard’. 
ly. 3. Ramiel. 
lvi. 12-13. 


lix. 2. ‘the eternal law’. 


In 4 Zzra, written between A.D. 81-96, we 


the Parables. : 
4 Ezra. 


vi. 49-52. Leviathan and Behemoth. 


vii. 32, 33. ‘Et terra reddet qui in ea dormiunt, et 
pulvis qui in eo silentio habitant, et promptuaria red- 
dent quae eis commendatae sunt animae. Et reve- 
labitur Altissimus super sedem iudicii.’ 


37: 


85, 95: 
125. ‘nostrae vero facies super tenebras nigrae ’. 





1 L£noch. 

Xixy 2 Olpensy. 

Ixii. 8. ‘His judgements have no respect of persons’. 

xc. 20. ‘opened those books’. 

Ix. 7-9, 24. Myth of Leviathan and Behemoth 
(earlier form). 

x. 19. ‘Each measure (of it) shall bear a thousand’. 

xcv. I. ‘Oh, that mine eyes were a fount of waters’, 
&c. 

civ. 2, 4. ‘ye shall shine as the lights of heaven... 
have great joy as the angels’. 

Ixxxiv. 3. ‘nothing is too hard for Thee’. 

xx 7. Remiel (Ge). 

vi-x. 

xcix. 2. ‘the eternal law’. 


find an apparent use of 1 Lvoch, particularly of 


1 L£noch. 

Ix. 7-9, 24. Leviathan and Behemoth (earliest form 
of myth). 

li. r, 3. ‘and in those days shall the earth also give 
back that which has been entrusted to it, And Sheol 
also shall give back that which it has received, And 
hell shall give back that which it owes . . . And the 
Elect one shall . . . sit on My throne’. 

paves gb aay 

C25: 

Ixli. 10. ‘the darkness shall grow deeper on their 
faces’. 


179 N 2 


BOOK OF "ENOCH 


From the second century A.D. onwards all knowledge of the Book of Enoch vanishes from 
Jewish literature with the exception of a few references that are given by Jellinek in the Zeztschr. 


D. M. G., 1853, p. 249. 


(6) THE INFLUENCE OF 1 ENOCH ON THE NEW TESTAMENT. 


1 Enoch has had more influence on the New Testament than has any other apocryphal or 
pseudepigraphic work. A few examples will clearly illustrate this. 


New Testament. 


(a) General Epistles. om 
Jude 6. ‘the angels which left their own habitation 


. reserved .. . great day’. 


14. ‘the seventh from Adam’. 
T4, 5. 
1 John i. 7. ‘walk in the light ’. 
ii, 8. ‘the darkness is past’: 
15. ‘ Love not the world nor the things that are 
in the world’. 


(6) Revelation. 
ii. 7. ‘the tree of life’. Cf. xxil. 2; 14, £9. 
ili. 5. ‘clothed in white raiment ’. 
10. ‘them that dwell upon the earth’. 
17. ‘I am rich and increased with goods’. 


20. ‘I will come in to him and will sup with him 
and he with me’. 
iv. 6. ‘round about the throne were four living 
creatures ’. 
8. ‘they rest not . . . saying’. 
vi. 10. The prayer of the righteous for judgement. 
15, 16. Compare the fear of the kings of the 
earth, and the princes, and the chief captains, and the 
rich, and the strong, when they see ‘the face of him 
that sitteth on the throne’. 
vii. 1. Angels of the winds. 
15. ‘He that sitteth on the throne shall dwell 
among them ’. 
ix. 1. ‘I sawa star from heaven fallen to the earth’. 


20. ‘worship demons, and the idols of gold, and 
of silver, and of brass, and of stone, and of wood’. 


xill. 14. ‘deceiveth them that dwell on the earth’. 
xlv. 9, 10. ‘tormented with fire and brimstone in 
the presence of the holy angels . . .’. 
to. ‘holy angels’. 
20. ‘blood came out... 
bridles’. 
xvii. 14. ‘Lord of lords and King of kings’. 
xx. 13. ‘the sea gave up the dead . . ., and death 
and Hades gave up the dead which were in them’. 


even to the horses’ 


15. ‘cast into the lake of fire’. 
Xxll. 3. ‘no more curse’. Cf. xxi. 4. 


(c) Epistles of St. Paul. 

om. viii. 38. ‘angels . . . principalities . . . powers’. 
COLEDHS..2 0/25 COLA AG 

ix. 5. ‘God blessed for ever’. Cf. xi. 31. 

1 Cor. vi. 11. ‘justified in the name of the Lord 
Jesus =: 








t Enoch. 


xii. 4. ‘the Watchers . . 
heaven’ 7... 

x. 4-6, 11,12. ‘Bind... darkness . .. judgement’. 

lx. 8. ‘the seventh from Adam ’. 

190 Ct. iia sexe 

xcil. 4. ‘walk in eternal light’. 

lvili. 5. ‘the darkness is past’. 

cvili. 8. ‘love .. . nor any of the good things which 
are in the world’. 


. who have left the high 


xxv. 4-6. The tree of life. 

xc. 31. ‘clothed in white ’. 

Xxxvii. 5. ‘those that dwell on the earth’. 

xcvil. 8. ‘We have become rich with riches and 
have possessions’. 

Ixii. 14. ‘and with that Son of Man shall they (i.e. the 
righteous) eat and lie down and rise up’. 

xl. 2. ‘On the four sides of the Lord of spirits I 
saw four presences ’. 

xxxix. 13. ‘who sleep not . . . and say’. 

xlvii. 2. The prayer of the righteous for judgement. 

Ixii. 3. ‘the kings, and the mighty, and the exalted 

5. ... Shall be terrified .. . and pain shall seize 
them when they see that Son of Man sitting on the 
throne of his glory’. 

Ixix. 22. ‘spirits . . . of the winds’. 

xlv. 4. ‘I will cause Mine Elect One to dwell among 
them ’. 

Ixexyie And 1 saw 
from heaven’. 

xcix 7. ‘worship stones, and grave images of gold, 
and silver, and wood, (and stone) and clay, and those 
who worship impure spirits and demons’. 

liv. 6. ‘leading astray those who dwell on the earth ’. 

xlviii. 9. ‘burn before the face of the holy .. . sink 
before the face of the righteous ’. 

xx. I and passim. ‘holy angels’. 

c. 3. ‘the horse shall walk up to the breast in the 
blood of sinners’. 

ix. 4. ‘Lord of lords . . . King of kings’, 

li. 1. ‘in those days shall the earth also give back 
that which has been entrusted to it, and Sheol also 
shall give back . . . and hell shall give back . . 

xc. 26. ‘cast into this fiery abyss’. 

xxv. 6. ‘no sorrow or plague or torment or calamity’. 


1 Enoch, 
Ixi. 10. ‘angels of power and . . 
palities ’. 
Ixxvil. r. ‘He who is blessed for ever’. 
xlviii. 7. ‘in his (i.e. the Messiah’s) name they are 
saved ’. 


. and behold a star fell 


. angels of princi- 


180 


INTRODUCTION 


: New Testament. 
2 Cor. iv. 6. ‘to give the light of the knowledge of 
the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ’. 


Eph. i. 9. ‘according to His good pleasure ’. 

ves. “children ‘of light 7, Cf r Zhess. v. 5. 

Co?. ii. 3. ‘in whom are hid all the treasures of 
wisdom and knowledge’. 

1 Thess. V. 3. ‘then sudden destruction cometh 
upon them as travail upon a woman with child’. 

2 Thess.i. 7. ‘the angels of His power’. 

1 Zim. i. 9g. ‘law is not made for a righteous man 
but for the lawless’, &c. 

i. 15. ‘worthy of all acceptation’. Cf. iv. 9. 
v. 21. ‘the elect angels’. 


vi. 15. ‘King of kings and Lord of lords’. 


(@) Epistle to the Hebrews. 

iv. 13. ‘there is no creature that is not manifest in 
His sight: but all things are naked and laid open 
before the eyes of Him with whom we have to do’. 

xi. 5. ‘Enoch was translated ’, &c. 

xii. g. ‘Father of Spirits’. 

(e) Acts of the Apostles. 
ill. 14. ‘the Righteous One’ (= Christ). 


iv. 12. ‘none other name . . . whereby we must 
be saved’. 

x. 4. ‘thy prayers . . . are gone up for a memorial 
before God’. 


xvii. 31. ‘He will judge the world in righteousness 
by the man whom He hath ordained’. 


(f) The Gospels. 
John v.22. ‘He hath committed all judgement unto 
the Son’. 
xii. 36. ‘sons of light’. 
xiv. 2. ‘mansions’. 
Luke i. 52. ‘He hath put down princes from their 
thrones ’. 
ix. 35. ‘ This is My Son, the Elect One’. 


Cf. Luke xvi. 8. 


xviii. 7. ‘Shall not God avenge His elect which cry 
unto Him day and night’. Cf. 2 Pet. ili. 9. 
xxi. 28. ‘your redemption draweth nigh’. 


XXxlii. 35. ‘the Christ of God, the Elect One’. 
Matt. xix. 28. ‘when the Son of Man shal! sit on 
the throne of His glory’. 
‘ye also shall sit on twelve thrones’. 


xix. 29. ‘inherit eternal life’. 
xxv. 41. ‘prepared for the devil and his angels’. 


xxvi. 24. ‘It had been good for that man if he had 
not been born’. 











1 Enoch. 

Xxxvill. 4. ‘the Lord of Spirits has caused His 
light to appear (emended) on the face of the holy, 
righteous and elect’. 

xlix. 4. ‘according to His good pleasure’. 

Cvill. rr. ‘the generation of light’. 

xlvi. 3. ‘the Son of Man . . . who reveals all the 
treasures of that which is hidden’. 

Ixii. 4. ‘Then shall pain come upon them as 
on a woman in travail’. 

Ixi. ro. ‘the angels of power’. 

xclil. 4. ‘a law shall be made for the sinners’. 


xClv. 1. ‘worthy of acceptation ’. 

xxxix. I. ‘elect and holy children . 
high heaven ’. 

ix. 4. ‘Lord of lords . . . King of kings’. 


t L£noch. 

ix. 5. ‘all things are naked and open in Thy sight, 
and Thou seest all things, and nothing can hide itself 
from Thee’. 

xv. I; Ixx. 1-4. 

xxxvil. 2. ‘ Lord of Spirits ’ (and passim in Parables). 


1 Lnoch. 

liu. 6. ‘the Righteous and Elect One’ (= Messiah). 

xlvil. 7. ‘in His (i.e. the Messiah’s) name they are 
saved ’. 

xcix. 3. ‘raise your prayers as a memorial . . . be- 
fore the Most High’. 

xli. 9. ‘He appoints a judge for them all and he 
judges them all before Him’. 


1 Enoch. 

lxix. 27. ‘the sum of judgement was given unto the 
Son of Man’. 

cvili. 11. ‘the generation of light’. 

xxxix. 4. ‘dwelling places of the holy’, &c. 

xlvi. 4. ‘shall +raise upt (Read ‘put down’) the 
kings . . . from their thrones’. 

xl. 5. ‘the Elect One’ (i.e. the Messiah). Cf. xlv. 
3, 4 ‘Mine Elect One? 5 xhix, 2.4. 

xlvil. 1, 2. ‘the prayer of the righteous . . 
judgement may be done unto them’, &c. 

li. 2. ‘the day has drawn nigh that they should be 
saved’. 

x5. ‘the-Plect One: 

Ixii. 5. ‘When they see that Son of Man sitting on 
the throne of his glory ’. 

cviii. 12. ‘I will seat each on the throne of his 
honour ’. 

xl. 9. ‘inherit eternal life’. 

liv. 4, 5. ‘chains . .. prepared for the hosts of 
Azazél’. 

XXxviii. 2. ‘It had been good for them if they had 
not been born’. 


. . from the 


. that 


(c) THE INFLUENCE OF 1 ENOCH ON PATRISTIC LITERATURE. 


Epistle of Barnabas (soon after A. D. 70). ; 
Xvi. 4 A€yer yap 7 ypapy Kal €oTat ér eoxXaTwv TV 
, a a \ 
Hpepav Kal tapaddcet Kvpwos 7a rpdBatra THs vouns Kat 
na > / 
Thy pdvdpay Kal Tov Tupyov abtav eis katapOopav. 


1 Lnoch. 

Ixxxix. 56. ‘He forsook that their house and their 
tower and gave them (i.e. ‘those sheep’) all into the 
hands of the lions, to... devour them. 66... . 
devoured. . . those sheep . . . and they burnt that 
tower and demolished that house’. 


181 


BOOK OF “ENOCH 


Apocalypse of Peter (ed. Robinson and James, 1892). 
2. Tous TewOvtas Kal dwadvtas Kat OALBopevous, Kc. 
3. Thpata . . . evKdtEepa Taocys XLovos Kal épvOpd- 
TEpa TavToS pddov. 
5. pea povyn tov Kiprov Gedy avevpypovr. 
6. of KorAdLovres ayyedou. 
8. adyyeAot Bacavicrai. 


Justin Martyr. 

Apol. ii. 5 of & adyyehkou . . . yovatkov pikeow ArTy- 
Oyoav Kal raidas éréexvwoav, of ciow ot Aeyopevor Sai- 
poves . . . kal eis avOpurovs pdvous, rod€uovs, porxeias 

. kal wacav Kakiav éorepav. Cf. 1. 5. 


Tatian (flor. a. D. 160). 
Oratio adv. Graecos, 8. 
20. 


Athenagoras (about A.D. 170). 

Legatio pro Christiants, 24, 25 ovro. roivuv ot ay- 
yerou ot éxrerdvtes TOV ovpavav, . . . odKért eis TA Srrep- 
oupavia jrepxviar Suvapevor’ Kal at Tov yryavrev Woxai, 
ot wept Tov Kdopov <iol tAaVepevor Saipoves. 


Minucius Felix. 

xxvi ‘Isti igitur spiritus, posteaquam simplicitatem 
substantiae suae . . . perdiderunt . . . non desinunt 
perditi iam perdere . . . et alienati a Deo, inductis 
religionibus a Deo segregare. Eos spiritus daemonas 
esse poetae sciunt .. .’ 


Irenaeus (ob. circa A.D. 202). 

1.15.6... Av dyyedixfs duvdpews “ALalHr roreiv. 

iv. 16. 2 (ed. Stieren) ‘Sed et Enoch . . . cum esset 
homo, legatione ad angelos fungebatur et translatus 
est et conservatur usque nunc testis iudicii Dei, 
quoniam angeli quidam transgressi deciderunt in 
terram in iudicium.’ 

iv. 36. 4. 

v. 28. 2 ‘. . . daemoniis et apostaticis spiritibus 
ministrantibus ei, per eos faciet signa, in quibus 
seducat habitantes super terram.’ 





1 Lnoch. 
Cvlil. 7-9. 
CVI. 2, Io. 


Ixi. g-11. ‘one voice . . . bless’, &c. 
lui. 3, &c. ‘angels of punishment’. 


ix. 8, 9 ; XVAG,10. 


vill. 3. ‘astrology’. 
Vis. 65 XV} 8,00: 


Vi$- Vil FRI Fe vee: 


Vill; xv. 8-123; xXVi.1; xix. 1. 


Vill, 1.) Ch alsorx. ss 
XU. 4-O 5) RUG dV g=7 xv va. 


Xs 2, “a deluge, 7 &c: 
Ree 


Ab, the 


Tertullian, writing between A.D. 197 and 223, regards Enoch as scripture. 


Afpol. xxii. 
De Cultu Fem. i. 2. 
ib, 1ROY 
De Idol. iv. 
De Idol. ix; De Virg. Veland. vii. 


Clement of Alexandria (circa A.D. 150-210). 
Lclogae Prophet. (ed. Dindorf), iii. 456. 


il. 474. 
Strom. ii. 9. 


Julius Africanus (ob. circa A. D. 237). 

Chronographia. ... dyyedou tod obpavod Ovyatpacw 
avOpwirwv cvvpdOov. "Ev évious dvtvypaois evpov ‘oi 
viol rod Geod.’ Ei dt é ayyéhwv vootro éxew rovrovs, 
Tovs mepi payeias Kal yoyretas, er. 8% éprOpav KWTEWS, 
TOV peTEedpwv Tais yvaist THY yvOow TapadedwKévat, ad’ 
ov eroinoay Tovs Taidas tovs yiyavras, Sv obs THs Kaklas 
> 
ervyevomevys . - . 


182 





t En. xv. 8, 9. 
Villiers: 

Vill. 1; 

XIX. 1; xcix. 6, 7. 
Vi sexiveus: 


ab, EY, 
Vill. 2, 3. 


VALS V4, 3 


Vil. I; viil, &c. 


INTRODUCTION 


Origen (A.D. 185-254) does not regard Enoch as inspired, and yet he does not wholly reject it. Cf. Contra 
Celsum, v. 52-4; In loannem, vi. 25 ; In Num. Homtl. xxviii. 2; De Princip. i. 3. 3; iv. 35. 


Acta SS. Perpet. et Felic. (ed. Robinson, p. 72 sqq.). 
Vil. 
<i 

Commodianus (flor. A.D. 250), Lustructiones (ed. Migne, 

Po Lov203—4): 

i. 3. (Deus) Visitari voluit terram ab angelis istam, 
Legitima cuius spreverunt illi dimissi, 
Tanta fuit forma feminarum, quae flecteret illos, 
Ut coinquinati non possent caelo redire. 
Rebelles ex illo contra Deum verba misere. 
Altissimus inde sententiam misit in illos 
De semine quorum gigantes nati feruntur. 
Ab ipsis in terra artes prolatae fuere, 
Et tingere lanas docuerunt et quaeque geruntur, 
Mortales et illi mortuos simulacro ponebant. 
Omnipotens autem, quod essent de semine pravo, 
Non censuit illos recipi defunctos e morte. 
Unde modo vagi subvertunt corpora multa 
Maxime quos hodie colitis et deos oratis. 


Cyprian (flor. A.D. 250). 

De Hab. Virg. 14 (ed. Hartel, i. p. 197) ‘Neque 
Deus ... tinguere . . . docuit . . . lapillis aut mar- 
garitis . . . quae omnia peccatores et apostatae angeli 
suis artibus prodiderunt ... oculos circumducto 
nigrore fucare .. .’ 


Pseudo. Cyprian (third century a. D.). 

Ad Novatianum (ed. Hartel, Cyprian, ili. p. 67) 
‘Ecce venit cum multis milibus nuntiorum suorum 
facere iudicium de omnibus et perdere omnes impios 
et arguere omnem carnem de omnibus factis impiorum 
quae fecerunt impie et de omnibus verbis quae de 
Deo locuti sunt peccatores.’ 


Hippolytus (flor. A.D. 220). 

Or. adv. Graecos (ed. Bunsen, Analecta Ante- 
Nicaea, 1. 393). . « > "Aidov, ev @ cvvéxovTar Wuxat 
ducatwv te Kal ddikwv . . . ‘O “Adns Témos éorly . . . 
dxatacKevacTos, xwpiov tmdye.ov, év © pds Kdcpov ovK 
emiAGpTret. 


Zosimus of Panopolis (third century), quoted in Syz- 
cellus (Dindorf, i. 1829, p. 24). 


Clementine Homilies (fourth century ?). 
Vill. 12 sqq. 





1 Lnoch, 
XXll. Q. 
XIV. Q-17. 


(Cf. Jud. iv. 15). 
Vile Bees 

xiv. 5. 

19:3. Xili. 2. 
Sov4 (SC Xie Sd 
Vile 

Ville. 


0B ale 


xv. 6. 
ya, At 


1 Ex. viii. 1, &e. 


xxii. 3. ‘all the souls of the children of men’. 
xxi. 1. ‘where things were chaotic’... ‘a place 
chaotic ’. 


vi-vili. 


vi. I-Xix. I. 


The Clementine Recognitions has a parallel but independent passage, 1V120;02'7 


Lactantius (flor. A.D. 320) in his Znsézt. ii. 14 (Migne, P. L. vi. 330-2 ; Brandt and Laubmann, i. p. 162 sqq-) 
gives quite a long passage which for its main features is indebted to 1 Loch xiv. 5-7 ; Ixix. 4; vu. 1; 


liv. 6; xv. 8-115 XVI. I; xix. I. 


Inst, iv. 273 v. 18. 

Vile. 7s 

vii. 16. 

vii. 19. 

Vii. 24. 

vii. 26. 
Cassianus (A.D. 360-435). ; 

Collatio viii. 21‘... illa opinio vulgi, qua credunt 
angelos vel maleficia vel diversas artes hominibus 
tradidisse.’ 





Kix.) T: 

XXil. 

ISOOE Pe 

XC, 195 Sel, E2. 
KE 7ed: 

xlviil. 9. 


Vilderme 


183 


BOOK OF ENOCH 


Thenceforward 1 noch fails to secure a single favourable notice. See Hilary, Comment. in Ps. 
cxxxli. 3; Chrysostom, Homil. in Gen.vi.1 ; Ferome, De Viris Illustr. iv, Comment. in Ps. CXXxXii. 3, 
Comment. in Ep. ad Titum i. 12; Augustine, De Civ. Dei, xv. 23, 4, xviii. 38. The book is finally 
condemned in explicit terms in Constit. Apost. vi. 16. From this period the book fell into disuse 
and became lost to the Western Church, except in the fragments preserved by Syncellus in his 
Chronography, pp. 20-3; 42-7 (ed. Dindorf, 1829). These fragments are vi-ix: 4; viii. 4-x. 14; 
xv. 8-xvi. 1 and another. 

There are also, as might be expected, many parallels in Guostic and Apocryphal Literature to 
1 Enoch. 
fistis Sophia (third century ?) ed. Schwartze, 1851-3. 


p. 245. 1 Ln. Xxx 3,6. 
D054: Vid Levitin 
Acts of Thomas (Tisch. Acta Apostolorum Apocrypha). 
Peeks, Cha xx ait VG 5 Texxvi a vitae eae 


Acts of ‘the Disputation of Archelaus with Manes’ 
(perhaps early in fourth century). 
ch. xxxii (Routh, Redigutae, iv. p. 211). IXXxVi..1,° 35 Vil T 3 xXVNgS) XVIIN EE, ous 


The Narrative of Joseph of Arimathaea (date uncertain) has a close parallel to 1 Enoch. 


il. 3 (ed. Tisch. Evangelia Apocrypha, 2nd ed., | c. 10, 12. 
Lipsiae, 1876, p. 465). 


The Apocalypse of Paul has a similar idea. 


4 sqq. (Tisch. Afocal. Apocr. p. 36). Ly Cusko, cae: 

The Book of Adam and Eve (ed. Malan, 1882). 
i. 8, Oat 1 OKO, ALY 
li. 19. Visi. 5s Vall. a 
li. 22. SEKI 407 
lil. 4. vI-x. 


(For the above details in Patristic; and Apocryphal Literature I owe much to Dr. Lawlor in 
Fournal of Philology, xxv (1897) 164-225.) 


§ 11. INFLUENCE ON NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE. 


B. Doctrines in Enoch which had an undoubted share in moulding the corresponding New 
Testament doctrines, or are at all events necessary to the comprehension of the latter. 
(a) The nature of the Messianic kingdom and of the future life. 
(0) The Messiah. 
(c) Sheol and the Resurrection. 
(2) Demonology. 

(2) The Kingdom. We shall only deal with one incident coming under this head ; it is found 
in the three Synoptists: Matt. xxii. 23-33; Mark xii. 18-27 ; Luke xx. 27-36. This incident can 
only be rightly understood from Enoch. When the Sadducees said, ‘Whose wife shall she be of 
them; for the seven had her to wife, they are arguing from the sensuous conception of the 
Messianic kingdom—and this was no doubt the popular one—given in 1 Enoch i-xxxvi, according 
to which its members, including the risen righteous, were to enjoy every good thing of earth, and to 
have each a thousand children. The Sadducees thought thereby to place this young prophet on 
the horns of a dilemma, and oblige Him to confess either that there was no resurrection of the dead, 
or else that polygamy or polyandry would be practised in the coming kingdom. But the dilemma 
proves invalid ; and the conception of the future life portrayed in our Lord’s reply tallies almost 
exactly in thought, and partially in word, with that described in 1 En? xci-ciy; according to which 
there is to ae a erate ae indeed, but a resurrection of the spirit, and the risen righteous are to 
rejoice ‘as the angels of heaven’ (1 En. civ. 4; Matt. xxii. 20: Mark xii. ing ‘ i 
the hosts of heaven’ (1 En. civ. a ; ae ame et 

(6) The Messiah. The Messiah is referred to in xc. 37, 38. He is represented as the head 
of the Messianic community out of which he proceeds, but he has no special rédle to fulfil. and his 

) Presence in that description seems due merely to literary reminiscence. This Messiah-reference 
| exercised no influence on New Testament conceptions. But with regard to the Messiah described 
‘in the Parables the case is very different. Four titles applied for the first time in literature to the 


184 


INTRODUCTION 


pe Messiah in the Parables are afterwards reproduced in the New Testament. These are | 
| rist “ or “the Anointed One’, ‘the Righteous One’, ‘the Elect One’, and ‘the Son of Man’. 
: saben or the Anointed One. This title, found repeatedly in earlier writings but always in 

actual contemporary kings or priests, is now for the first time—see xlviii. 10 ; lii. 4— 
applied to the ideal Messianic king that is to come. It is associated here with supernatural attri- 
butes. A few years later in another writing, the Psalms of Solomon (xvii. 36; xviii. 6, 8), it 
possesses quite a different connotation. In those Psalms the Messiah, though endowed with divine 
gifts, isa man and nothing more, and springs from the house of David. | 

The Righteous One. This title, which occurs in Acts iii. 14; vii. 52; xxii. 14 (cp. 1 John ii. 1), 
first appears in 1 Enoch as a Messianic designation; see 1 En. xxxviii. 2; liii.6. Righteousness is 
one of the leading characteristics of the Messiah, xlvi. 3. 
ee The Elect One. This title likewise appearing first in I En. x5 > xiv. 3-4; xlix. 2,45 li. 3, 5, 

., passes over into the New Testament, Luke ix. 35; xxiii. 35, ‘The Christ, the Elect One.’ 
In the Old Testament we find ‘ Mine Elect’, Isa. xlii. 1, but not ‘the Elect One’. 

_ Lhe Son of Man, This definite title (see notes on xlvi. 2, 3) is found in 1 Enoch for the first | 

time in Jewish literature, and is, historically, the source of the New Testament designation, and 
contributes to it some of its most characteristic contents. For an account of the relations between 
the Enochic and New Testament uses of this title, we must refer to the Appendix on ‘The Son of 
Man’ at the close of the book. 
__ (c) Sheol. If we except the Psalms we have in 1 Enoch the first instances in which this word 
is found in its New Testament signification. For the history of this word and its meanings, see 
note on lxii. 10. Observe that x. 6, 13 refers to an abyss of fire prepared for Semjaza and his 
angels (cf. Matt. xxv. 41; Rev. xx. 4, 13-15). 

_ __It is further interesting to note that the writer of xci—civ delivers himself of a sustained polemic 
in cil. 4-civ. 9 against the Old Testament doctrine of Sheol, and the fact that this writer in xci. 4 
borrows Sirach i. 25 makes it probable that the immediate book he had in view is Sirach, which 
enforces dogmatically and repeatedly the Old Testament doctrine of Sheol. 

The Resurrection. This doctrine, which is first taught beyond possibility of doubt in Dan. xii, 
though a true exegesis will find many intimations of the doctrine in earlier books, was made 
a commonplace of Jewish theology by 1 Enoch. For the various forms this doctrine assumed, see 
note on li. 1. 

(2) The Demonology of 1 Enoch reappears for the most part in the New Testament. 

(a) The angels which kept not their first estate, Jude 6; 2 Pet. ii. 4, are the angelic 
Watchers who fell from lusting after the daughters of men, and whose fall and punishment are 
recounted in 1 En. vi-xvi. They have always been imprisoned in darkness from the time of 
their fall. 

(8) Demons. These are, according to 1 En. xvi. 1, the spirits which went forth from the souls 
of the giants who were the children of the fallen angels and the daughters of men. These demons 
were to work moral ruin on the earth without hindrance till the final judgement as disembodied 
spirits. 

: So in the New Testament. The demons are disembodied spirits, Matt. xii. 43-5; Luke 
xi. 24-6. They are not punished till the final judgement: Matt. viii. 29, ‘Art Thou come 
hither to torment us before the time?’ They are subject to Satan, Matt. xil. 24-8. 

(y) Satan appears in Enoch as the ruler of a counter-kingdom of evil, yet a kingdom subject to 
the Lord of Spirits. He led astray the angels and made them his subjects, liv. 6 ; 1xix. 5. A Satan 
also led astray Eve, lxix.6. The Satans (as in Job) can still appear in heaven, xl. 7. The functions 
of the Satans are threefold: they tempted to evil, Ixix. 4,6; they accused the fallen, xl. 7; they 
punished the condemned as angels of punishment, ital Vie I. 

So in the New Testament there is the counter-kingdom of sin, Matt. xii. 26; Luke xi. 13s 
‘if Satan cast out Satan, how shall his kingdom stand?’ Satan led astray the angels, Rev. xii. 4, 
and led astray man, 2 Cor. xi. 3. The demons are subjects of Satan, Matt. xii. 24-8. The 
functions of Satan are tempting, Matt. iv. 1-12; Luke xxii. 31; accusing, Rev. xii. Io ; 
punishing, 1 Cor. v. 5, where impenitent sinners are delivered over to Satan for punishment. 


185 


BOOK OF ENOCH 


§ 12, BIBLIOGRAPHY, 


(a) CHIEF EDITIONS OF THE TEXT. 


i. TRANSLATIONS. 


LAURENCE. The Look of Enoch, an apocryphal production, now first translated from an Ethiopic MS. in the 
Bodleian Library, Oxford, 1821. 

DILLMANN. Das Buch Henoch tibersetzt und erklirt, Leipzig, 1853. 

SCHODDE. The Book of Enoch translated with Introduction and Notes, Andover, 1882. Let 

CHARLES. The Book of Enoch translated from Dillmann’s Ethiopic Text emended and revised tn accordance 
with hitherto uncollated Ethiopic MSS. and with the Gizeh and other Greek and Latin fragments, Oxford, 
193. 

BEER Fe eahesckes Die Apokryphen und Pseudepigraphen des Alten Testaments, Tiibingen, 1900, ii. 236-310. 

FLEMMING and RADERMACHER. Das Buch Henoch herausgegeben im Auftrage der Kirchenvater-Commission 
der Konighich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Leipzig, 1901. 

MarRTIN. Le Livre d’Hénoch tradutt sur le texte éthiopien, Paris, 1906. 

CHARLES. The Book of Enoch, translated anew from the Editor's Text, with Introduction, Commentary, Critical 
Notes, and Appendices, Oxford, 1912. 


ii. EDITIONS OF THE VERSIONS. 


Editions of the Greek Versions. 


BouRIaNnt. Fragments grecs du livre a’Enoch. Mémoires publiés par les membres de la Mission archéologique 
Srangaise au Caire, tom. ix, pp. 91-136, 1892. : 

L’Evangile et l’ Apocalypse de Pierre avec le texte grec du livre a’Enoch. Texte publié en fac-simile par 
Vhéliogravure a’apres les photographies du manuscrit de Gizeh, Paris, 1893. 

DILLMANN. Siézungsberichte d. Kgl. Preuss. Akademie d. Wissenschaften zu Berlin, 1892, li-liii, pp. 1039-54, 
1079-92. 

Lops. ae Livre @’ Hénoch: Fragments découverts & Akhmim, publiés avec les variantes du texte éthiopien, 
traduits et annotés, Paris, 1892. 

CHARLES. Look of Enoch, pp. 318-70, Oxford, 1893. In this work I attempted an exhaustive comparison of 
the Greek and Ethiopic texts. \ 

SWETE. Zhe Old Testament tn Greek, vol. iii. 

RADERMACHER. Das Buch Henoch, herausgegeben ... von J. Flemming und L. Radermacher, pp. 18-60, 
113-14, Leipzig, 1901. This text on the whole is well edited. As Dr. Radermacher is not a Semitic 
scholar he was sorely handicapped in editing a Greek text which is Greek in vocabulary, but largely Semitic 
in idiom. 

The Vatican Fragment, written in tachygraphic characters (Vatican, No. 1809), was published by Mai, Patrum 
Nova Bibliotheca, tom. ii, and deciphered by Gildemeister in ZDJZG, 1885, pp. 621-4, and studied afresh by 
von Gebhardt in Merx’ Archiv, ii. 243, 1872. 


Editions of the Ethiopic Version. 


LAURENCE. Libri Enoch Versio Aethiopica, Oxoniae, 1838. This text was issued simply as a transcript of a, 
one of the MSS. brought to Europe by Bruce, the great Abyssinian traveller, in 1773. 

DILLMANN. Liber Henoch, Aethopice, ad guingue codicum fidem editus, cum variis lectionibus, Lipsiae, 1851. 

CHARLES. The Book of Enoch, Oxford, 1893. This translation was based on a drastic revision of Dillmann’s 
text. Ten new MSS., belonging to the British Museum, were used, 2, ¢ being of primary importance, and 
Jfhikino being of only secondary. 7 

FLEMMING. Das Buch Henoch: Aethiopischer Text herausgegeben von Joh, Flemming (= Texte und Unter- 
suchungen, Neue Folge, vii. 1). Leipzig, 1902. Dr. Flemming’s text is based on fifteen MSS., abcdeg,g, 
mpgtuvwy. This editor had been at no little pains in the preparation of the text. His collations of 
gmq, however, are inaccurate and defective. 


(2) CHIEF CRITICAL INQUIRIES. 


LUCKE. Lvinleitung in die Offenbarung des Johannes (2nd ed., 1852), pp. 89-144 ; 1071-3. 

DILLMANN. Das Buch Henoch iibersetzt und erklart, Leipzig, 1853. In this edition he insisted that the book 
proceeded from one author with the exception of certain historical allusions, vi-xvi; xci. 12-17 ; xciii; cvi, 
cvii; and certain Noachic interpolations, liv. 7-Iv. 2; Ix; Ixv-Ixix. 25, and also of 90.9 boda Iheain tyr Iboodil 
9-20 ; Cviii. 

In 1860, in Herzog’s 2. Z. (ed. 1), vol. xii. 308-10, he recognized the separate authorship of xxxvii-Ixxi 
and its priority to the rest of the book. : 

In 1883, in Herzog’s R. E. (ed. 2), vol. xii. 350-2, he describes 1 Enoch as a mere ‘ combination of the 
Enoch and Noah writings’, and concedes that xxxvii-Ixxi are later than the rest of the book. 

EwaLb. <Abhandlung iiber des athiopischen Buches Henokh Entstehung, Sinn und Zusammensetzung, 1855 ; 
fiistory of Israel, v. 345-9 (translated from the German). ; ; 

HILGENFELD. Die jiidische Apokalyptik, 1857, pp. 91-184. 

HALEvy. ee sur la langue de la rédaction primitive du livre d’Enoch’ (Journal Asiatigue, 1867, 
PP- 352-95). 

186 


INTRODUCTION 


GEBHARDT. ‘Die 70 Hirten des Buches Henoch und ihre Deutungen mit besonderer Riicksicht auf die Barkochba- 
Hypothese’ (Merx’ Archiv fiir wissenschaftl. Erforschung des A. T., 1872, vol. ii, Heft ii, pp. 163-246). 

TIDEMAN. ‘De Apocalypse van Henoch en het Essenisme ’ (Theol. Tijdschrift, 1875, pp. 261-96). 

DkUMMOND. The Jewish Messiah, 1877, pp. 17-73. 

SCHURER. A History of the Jewish People in the Time of Jesus Christ (translated from the second and revised 
edition of the German), vol. iii, div. ii, pp. 54-73, 1886. 

BALDENSPERGER, Das Selbsthewusstsein Jesu, 1888, pp. 7-16. 

CHARLES. The Book of Enoch, translated from Professor Dilimann’s Ethiopic Text, emended and revised in 
accordance with hitherto uncollated Ethiopic MSS. and with the Gizeh and other Greek and Latin Sragments, 
Oxford, 1893. 

CLEMEN. Theologische Studien und Kritiken, 1898, pp. 211-27, ‘ Die Zusammensetzung des Buches Henoch’. 

BEER. ‘Das Buch Henoch’ in Kautzsch’s Die 4 pocryphen und Pseudepigraphen des A. T., vol. ii, 1900, 
pp. 224-30. 

FLEMMING and RADERMACHER. Das Buch Henoch, Leipzig, 1901. 

MARTIN. Le Livre a’Hénoch traduit sur le texte éthiopien, Paris, 1906. 


[For further details see my new 
Commentary, /x¢troduction, § 9.] 


(c) CHIEF EDITIONS OF THE Book. 


See under Translations, § 12 (a) i. 


LAURENCE. BEER. 

DILLMANN. FLEMMING and RADERMACHER. 
SCHODDE. MARTIN. 

CHARLES. CHARLES, 


§ 13. ABBREVIATIONS AND BRACKETS SPECIALLY USED IN THE TRANSLATION OF 1 ENOCH. 


a, 6, c, d, &c., denote the Ethiopic MSS. 

a denotes the earlier Ethiopic MSS., ie. 2, gq ¢1. ; : . 

8 denotes the later Ethiopic MSS., i.e. a cd, &c. (i.e. from @ to 2,a,4, with the exception of the earlier MSS.). 

E denotes the Ethiopic Version. ¢ , 

G§ denotes the fragments of the Greek Version preserved in Syncellus: in the case of 8>-g» there are two forms 
of the text, G*! Gs’. ; f : ' 

G§& denotes the large fragment of the Greek Version discovered at Akhmim, and deposited in the Gizeh 
Museum, Cairo. - : 

Two special brackets are used in the translation of 1 Enoch: ; 

r The use of these brackets means that the words so enclosed are found in G8 but not in E. 


T T_ ‘The use of these brackets means that the words so enclosed are found in E but not in G8 or G’. 


187 


BOOK OF EN@OGE 


Section I, CuHapters I—XXXVI 
INTRODUCTION 
I-V. Parable of Enoch on the Future Lot of the Wicked and the Righteous. 


1: The words of the blessing of Enoch, wherewith he blessed the elect "and" righteous, who will be 
2 living in the day of tribulation, when all the wicked "and godless" are to be removed. And he 
took up his parable and said—Enoch a righteous man, whose eyes were opened by God, saw the vision 
of the Holy One in the heavens, 'which! the angels showed me, and from them I heard everything, 
and from them I understood as I saw, but not for this generation, but for a remote one which is 

3 for to come. Concerning the elect I said, and took up 'my' parable concerning them : 


The Holy Great One will come forth from His dwelling, 

4 And the eternal God will tread upon the earth, (even) on Mount Sinai, 
[And appear from His camp] 
And appear in the strength of His might from the heaven 'of heavens|. 


5 And all shall be smitten with fear, 
And the Watchers shall quake, 
And great fear and trembling shall seize them unto the ends of the earth. 


6 And the high mountains shall be shaken, 
And the high hills shall be made low, 
And shall melt like wax before the flame. 


I. 1. The blessing of Enoch. Cf. Deut. xxxiii. 1, ‘the blessing of Moses.’ 

the elect and righteous. This phrase is found also in xxxviii. 2, 3, 4, xxxix. 6, 7, xlviii. 1, Iviii. 1, 2, Ix. 13, lxiii. 
UPA AIGY Wn 15%. 

day ...removed. Cf. Pss. Sol. iv. 9 (a citation ?). 

all the wicked. Here Gk. reads mdvras rovs éyOpovs = pyynnby corrupt for oyin-5>. So E. 

removed +‘and the righteous will be saved’ G8. 

2. took up his parable, &c. So G8. Cf. Num. xxiv. 3, 4, whence also ‘ eyes were opened ’ (of Balaam). 

saw. ‘had’ G8, corrupt. 

the Holy One. See verse 3. The change from the first to the third person, as here, is frequent in this book. 
Cf. xii. 1-3, xxvii. 1, 2, xx. I, 3, Ixxi. 5, xcii. 1, and esp. xci-civ. 

to come + ‘do I speak’ Gs. 

3. the elect. This designation belongs mainly to the Parables. It occurs ini. 8, v. 7, xxv. 5, xl. 5, xli. 2, xlviii. 1, 9, 
INS) Bn Iii (os Sh INAV A IE, AY TD, Ib 9h SE UNtity oe, 2 

3°-9. A poem consisting of tristichs. The discovery of this structure is helpful in the restoration of the text, 
especially in stanzas 1 and 7. 

Holy Great One. So G8, E always has ‘Holy and Great One’. Also in x. I, xiv. I, xxv. 3, DocdVentxclianas 
XCVil. 6, xcvili. 6, civ. 9. God is called simply ‘The Holy One’ in i. 2, xciii. 11; and ‘ The Great One’ in xiv. 2, Cili. 4, 
Clv. I (twice). f 

come forth from His dwelling. Mic. i. 3, Isa. xvi. 21, Ass. Mos. x. 3. 

the eternal God = odin sabe, 6 Geds rod ai@vos. Cf. Gen. xxi. 33, Isa. xl. 28, Rom xvi. 26. This could also be 
translated ‘ God of the world’. Cf. lviii. 4, Ixxxi. 10, Ixxxii. 7, lxxxiv. 2; also xii. 3, Ixxxi. 3 (‘Lord, King... of the world’). 

4. Sinai, where the law was given, will be the place of future judgement. Cf. Deut. xxxiii. 2; Ps. Ixviii. 17. Verses 
4-9 all deal with the final judgement. 

upon the earth G8, ‘thence’ E. 

[And appear from His camp]. So G8’, a needless repetition after ‘from his dwelling’. It spoils the 
parallelism. E has ‘and appear with His hosts’. ; 

5. Watchers. Here and in x. 9, 15, xii. 4, xiii. 10, xiv. 1, 3, XV. 2, Xvi. I, 2, xci. 15 = fallen angels. In xii. DBO XK os 
Xxxix. 12, 13, xl. 2, Ixi. 12, xxi. 7 = archangels. The name first occurs in Dan. iv. 13, 17, 23. The Greek here 
inaptly inserts the singing of the Watchers (see 2 En. xviii). 

quake E, ‘believe’ G8. 

6. Cf. O.T.; e.g. Ps. xcvii. 5, Mic. i. 4, and Ass. Mos. x. 4. 

shaken + ‘shall fall and be dissolved’ G8. 

made low + ‘so that the mountains shall waste away’ G8. 


188 


21 


2 


POg@ieOr ENOCH 1075-5. 2 


And the earth shall be ‘wholly! rent in sunder, 
And all that is upon the earth shail perish, 
And there shall be a judgement upon all (men). 


But with the righteous He will make peace, 
And will protect the elect, 
And mercy shall be upon them. 


And they shall all belong to God, 
And they shall be prospered, 
And they shall ‘all' be blessed. 


fAnd He will help them all’, 
And light shall appear unto them, 
"And He will make peace with them’. 


And behold! He cometh with ten thousands of 'His! holy ones 
To execute judgement upon all, 
And to destroy ‘all' the ungodly : 


And to convict all flesh 
Of all the works ‘of their ungodliness’ which they have ungodly committed, 
And of all the hard things which! ungodly sinners ‘have spoken' against Him. 


Observe ye everything that takes place in the heaven, how they do not change their orbits, 'and? 
the luminaries which are in the heaven, how they all rise and set in order each in its season, and trans- 
gress not against their appointed order. Behold ye the earth, and give heed to the things which 
take place upon it from first to last, "how steadfast they are', how "none of the things upon earth! 


3 change, ‘but! all the works of God appear ‘to you'. Behold the summer and the winter, "how 


3 


NS 


the whole earth is filled with water, and clouds and dew and rain lie upon it." 

Observe and see how (in the winter) all the trees "seem as though they had withered and shed 
all their leaves, except fourteen trees, which do not lose their foliage but retain the old foliage from 
two to three years till the new comes. 

And again, observe ye the days of summer how the sun is above the earth over against it. And 
you seek shade and shelter by reason of the heat of the sun, and the earth also burns with glowing 
heat, and so you cannot tread on the earth, or on a rock by reason of its heat. 

Observe ye" how the trees cover themselves with green leaves and bear fruit: wherefore give ye 
heed ‘and know! with regard to all "His works', and recognize how He that liveth for ever hath 


made them so. 
And ‘all’ His works go on ‘thus! from year to year ‘for ever', and all the tasks which they 


8. will make peace. See v. 4 (note). = *, hi S = oe 
the righteous. i. 7, 8, v. 6, XXV. 4, XXXVIIL. 3, XX¥IX, 4, xlill. 4, xlvii. 1, 2, 4, xlvill. I, 7, 9, Leos Mille Zon Lvs zy Ivili, 3, 5; 
Ix. 2, Ixi. 3, Ixii. 3, Ixxxii. 4, XCiV. 3, I1, XCV. 3, 7, xCVi. I, 8, XCVil. 1, 3, 5, XCVIIl. 12-14, XCIX. 3, C. By 7) LOuiClle4 5) 10, 

il. iv. T2513. ; megee 

- eae ra So E. G®& has éml rods ékXextovs €orat ouvTnpycts. Cf. Wisd. Ave tho ek 
they shall be prospered. rv teddoxiavt dace adtois G8, corrupt for evodiay as in Sir. xliii. 26. 
light. Cf. xxxvili. 4. This 7th stanza is restored from the Greek. E omits two clauses of the tristich. 

9. Quoted by St. Jude 14, 155 Pseudo-Cyprian (ed. Hartel iii. 67) ; Pseudo- Vigilius (Migne Ixii. col. 363). The 
Greek supplies the defects in the Ethiopic, i.e. ‘ His’, ‘all’, ‘ of their ungodliness’ ‘and hard words which’ ‘have spoken’. 
Cf. v. 4, xxvii. 2, ci. 3. Fora full discussion of the literary problem see my edition of Enoch in Anecdota Oxoniensia, 
Semitic Series, Part xi, pages 5 and 7. The Greek, however, has ére wrongly for idov, and a dittograph in the last 
aces peaecacs of His holy ones. Cf. Deut. xxxiil. 2, Dan. vii. 10. The angels are so called in xii. 2, xiv. 23, 
xxxix. 5, xlvii. 2, Ivii. 2, Ix. 4, Ixi. 8, 10, 12, Ixv. 12, Ixix. 13, Ixxxi. 5, Cili. 2, Cvi, 19, as already in Job v. 1, ay ae ek 
xiv. 5, Dan. iv. 13, vill. 13. They are called ‘holy angels’ in xx. 1-7, XXI. 5, 9, Xxil. 3, xxiv. 6, xxvii. 2, xxxil. 6, Ixxi. 8, 
xciii. 2. And ‘holy ones of heaven’ in ix. 3. For other names see vi. 2 (note). 

ii— f nature is contrasted with the disorder of man’s world. In Test. Naph. iii. 2, 3, men are 
Pee Pee sun, moon, and stars observe their appointed order, and the Watchers who left their 


natural order are held up as a warning. Cf, Sirach xvi. 26-28, Pss. Sol. xviii, 12-14. 


. “corruptible’ G8, possibly a misreading of D'232 as ordap. Fa es 
epee red x seasons only: Summer and Winter. Cf. Gen. viii. 22, Isa. xviii. 6, Zech. xiv. 8. 


i i Greek Verss. of Test. of xii 
fourteen evergreen trees see Geoponica xl. I. The twelve trees (see my ) f 
ee oes PA) for use arith sacrifices have nothing to do with this list here. The Greek has lost iii. 1®-v. 1% 
DD: 
through homoeoteleuton. 


V.2. allthe tasks...change not ‘ all His works serve Him and change not’ E. 


189 


3 


4 


‘ BOOK OF ENOCH 65. 2-9 


accomplish for Him, and 'their tasks! change not, but according as God hath ordained so is 
it done. 

And behold how the sea and the rivers in like manner accomplish and ‘change not! their tasks 
‘from His commandments|. 


But ye—ye have not been steadfast, nor done the commandments of the Lord, 
But ye have turned away and spoken proud and hard words 

With your impure mouths against His greatness. 

Oh, ye hard-hearted, ye shall find no peace. 


Therefore shall ye execrate your days, 

And the years of your life shall perish, 

And the ‘years of your destruction! shall be multiplied in eternal execration, 
And ye shall find no mercy. 


In those days ye shall make your names an eternal execration unto all the righteous, 
And by you shall ‘all’ who curse, curse, . 

‘And all' the sinners ‘and godless! shall imprecate by you, 

And for you the godless there shall be a curse. 


‘And all the . . . shall rejoice, 

And there shall be forgiveness of sins, 

And every mercy and peace and forbearance : 
There shall be salvation unto them, a goodly light. 


And for all of you sinners there shall be no salvation, 
But on you all shall abide a curse! 

But for the elect there shall be light and joy and peace, 
And they shall inherit the earth. 


And then there shall be bestowed upon the elect wisdom, 
And they shall all live and never again sin, 

Either through ungodliness or through pride: 

But they who are wise shall be humble. 


And they shall not again transgress, 

Nor shall they sin all the days of their life, 

Nor shall they die of (the divine) anger or wrath, 

But they shall complete the number of the days of their life. 


And their lives shall be increased in peace, 
And the years of their joy shall be multiplied, 
In eternal gladness and peace, 

All the days of their life. 


4. the commandments of the Lord. Cf. xcix. 2 ‘ the eternal law’. 
of the Lord: ‘ His’ Gs, 
proud and hard words. See i. 9, note, and Cf. Ps. xii. Ac] Dan. wvilsco)e11,.2oseebhe charge of blasphemy is 
frequent in xci-civ, e.g. xci. 7, II. 
greatness + ‘for ye have spoken with your lies’ G8, a gloss. 
hard-hearted. Cf. xcviii. 11, c. 8 ‘ obstinate of heart ’. 
ye shall find no peace. This phrase occurs only in i-xxxvi and xCi-Civ, v. 4, xii. 5, xiii. 1, xvi. 4, xciv. 6, xcviii. 
II, 15, XCIx. 13, Ci. 3, Cli. 3, cili. 8, and cf. i. 8. Cf. Isa. xlviii. 22, lvii. 21. 
5. shall perish G8. ‘ye shall destroy’ E, corruptly. 
6. ye shall make your names E (lit. ‘give’). ‘your names shall be’ G8. Read perhaps ‘ye shall leave’, &c., 
as in Isa, Ixy. 15. 
by you... curse G8. ‘you shall the sinners curse’ E, wrongly. For G8 cf. Ps. cii. 9. G8 adds five lines, of 
which one or two only can be original. I have transferred 7¢, so as to give three parallel tetrastichs in Oy We 
7. The temporal blessings promised in the O.T., cf. Ps. xxxvii. II, are here renewed, but the writer has forsaken 
O.T. ground on the question of Sheol and the Resurrection. 
joy E, ‘grace’ G8, 
8. bestowed upon the elect wisdom. See xlii. I, 2. G8 adds in this verse doublets from 7ae Ba, 
wise ... humble seems suspicious. G8 adds largely, and omits ‘ humble’. 
9. Cf. Isa. Ixv. 20, 22, Zech. viii. 4; 1 En. xxv. 4, 5 (note). 
“Sin Gs. ‘be judged’ E, another meaning of DWN’, 
increased, multiplied. Cf. Gen. i. 22, &c., but here of spiritual expansion. 


1900 


BOOK OF ENOCH 6. 1-8 


VI-XI. The Fall of the Angels: the Demoralization of Mankind: the Intercession of the Angels on 


behalf of Mankind. The Dooms pronounced by God on the Angels: the Messianic Kingdom— 
(a Noah fragment). 


61 And it came to pass when the children of men had multiplied that in those days were born unto 

2 them beautiful and comely daughters. And the angels, the children of the heaven, saw and lusted 

after them, and said to one another: ‘ Come, let us choose us wives from among the children of men 

3 and beget us children.’ And Semjaza, who was their leader, said unto them: ‘I fear ye will not 

4 indeed agree to do this deed, and I alone shall have to pay the penalty of a great sin.’ And they 

all answered him and said : ‘ Let us all swear an oath, and all bind ourselves by mutual imprecations 

5 not to abandon this plan but to do this thing.’ Then sware they all together and bound themselves 

6 by mutual imprecations upon it. And they were in all two hundred ; who descended ‘in the days! 

of Jared on the summit of Mount Hermon, and they called it Mount Hermon, because they had sworn 

7 and bound themselves by mutual imprecations upon it. And these are the names of their leaders : 

Samiazaz, their leader, Arakiba, Raméél, Kékabiél, Tamiél, Ramiél, Danél, Ezéqéél, Bardqjjal, 

8 Asaél, Armarés, Batarél, Ananél, Zaqiél, Samsapéél, Satarél, Tarél, Jomjaél, Sariél. These are 
their chiefs of tens. 


VI-XI. These chapters are abruptly introduced. See introduction. vi. 3-8, vill. I-3, ix. 7, x. 11 belong to a 
Semjaza cycle of myths. As in Ixix. 2 he is chief and Azazel only tenth in command, Elsewhere in Enoch Azazel 
is chief and Semjaza is not mentioned. These myths, however, were already confused in their present form when 
Ixxxvili-Ixxxix. I were written. Again, x. 1-3 belongs to an Apocalypse of Noah, many fragments of which occur in 
Enoch. Syncellus gives an additional fragment of it after x. 3. Indeed, vi-xi is all Noachic ; cf. Jub. vii. 21-25, and 
my edition of Jubilees Ixxi seq., 264. xii-xvi, however, belong to the Book of Enoch. 


VI. 2. children of the heaven. Cf. xiii. 8, xiv. 3, xxxix. I. See xv. 1-7. Cf. ‘sons of the holy angels’ Ixxi. 1, 
and note. 

The entire myth of the angels and the daughters of men in Enoch arises from Gen. vi. 1-4: ‘the sons of God came 
in unto the daughters of men.’ This refers not to alliances between Sethites and Cainites, but to an early Persian (?) 
myth to the effect that before Zoroaster’s coming demons had corrupted the earth and allied themselves with women 
(Bousset, Rel. d. Jud. 382, 560). The original LXX rendering for ‘sons of God’ was é@yyeAo rod Geod, as in Philo, de 
Gigantibus, Justin Martyr, AZol. ii. 5, Eusebius, Augustine, and Ambrose. On the myths see Griinbaum in ZDMG 
xxxi. 225 ff., and for statements dependent on this account in Enoch, or harmonizing with it, cf. Jub. iv. 15, v. 1 seqq. ; 
Test. Reub. v. 6, 7, Test. Naph. iii. 5, 2 En. vii, xviii, Jude 6,2 Pet. ii. 4; Joseph, Amz. i. 3. 15 Philo, de Gegantibus ; 
Justin Martyr, Afol.i. 5; Ps. Clement, Hom. viii. 13; Clem. Alex. Strom. v.1. 10; Tert. de Virg. Veland. vii; Adv. 
Marcion. v.18; De Idol. ix; Lact. Jnstit. ii. 15 ; Commodian, /mstruct. i. 3. In the De Czv. Dez xv. 23 Augustine 
combats this view and denies the inspiration of Enoch which Tertullian had upheld. 

saw and >Gé. 

4. And they >Gé. 
and said >G8. hts : he 
6. in the days of Jared see cvi. 13. Sothe Greek; the Ethiopic is corrupt. We thus get two paronomasiae in 
the Hebrew: Jared, and 37" ‘descend’, and Hermon and nn ‘acurse’. For the tradition cf. Orig. Comment. zn Lloann. 
tom. viii, p. 132, ed. Huet. ; Epiphanius, Adv. Haer. i. 4, ed. Petav., tom. i, p- 43 Hilary, Comm. in Ps. Cxxxii. 3. 

The reasons for the angels’ descent in the Book of Jubilees differ from those given in this chapter. There in iv and 
v it is said that the Watchers were sent to earth by God ‘to instruct the children of men to do judgement and upright- 
ness’, and that when so doing they began to lust after the daughters of men. Cf. Test. Reub. v.6. In 1 Enoch the 
angels are said to have descended because of their lust, and the same reason is given in Jalkut Shim. eresh. 44. 

ud. Theologieé, 253. es 
ra wh ee Tee es implicit polemic against this and other statements of Enoch. Inlater tradition Azazel 
could not return to heaven because he had outstayed the seven days’ limit assigned to angelic visitants to earth. 
7. This list is incomplete, as a name has been lost after Tarél. 

Samiazaz: possibly myn or *xrmnw (cf. Shamchazai in Targ. Jon. on Gen. vi. 3). prin Mei f,-2x 

RAméél: probably corrupt for Arakiél as in GS’. In vill. 3 G§ says of Arakiél, 6 d€ Tpiros edidakey ra onucia Tis 
yns. Now in Aramaic pry = ‘earth’, and thus his duties are reflected in his name. He is mentioned as unfallen in 
Sib. Or. ii, 215-217. 

Kékabiél = ‘star of God’. 

TAmiél = ‘perfection of Cae = a 

Amiél : 2 . lv. ib. Or. 11, 215-217. 3 : : ’ Py 
fesged!: A ee G de 6 be 8800s Jibaker depookortay ; thus his name describes his functign, as pnw = anp 
(2 Kings xxii. 12). os : 5 , 
ee ee ae (G8). In vili. 3 G® says he edidaev hice émandds ... kal émaovdey urnptov : 
the name thus may come from 73n, 4 spell or incantation, and be Abaros or something Rhee: a tN ee, 
Samsapéél. G' in viii. 5 assigns to the 7th ra onpeia tod HAiov. So the name should be Shamshiel, For the 


sun-god Shamash see K.A.7. 3 367-370. 
Tarél = ‘rock of God 3 
Jom ee saat CE) Sesareél (viii. 3). G8 (viii. 3) assigns him ra onpeia tys oeAnvns, so these forms are corrupt for 
? ? : eo vee on 5 
Sariel (G8) "nD = ‘moon’. G8 gives Seriel in viii. 3 but Atriel here. 
8. chiefs of tens. G& has dpyat airéy of déka, an Aramaic construction = our text. Cf. xix. 2 G. 


191 


7 


8 


Q ce! 9 


I 


2 


3 
4 


5 
6 


I 


2 


3 


BOOK OF ENOCH 7. 1—9%. 3 


And all the others together with them took unto themselves wives, and each chose for himself one, 
and they began to go in unto them and to defile themselves with them, and they taught them charms 
and enchantments, and the cutting of roots, and made them acquainted with plants. And they 
became pregnant, and they bare great giants, whose height was three thousand ells : Who consumed 
all the acquisitions of men. And when men could no longer sustain them, the giants turned against 
them and devoured mankind. And they began to sin against birds, and beasts, and reptiles, and 
fish, and to devour one another’s flesh, and drink the blood. Then the earth laid accusation against 
the lawless ones. 

And Azazél taught men to make swords, and knives, and shields, and breastplates, and made 
known to them the metals (of the earth) and the art of working them, and bracelets, and ornaments, 
and the use of antimony, and the beautifying of the eyelids, and all kinds of costly stones, and all 
colouring tinctures. And there arose much godlessness, and they committed fornication, and they 
were led astray, and became corrupt in all their ways. Semjaza taught enchantments, and root- 
cuttings, "Armarés the resolving of enchantments, Baraqijal (taught) astrology, Kékabél the con- 
stellations, Ezéqéél the knowledge of the clouds, <Araqiél the signs of the earth, Shamsiél the signs 


4 of the sun), and Sariél the course of the moon. And as men perished, they cried, and their cry 


I 


N 


went up to heaven... 

And then Michael, Uriel, Raphael, and Gabriel looked down from heaven and saw much blood being 
shed upon the earth, and all lawlessness being wrought upon the earth. And they said one to another : 
‘The earth made twithout inhabitant cries the voice of their cryingst up to the gates of heaven. 
"And now to you, the holy ones of heaven", the souls of men make their suit, saying, ‘‘Bring our cause 


VII. The Ethiopic and Greek vary considerably in this and the eighth chapter. The notes of time in the Greek are 
due to later hands. 
I. charms and enchantments. Cf. Wisdom xii. 4, Joseph. Azz. viii. 2. 5. 
2. great giants. For further references to these cf. Wisdom xiv. 6, Tob. vi. 14, Sir. xvi. 7, I Bar. iii. 26, 3 Macc. ii. 4, 
Jubilees vii. 22, 23. 
three thousand ells. Syncellus omits the height, and the misdeeds of the giants (verses 3-6), but adds ‘And 
they bare unto them three kinds (of offspring) ; first, great giants. And the giants tbegot the Naphilim and to the 
Naphilim weret born the Eliud. And they grew according to their greatness’, The Eth. and the Giz. Gk. have lost 
this from the original. Jub. vii. 21-22 is based on this passage and enables us to correct ‘begot’ and ‘ were born’ to 
‘slew’. Also in vii. 24 Jub. quotes most of viii. 5. Cf. E and GS (omitted by GS). Thus both lines of text E G8 and Gs 
are here defective. The three classes of giants go back to Gen. vi. 4 ; cf., too, 1 En. Ixxxvi. 4, Ixxxviii. 2 and Jub. vii. 
21, 22 (Giants, Naphil, Eljé). 
5. drink the blood. With the Jews a great crime. Gen. ix. 4; 1 Sam. xiv. 32-34; Acts xv. 20; Jub. vii. 28, 
xxl. 6, 1 En, xcviii. 11. 
one another’s flesh. One class of giants destroyed another. Cf. Jub. vii. 22. 


VIII. 1. Azazél. See note on vi-xi, also x. 4 note. The origin of the name is unknown. See Lucyc. Bib. tn loc. 
Azazél here is first in order and tenth in command according to Syncellus, who alone adds a number. He calls 
Semjaza the mp@rapxos in verse 3. 

metals... antimony, &c. Cf. Tert. De Cultu Fem.i.2; ii. 10 (‘ut Enoch refert’), where he follows this passage 
closely. Cf., too, Test. Reub. v. 5, 6; Isa. iii. 16-24. The Ethiopic misread péradda (G*) as per’ adtd, G8 as peydda. 

the metals of the earth G*. So E on repeating the phrase in a doublet. G® ends this verse: ‘And the children 
of men made (them) for themselves and their daughters and transgressed and led astray the holy ones.’ This con- 
ep ate our Noachic text, and agrees with Jub. and Test. xii Patr. where the women by these arts seduce the 
angels. 

2-3. The variations between the Eth. and G8 are here numerous. 

2. and they committed ... astray > G‘. 

3. resolving of enchantments. Dan. v. 12; cf.1 En. xcv. 4 ‘anathemas that cannot be resolved’. 

astrology. Cf. Clem. Alex. Eclog. Proph. Dind. iii. 474 ’Evox gnow tots mapaBdvras dyyédous Siddéar rods 
avOpamous dorpovopiay kal pavtikiy kal tas dAdas Téxvas. 
Several of these names correspond to the functions. See vi. 7 (notes). G* alone gives us the complete list, and 
he giyes their numbers not their names, according to their order in vi. 7. 
Ezéqéél. E reads Tamiél wrongly here (See vi. 7, note), G has Sathél, and G8 E dorepockoniay for depookoriay.. 
; After vill. 3 G* introduces ‘after this the giants began to devour men’s flesh’, and this leads up to viii. 4, the cry 
of men. 

4. to heaven + ‘saying Bring our cause before the Most High and our destruction before the Great Glory, before 

the Lord of all the lords in greatness’ G8”, Cf. ix. 3. 


IX. 1. And then (E), ‘then’ G8, + ‘the four great archangels hearing’ GS12, 
The Eth. has Surjan and Urjan, i.e. Suriel and Uriel. For Suriel the Greek has Raphael, thus giving us the usual 
four archangels. See xl. 2 (note). 
looked down from heaven. Ps. xiv. 2. 
2. the earth... heaven: ‘the voice of them that cry upon the earth to the gates of heaven’ G8. 
without inhabitant. Cf. Ixvii. 2, Ixxxiv. 5; Test. Naph. iii. 5. 
3. and now... heaven. Lost in G8!” through hmt. 
holy ones. See i. 9 (note). 
T92 


BOOK (OF BNOCH: 9. 4—10: 5 


4 before the Most High.”’’ And they said to the Lord of the ages: ‘ Lord of lords. God of i 
of kings, (and God of the ages), the throne of Thy glory (standeth) unto all the eet oo 
5 ages, and Thy name holy and glorious and blessed unto all the ages! Thou hast made all things, and 
power over all things hast Thou: and all things are naked and open in Thy sight, and Thou seest all 
6 things, and nothing can hide itself from Thee. Thou seest what Azdzél hath done, who hath taught 
all unrighteousness on earth and revealed the eternal secrets which were (preserved) in heaven, which 
7 men were striving to learn: And Semjaza, to whom Thou hast given authority to bear rule over 
8 his associates. And they have gone to the daughters of men upon the earth, and have slept with the 
9 women, and have defiled themselves, and revealed to them all kinds of sins. And the women have 
to borne giants, and the whole earth has thereby been filled with blood and unrighteousness. And now, 
behold, the souls of those who have died are crying and making their suit to the gates of heaven, 
and their lamentations have ascended: and cannot cease because of the lawless deeds which are 
1r wrought on the earth. And Thou knowest all things before they come to pass, and Thou seest 
these things and Thou dost suffer them, and Thou dost not say to us what we are to do to them 
in regard to these.’ 
1 Then said the Most High, the Holy and Great One spake, and sent Uriel to the son of Lamech, 
2 and said to him: ¢‘ Go to Noah and) tell him in my name “ Hide thyself!’ and reveal to him the 
end that is approaching: that the whole earth will be destroyed, and a deluge is about to come 
3 upon the whole earth, and will destroy all that is on it. And now instruct him that he may escape 
4 and his seed may be preserved for all the generations of the world.’ And again the Lord said to 
Raphael: ‘Bind Azazél hand and foot, and cast him into the darkness: and make an opening 
Sin the desert, which is in Didaél, and cast him therein. And place upon him rough and jagged 


Most High. See xcix. 3 (note). 

_ 4. The angels’ prayer is fuller in G%, and a still more rhetorical form of it occurs in Ixxxiv. 2, 3. For angelic 
intercession see v. Io note. 

Lord of the ages. So G*. Lord of the kings E, >Gss*. (and God of the ages) G*”’. 

5. power over all things EG’, ‘all power’ G8. ' 

and nothing ...seest. Lost in G8 through hmt. 

6. revealed .. to learn, G8. E corrupt, but easily emended to our text. For ¢yywcay G8 we read yvava as G* 
suggests. G® ‘revealed to. the world the things which are (preserved) in heaven. And the children of men are 
practising his practices in order to know the mysteries’. 

the eternal secrets, &c. What these are is not told. 

7. {and) G8. Semijaza is the leader in this verse, as Azazel in verse 6. See note on vi-xi. 

8-9. Cf. Justin, Aol. ii. 5 of b€ &yyeAor—yuvaikdy pikeow ArrnOnoav Kai rraidas eréxvwcar, oi ciow ot AeySpevor Saipoves 
—kal eis avOpamous povous, modémous, porxeias—kal macay kakiay €omTetpar. 

8. with the women >G8. ; 

The Eth. contains an Aramaism per’ adrav pera tov Onderav which has led G* to add a verb euidvOnoay, and GS to 
omit pera Tay Ondrerov. : 

all kinds of sins+‘and have taught them to make hate-producing charms’ G’, or reading pronriay for piontpa, 
‘to practise lewdness’. 

g. Giants. riravas G8, yiyavras G*. 

10. cannot cease, &c. ¢&edGciv, E Gss=ppynd corrupt for ppand=‘ cease’. 

The angels’ intercession on men’s behalf, as in this chapter and also in xv. 2, xl. 6, xlvii. 2, xcix. 3, 16, civ. I, is an 
O.T. doctrine; cf. Job v. 1, xxxiii. 23; Zech. i.12. It was evidently a popular doctrine. Cf. Tobit xii, 12 (contrast 
Acts x. 4), xii. 15 ; Rev. viii. 3; Test. Levi iii. 5 and v. 6,7 (see my full note on doctrine 200 B.C.-A.D. 100, T. Levi iii. 5). 

11. seest G88, ‘knowest’ E. 

suffer them. So Greek texts, misread by E ra eis for eas. 

X.1 (said) >E. - 

the Most High. See xcix. 3 (note). 

the Holy and Great One (E). See i. 3 (note). ‘And the Great Holy One’ G8®. 

Uriel. So G%, Gg has Istrael. E is corrupt. : 

son of Lamech, i.e. Noah. ; f : 

2. (Go to Noah and) G°; original, as each command begins with ‘Go’. Cf. x. 4, 9, II in Gee 

Hide thyself; i.e. to receive further disclosures from the angel. Cf. xii, 1, 2. ; 

3. G* is much fuller. ‘Instruct the righteous (man) what he is to do, from the son of Lamech, and he will preserve 
his soul unto life and escape through the world, and from him will be planted a plant and it will be established 
throughout all the generations of the world.’ 

of the world G8* x >E-z. rap a : a ; ‘ 

4-8. Raphael’s task—to remove Azazel and heal the earth ; Uriel’s task is given in 1-3, Gabriel’s in g-10, Michael's 
in I-12. A Layee 3 

4. Azazel as the chief offender and leader is first punished (in v. 11, Semjaza), by imprisonment now, and finally by 
fire. He is conceived as chained in the wilderness into which the scape-goat was led. The Jerusalem Targum 
(Ps, Jonathan) on Leviticus says that the goat was sent to die in a hard and rough place in the wilderness of jagged 
rocks, i.e. Beth Chadure or Beth Chaduda (Joma, vi. 8). _ This Beth Chaduda (=‘ Dudael’ of this verse) was a definite 
locality near Jerusalem. Cf. Lev. xvi. 10, 22. On Semjaza and Azazel see Targ. Ps, Jon. on Gen. vi. 3, where both 
names occur and the myth is given. Observe that Azazel is punished in a place by himself; and also that in the Noah 
sections this place is in the valleys of the earth, but in the genuine Enoch beyond the earth. 

5. upon him, ‘under him’ Gk. wrongly. Cf, liv. 5. 

1105.2 : 193 0 3 


BOOK OF ENOCH 10. 5-17 


rocks, and cover him with darkness, and let him abide there for ever, and cover his face that he may 
6, 7 not see light. And on the day of the great judgement he shall be cast into the fire. And heal the 
earth which the angels have corrupted, and proclaim the healing of the earth, that they may heal 
the plague, and that all the children of men may not perish through all the secret things that the 
8 Watchers have disclosed and have taught their sons. And the whole earth has been corrupted 
g through the works that were taught by Az4zél: to him ascribe all sin.’ And to Gabriel said the 
Lord: ‘ Proceed against the bastards and the reprobates, and against the children of fornication : 
and destroy [the children of fornication and] the children of the Watchers from amongst men : [and 
cause them to go forth]: send them one against the other that they may destroy each other in 
10 battle: for length of days shall they not have. And no request that they (i.e. their fathers) make 
of thee shall be granted unto their fathers on their behalf; for they hope to live an eternal life, and 
11 that each one of them will live five hundred years.’ And the Lord said unto Michael: ‘ Go, bind 
Semjaza and his associates who have united themselves with women so as to have defiled themselves 
12 with them in all their uncleanness. And when their sons have slain one another, and they have 
seen the destruction of their beloved ones, bind them fast for seventy generations in the valleys 
of the earth, till the day of their judgement and of their consummation, till the judgement that is 
13 for ever and ever is consummated. In those days they shall be led off to the abyss of fire: (and) 
14 to the torment and the prison in which they shall be confined for ever. And whosoever shall be 
condemned and destroyed will from thenceforth be bound together with them to the end of all 
15 generations. And destroy all the spirits of the reprobate and the children of the Watchers, because 
16 they have wronged mankind. Destroy all wrong from the face of the earth and let every evil work 
come to an end: and let the plant of righteousness and truth appear: ‘and it shall prove a blessing ; 
the works of righteousness and truth’ shall be planted in truth and joy for evermore. 
17 And then shall all the righteous escape, 
And shall live till they beget thousands of children, 
And all the days of their youth and their old age 
Shall they complete in peace. 


for ever, i.e. eis rov aiéva, may denote various periods, according to the context in which it is used. Here it equals 
seventy generations (cf. v. 12) ; in v. 10 five hundred years; elsewhere again an unending period. 
For verses 5 and 12 cf. Jude 6. 
6. day of the great judgement Gs, ‘great day of judgement’ E. See xlv. 2 (note). This judgement inaugurates 
the final judgement of the angels. 
the fire. See xviii. 11, xix, xxi. 7-10; 2 Bar. xliv. 15, xviii. 39, lix. 2. 
7- Raphael’s name suggests ‘healing’. Cf. Tob. iii. 7, xis A. 
healing of the earth E Gé, ‘healing of the plague’ Gs, 
the plague G85, ‘the earth’ E. 
disclosed G8, ‘smitten’ E Gg, 
8. Note how all sin is ascribed to the fallen angels. 
works that were taught Gs, ‘ teaching of the works’ E. 

9, 10. Gabriel to destroy the giants. The account here is closely followed by Jubilees v. 6-11. The giants slay one 
another in the presence of their parents ; cf. xiv. 6, and v. 12 here. The parents are then bound in the earth’s 
abysses, and their power of hurting the earth is at an end; cf. xiv. 5. But it is not so with the spirits of the giants. 
They enjoy an impunity in wrong-doing until the final judgement. See xv. 11-xvi. 1. 

g. [the children ... and] >Ggs, dittograph in E. 

[and cause ... forth] dittograph in E of ‘send’. 


send ... battle, ‘ send seenWan Gs. : 
ag one life, i.e. five hundred years. See v. 5 (note). As to the prayer of the fallen angels, cf. xii. 6, xiii. 
4-6, xiv. 7. 


11. This verse describes Michael’s task, which is distinct from that of Gabriel. Cf. Ixxxviii. 3 which is distinct from 
XXXViii. 2. 


the Lord >Gss, 
bind. So Gs, ‘show’ Gg and E, i.e dnAScov for djoov. 
united...with them. Jub. iv. 22. 
12. their sons: ‘all these sons’ E, ‘all’ being corrupt as often in E for def. art. Wa; 
The binding of the angels in the valleys has been altered in E to ‘in the hills’ as in the Greek myths of the Titans 
For the valley see Ixvii. 4 sqq. and cf. Jub. v. 10 ‘in the depths of the earth ’, and Jude 6 td Yhoy. : 
Seventy generations. This period has no connexion with the Apocalypse of Weeks. 
a 3. ee oe lee tal be as that mentioned in vz. 6, xviii. II, XIX, Xxl. 7-10, xc. 24. Cf. Rev. xx. 10, 14, 15 
14. condemned G*._ xataxavo67j GE E corrupt for xaraxp.67. 
all generations E, ‘the (‘ their’ G*) generation’ G8. Here G8 ends. 

15: pobre . given this charge in v. 9. 

10. plant of righteousness, i.e. Israel. Israel] springs from a seed that ‘is sown’ li. 8: hence it j 
established as ‘a plant of the seed for ever se ei 6; is called ‘the plant of uprigiiteas Weis : vee of 
righteousness, xciii. 5 ; the eternal plant of righteousness, xciii. to; and ‘the plant of righteous judgement’ xii 

17. The writer wanders off to a very sensuous picture of Messianic bliss ; cf. xxv. 4 (note). ; iS 

old age. The reading (E and GS) ‘Sabbath’ is due to a corruption in the original Aramaic or Hebrew. 


194 


BOOK OF ENOCH 10. 18-12; 4 


18 And then shall the whole earth be tilled in righteousness, and shall all be planted with trees and 

19 be full of blessing. And all desirable trees shall be planted on it, and they shall plant vines on it: 

and the vine which they plant thereon shall yield wine in abundance, and as for all the seed which 

is sown thereon each measure (of it) shall bear a thousand, and each measure of olives shall yield 

20 ten presses of oil. And cleanse thou the earth from all oppression, and from all unrighteousness, 

and from all sin, and from all godlessness : and all the uncleanness that is wrought upon the earth 

21 destroy from off the earth. !And all the children of men shall become righteous!, and all nations 

22 shall offer adoration and shall praise Me, and all shall worship Me. And the earth shall be cleansed 

from all defilement, and from all sin, and from all punishment, and from all torment, and I will 
never again send (them) upon it from generation to generation and for ever. 

t And in those days I will open the store chambers of blessing which are in the heaven, so as to send 

2 them down ‘upon the earth! over the work and labour of the children of men. And truth and peace 


shall be associated together throughout all the days of the world and throughout all the generations 
of men.’ 


XII-XVI. Dream-Vision of Enoch: his Intercession for Azazel and the fallen Angels: and 
his Announcement of their first and final Doom. 


12: Before these things Enoch was hidden, and no one of the children of men knew where he was 

2 hidden, and where he abode, and what had become of him. And his activities had to do with the 
Watchers, and his days were with the holy ones. 

3 And I Enoch was blessing the Lord of majesty and the King of the ages, and lo! the Watchers 

4 called me—Enoch the scribe—and said to me: ‘ Enoch, thou scribe of righteousness, go, tdeclaret 

to the Watchers of the heaven who have left the high heaven, the holy eternal place, and have defiled 

themselves with women, and have done as the children of earth do, and have taken unto themselves 


18. shall all be planted with trees E, ‘and a tree shall be planted in it’ G8. ; ue ; 
18, 19. Cf. O.T. prophecies, Amos ix. 13, 143 Hos. ii. 22,23; Jer. xxxi. 5; Isa. xxv.6; Ezek. xxviii. 26, xxxiv. 26, 27. 
19. G& corrupt. wees ‘ ets 
each measure shall bear. Contrast Isa. v. 10, and cf. the chiliastic expectations of Papias in Iren. adv. 
Haer. v. 33. Cf., too, 2 Bar. xxix. 5. 
20. The cleansing is by the Messianic kingdom probably, not by the deluge. 
oppression E, ‘impurity’ G8. 
20, 21. from off... righteous E >G8. i 
21. The conversion of the Gentiles. Cf. xc. 30 (note), xci. 14. 
22. the earth E, ‘all the earth’ G8. 


XI. concludes an account of the Messianic kingdom. Cf. Deut. xxviii. 12. 
upon the earth >G8. ; 

2. Cf. Ps. Ixxxv. 10; Isa. xxxil. 17. 
of men G§, aiavey E tfor avror. 


XII-XVI. The visions are only preserved in fragments and are out of order. Cf. Ixxvili-Ixxx, xci-xciv. As Enoch 
can still intercede for the fallen Watchers their doom in x is not yet carried out. The original order was: Enoch was 
asked to intercede for Azazel (lost), vision (lost), answer in xiii. I-2; then to intercede for the Watchers, xiii. 3, xil. 3, 
xiii. 4-7, vision in xiii. 8, answer to the Watchers xi. 9-10. This second vision is given at length, with God’s 
revelation about the Watchers’ first estate, sin, and doom, xiv. 2-xvi. 2. The closing message of doom for the Watcher 
in xvi. 3-4 is a duplicate of xii. 4-6, which seems more original. This repetition is very Semitic. Thus the origina 


i iii iii ii iii, 4- iv. 2-xvi ii. 4-6 || xvi. 3-4. xii. I-2 is an editorial 
order would be xiv. 1. . ., xiii. 1-2, xill. 3, xii, 3, XII]. 4-10, XIV. 2-XvI. 2, Xl, 4-0 3 ; é 
introduction. Note that here in this Enoch section a man intercedes for angels: in the Noah section angels intercede 
for men (ix. 3, 4), but not for angels (Ixviii. 3, Noachic). . 


i rt i ix) ¢ : hers. 
_1. Before these things, before the angels’ intercession for men (ix) and God’s doom (x) on the Watc 
ae tidden E, ‘ was cohen’ G8, to receive the following revelation. Cf.x. 2. Enoch is still living, and not finally 
translated from earth as yet. As man he writes the petition for the fallen angels (xili. 6) ; receives a vision in sleep, 
and is transported in spirit unto heaven (xiv. 2) ; speaks with a tongue of flesh (xiv. 2) ; and is terrified, like a mortal 
man, at the presence of God (xiv. 24). 
2. holy ones. See i. 9 (note). 
Watchers. See z 5 ae. eek 
. of majesty G8. So y the slightest change. ; 
; King of the ages. See i. 3 (note). Watchers E, + ‘of the Holy Great one G. 
called. Enoch is really asked to intercede. So read this verse after xiii. 3. SY es 
the scribe. Cf. xcii.1. Enoch is further called the scribe of righteousness (xil. 4, XV. 1), because ne is himse 
a righteous man (xv. 1, lxxi. 14-16) and also declares the righteous judgement that is coming (xiii. 10, xiv. I, 3, 'xxxi. 6, 
Ixxxii. 1, &c.). ates 
4-6. Really the close of xii-xvi. See note above. } 
4. Cf. Jude 6. + declare E, Gé ‘and say’, correctly. Cf. xvi. 4. 
have left. Cf. xv. 3. ; 
the holy eternal place E, ‘the holiness of the eternal place’ G8. ae 
195 


BOOK OF ENOCH 12. 5—14. 4 


5 wives: ‘‘ Ye have wrought great destruction on the earth: And ye shall have no peace nor forgive- 
6 ness of sin: and inasmuch as ftheyt delight themselves inf theirt children, The murder of }theirf 
beloved ones shall} they} see, and over the destruction of {their} children shallf they} lament, and 
shall make supplication unto eternity, but mercy and peace shall ye not attain.” ’ 
131 And Enoch went and said: ‘ AzAzél, thou shalt have no peace: asevere sentence has gone forth 
2 against thee to put thee in bonds: And thou shalt not have toleration nor frequest{ granted to thee, 
because of the unrighteousness which thou hast taught, and because of all the works of godlessness 
3 and unrighteousness and sin which thou hast shown to men.’ Then I went and spoke to them all 
4 together, and they were all afraid, and fear and trembling seized them. And they besought me to 
draw up a petition for them that they might find forgiveness, and to read their petition in the presence 
5 of the Lord of heaven. For from thenceforward they could not speak (with Him) nor lift up their 
6 eyes to heaven for shame of their sins for which they had been condemned. Then I wrote out their 
petition, and the prayer fin regard to their spirits and their deeds individually and in regard to their 
7 requests that they should have forgiveness and lengtht.. And I went off and sat down at the waters 
of Dan, in the land of Dan, to the south of the west of Hermon: I read their petition till I fell 
8 asleep. And behold a dream came to me, and visions fell down upon me, and I saw visions of 
chastisement, ‘and a voice came bidding (me)! to tell it to the sons of heaven, and reprimand them. 
g And when I awaked, I came unto them, and they were all sitting gathered together, weeping in 
1o ’’Abelsjail, which is between Lebanon and Sénésér, with their faces covered. And I recounted before 
them all the visions which I had seen in sleep, and I began to speak the words of righteousness, and 
to reprimand the heavenly Watchers. 
141° The book of the words of righteousness, and of the reprimand of the eternal Watchers in accordance 
2 with the command of the Holy Great One in that vision. I saw in my sleep what I will now say with 
a tongue of flesh and with the breath of my mouth: which the Great One has given to men to 
3 converse therewith and understand with the heart. As He has created and given "to man the power of 
understanding the word of wisdom, so hath He created me also and given™ me the power of reprimanding 
4 the Watchers, the children of heaven. I wrote out your petition, and in my vision it appeared thus, 
that your petition will not be granted unto you "throughout all the days of eternity, and that judge- 


Ye have G8, ‘and have’ E. 
5. And ye G&, ‘and they’ E. 

no peace. Cf. v. 4, xiii. I. 
5,6. tthey, ttheir. Read ‘ye’, ‘your’. 
Om Cie x1 Ov 2exiVe On 


XIII. 1. Azazel addressed in conformity with x. 4. Message of his doom. See xii-xvi (note). 
went and said E, ‘said “ Go”’ Gs, 
no peace xvi. 4, v. 4. 
bonds x. 4. 
2. trequest. Read ‘rest’. 
4, 5. As the angels could not address God nor lift up their eyes to heaven, Enoch is besought to become their 
intercessor. Asa scribe, he draws up their petition in writing, and does not present it by word of mouth. 
4. read G8, ‘take up’ E. 
6. tin regard to...lengtht. For ‘length’ read ‘length of days’, x. 9, 10. 
7. waters of Dan. This river, called also the Little Jordan (Joseph, Avz/. v. 3. 1, viii. 8. 4) is a tributary of the 
Jordan. This place (from }%, to judge) is chosen because of the significance of its name here— judgement. 
the west of Hermon E, ‘ Hermon of the West’ G8. 
8. to tell... and reprimand E, ‘ Tell... to reprimand’ Ge. 
sons of heaven. See vi. 2 (note). 
g. ’Abelsjail, perhaps Abilene soon, with a play on pbax, ‘mourning’. 
10. Sénésér—Senir, a name of Hermon—Deut. iii. 9, Cant. iv. 8. 
recounted G8, ‘spake’ E. 
reprimand, cf. 1 Cor. vi. 3, ‘judge angels’. 
heavenly Watchers. See i. 5 (note). The vision follows in xiv. 2-xvi. 2. 


XIV. 1. A title for the section xii—xvi. 
The book of the words 9G, ‘ This book is the word’ E (rest of MSS.). 
eternal, lit. ‘who are from eternity’, in the loose sense of that word. See x. 5 (note). 
Holy Great one G8, ‘ Holy and Great one’ E. See i. 3 (note). 


XIV. 2.-XVI. 2—the Vision. 
2, 3. God has created man with a tongue for speech and a faculty of understanding, and so has created Enoch with 
a power of reprimanding the eternal watchers. 
tongue of flesh. Cf, Ixxxiv. 1. 
the Great One. Cf. ciii. 4, civ. 1. 
and understand with the heart E, ‘with understanding of the heart’ Gs. 
3. toman...and given >G8, through hmt. 
children of heaven. See vi. 2 (note). 
4-7. Enoch’s reprimand to the Watchers. 


196 


BOOK OF ENOCH 14. 5-24 


5 ment has been finally passed upon you: yea (your petition) will not be granted unto you" 
: henceforth you shall not ascend into heaven unto all eternity, and !in Pe ads! of the pee he ee ; 
has gone forth to bind you for all the days of the world. And (that) previously you shall have seen 
the destruction of your beloved sons and ye shall have no pleasure in them, but they shall fall before 
7 you by the sword. And your petition on their behalf shall not be granted, nor yet on your own: 
even though you weep and pray and speak all the words contained in the writing which I have 
8 written. And the vision was shown to me thus: Behold, in the vision clouds invited me and a mist 
summoned me, and the course of the stars and the lightnings sped and hastened me, and the winds in 
9 the vision caused me to fly and lifted me upward,and bore me into heaven. And I went in till I drew 
nigh to a wall which is built of crystals and surrounded by tongues of fire: and it began to affright 
tome. And I went into the tongues of fire and drew nigh to a large house which was built of crystals : 

and the walls of the house were like a tesselated floor (made) of crystals, and its groundwork was 
11 of crystal. Its ceiling was like the path of the stars and the lightnings, and between them were 
12 fiery cherubim, and their heaven was (clear as) water. A flaming fire surrounded the walls, and its 
13 portals blazed with fire. And I entered into that house, and it was hot as fire and cold as ice: there 
14 were no delights of life therein: fear covered me, and trembling gat hold upon me. And as I quaked 
15 and trembled, I fell upon my face. And I beheld a vision, And lo! there was a second house, greater 
16 than the former, and the entire portal stood open before me, and it was built of flames of fire. And 

in every respect it so excelled in splendour and magnificence and extent that I cannot describe to 
17 you its splendour and its extent. And its floor was of fire, and above it were lightnings and the path 
18 of the stars, and its ceiling also was flaming fire. And I looked and saw “therein” a lofty throne: its 

appearance was as crystal, and the wheels thereof as the shining sun, and there was the vision of 
19 cherubim. And from underneath the throne came streams of flaming fire so that I could not look 
zo thereon. And the Great Glory sat thereon, and His raiment shone more brightly than the sun and 
21 was whiter than any snow. None of the angels could enter and could behold His face by reason 
22 of the magnificence and glory, and no flesh could behold Him. The flaming fire was round about 

Him, and a great fire stood before Him, and none around could draw nigh Him: ten thousand times 
23 ten thousand (stood) before Him, yet He needed no counsellor. And the most holy ones who were 
24 nigh to Him did not leave by night nor depart from Him. And until then I had been prostrate on 

my face, trembling: and the Lord called me with His own mouth, and said to me: ‘ Come hither, 


5. Cf. xiii. 5. Also Athenagoras’ Afology, xxv. 1; Origen, c. Celsum v. 52. 
in bonds of the earth G8, ‘on the earth’ E. Read ‘in bonds on the earth’ or (cf. Lam. iii. 34) ‘as prisoners of the 
earth’. 

Ge Cf, x. 9; ai, 6: 

pleasure in them. Cf. xii.6. So G8. E has ‘ye shall not possess them’. 

7. speak all the words. I have emended py into pny in G8 cal py Aadodvres wav pyya (Cf. converse in x. 7 G8). 
If we accept the negative and read Aaydvres for Nadovvres, we can take the phrase as an apodosis—‘ ye are not to be 
granted a single request’, &c. 

Iren. iv. 16. 2 refers to this passage and to Enoch’s legatio ad angelos. 

8. clouds invited me. The expression is peculiar. Cf. perhaps Matt. xvii. 5. We should expect, however, some 

such idea as in Ps. xviii. 10, 11, civ. 3. 
sped E, xareomovdafoy G8. Cf. Passio Perpetuae xi. 
hastened éOopiBafov GEE. But 97a in Heb. and Aram. means also ‘hasten’, cf. Dan. iv. 5. 
caused me to fly E=dverrépwoav, G8=eenéracay. Perhaps read e£emépacay, cf. Num. xi. 31. 

9-13. Enoch is carried up into heaven and passes within the outer court of God’s palace. 

10. crystals=hailstones. Cf. Isa. xxx. 30. (made) of crystals E. G8 has ‘and they were all of snow’. 

13. delights=rpup7. tpopn G8. 

RA Ci. oy oly zeked. 20), Danevill. 175, 10. een f 

15. The doors are open so that Enoch can describe what is within. G8 is corrupt. ; 

18-22. The writer draws on Isa. vi: Ezek. i. x.; Dan. vii. 9, 10. This passage is used by the author of Ixxi. 5-8. 

18. therein > Gé&. . : : ¥ : 

a lofty throne: Ezek.i.26; Dan. vii. 9; 1 Kings xxii. 19; Isa. vi. 1; Ass. Mos. iv. 2; Test. Leviv.1; Rev. iv. 2. 
vision. SolIemend. E has ‘voice’ (érdés). G8 has opos corrupt for dpacts. 

19. Dan. vil. Io. 

streams of flaming fire E, ‘ flaming streams of fire’ G8. 
20. the Great Glory. Cf. cil. 3; Test. Lev. iii. 4. } 
whiter than, &c. Cf. Dan. vii.9; Ps. civ. 2; Jam. 1.173; Rev. iv. 3. 
21. enter + ‘into this house’ G8. ; ; ; ne 3 
by reason of the magnificence and glory G8, ‘ of the Magnificent and Glorious One’ E (cf. cili. 1), but this 
seems corrupt. ; , 
22. could draw nigh. Cf. 3 Macc. ii. 15; 1 Tim. vi. 16. ie ‘ : 
He needed no counsellor. Cf. Sir. xlii. 21, and 2 En. xxxiii. 4.. E, with a slight change, gives our text. G8 has 
nas Néyos adrod épyov. Cf. 2 En, xxxili. 4. 
23. the most holy ones Gé, ‘the holiness of the holy ones IDE. 
‘did not leave.’ Contrast lxxi. 8. a . ; 
24. prostrate G8. Eis corrupt. Cf. Dan. vili. 17; 2 En. xxi. 2; Luke xxiv. 5. 


197 


BOOK OF ENOCH 14. 25—16. 2 


25 Enoch, and hear my word.’ ‘And one of the holy ones came to me and waked me', and He made 
me rise up and approach the door: and I bowed my face downwards. 

151 And He answered and said to me, and I heard His voice: ‘ Fear not, Enoch, thou righteous 

2 man and scribe of righteousness : approach hither and hear my voice. And go, say to "the Watchers 
of heaven", who have sent thee to intercede "for them: ‘‘You should intercede" for men, and not men 
3for you: Wherefore have ye left the high, holy, and eternal heaven, and lain with women, and 
defiled yourselves with the daughters of men and taken to yourselves wives, and done like the children 
4 of earth, and begotten giants (as your) sons? And though ye were holy, spiritual, living the eternal 
life, you have defiled yourselves with the blood of women, and have begotten (children) with the 
blood of flesh, and, as the children of men, have lusted after flesh and blood as those ‘also! do who die 
5 and perish. Therefore have I given them wives also that they might impregnate them, and beget 
6 children by them, that thus nothing might be wanting to them on earth. But you were ‘formerly! 
7 spiritual, living the eternal life, and immortal for all generations of the world. And therefore I have 
not appointed wives for you; for as for the spiritual ones of the heaven, in heaven is their dwelling. 
8 And now, the giants, who are produced from the spirits and flesh, shall be called evil spirits upon 
9 the earth, and on the earth shall be their dwelling. Evil spirits have proceeded from their bodies ; 
because they are born from men "and" from the holy Watchers is their beginning and primal origin ; 
10 ‘they shall be evil spirits on earth, and! evil spirits shall they be called. [As for the spirits of heaven, 
in heaven shall be their dwelling, but as for the spirits of the earth which were born upon the earth, 
11 on the earth shall be their dwelling.] And the spirits of the giants afflict, oppress, destroy, attack, 
do battle, and work destruction on the earth, and cause trouble: they take no food, ‘but never- 
12 theless hunger! and thirst, and cause offences. And these spirits shall rise up against the children 
of men and against the women, because they have proceeded ‘from them |. 

16: From the days of the slaughter and destruction and death 'of the giants', from the souls of whose 
flesh the spirits, having gone forth, shall destroy without incurring judgement—thus shall they 
destroy until the day of the consummation, the great ‘judgement! in which the age shall be con- 

2 summated, over the Watchers and the godless, yea, shall be wholly consummated.’ And now as 


hear my word G8, ‘to my holy word’ E (dyiov for dxovoor). 
25. bowed: so G8. ‘looked’ E corruptly. 


XV. 1. scribe of righteousness. See xii. 3 (note). 
2. Watchers of heaven >G8. 

intercede. See ix. Io (note). 

for them..intercede >G8 through hmt. 

3. Cf. xii. 4; Jude 6. 7 

4-7. For mortal man upon earth wedlock is appointed, to continue the race; but for immortal angels in heaven it 
involves pollution and guilt. Cf. Matt. xxii. 30, no marriage in heaven. 

4. spiritual, living the eternal life E, ‘and spirits, living, eternal’ Gs. 

as the children of men, ‘with the blood of men’ G8 E, i.e. O53 for 1335. 
lusted after + ‘and made’ E. 

5. nothing..tothem. Es‘ corrupt. 

6. spiritual, &c. G8 as in v. 4. 

8-9. The forbidden union of angels and the daughters of men gives rise to a monstrous race of giants, with spiritual 
powers and earthly desires. So from these giants when they die will proceed evil spirits, i.e. demons, fiving on earth. 
Moreover, these demons will not be restrained as the fallen angels are, nor slain like the mortal bodies of the giants. 
Cf. Justin, Afo/. ii. 5; Tert. Apol. xxii. Lact. Zmstit. ii. 15 regards the demons as wicked angels and no more. 

8. shall be called evil spirits EG’ ; mvevpara ioxupa G8, defective and corrupt. 

9. from men GS, ‘from those above’ G8 E. 

beginning E + ‘of their creation’ G88, 
they shall be..earth E GS. > Gs. 

Io. G8 omits. The verse is only a repetition of 7, 8. 

of the earth E, ‘on the earth’ Gs.. 

11. afflict: ‘laying waste’ GS, ‘clouds’ E G8, ie, p22» corrupt for py = ‘afflict’. The demons’ evil activities will 
continue on the earth. 

trouble E; dpdpuous G8%, corrupt for rpdpous (?). 
but nevertheless hunger G8*. >E + kai pdopara rowoivra G*, perhaps rightly. 
cause offences G8°, also E, easily corrected. 

12. against the women E, ‘of the women’ G8°. 


XVI. 1. The demons will not be punished until the final judgement, whereas the watchers are punished before and 
again atthat judgement. This doctrine also appears in Jubilees x. 5-11,and inthe N.T. Cf. Matt. viii. 29, ‘to torment us 
before the time.’ 

of the giants E G* >G& + Nagnelp of loxupoi ris yijs of weyddor dvopacroi G®. Cf. Gen. vi. 4. 
from the souls of whose flesh E™Y Gs. All texts are here corrupt, though ©Y are best. 
consummation. See xlv. 2 (note). 

es Ss eee Bae a Loe in Syncellus ending—‘and these are from the first book of Enoch concerning the 
watchers ’. Imits the age of man to 120 years and so perhaps does belong to the lost A. Joah 
forthcoming Commentary on Enoch, pp. 14, 15. : : aie ii ol 5k 


198 


BOOK OF ENOCH 16. 2—18. ; 


o 


to the watchers who have sent thee to intercede for them, who had been "aforetime in heaven” (say 
3 to them): ‘‘ You have been in heaven, but fall’ the mysteries had not yet been revealed to you 
and you knew worthless ones, and these in the hardness of your hearts you have made known to 
the women, and through these mysteries women and men work much evil on earth.” 
4 Say to them therefore: ‘“ You have no peace.”’’ 


XVII-XXXVI. Enoch’s Fourneys through the Earth and Sheol. 
XVII-XIX. The First Fourney. 


171 And they took and brought! me to a place in which those who were there were like flaming fire, 
2 and, when they wished, they appeared as men. And they brought me to the place of darkness, and 

3 to a mountain the point of whose summit reached to heaven. And I saw the places of the luminaries 
Tand the treasuries of the stars! and of the thunder, ‘and! in the uttermost depths, where were 

4 a fiery bow and arrows and their quiver, "and a fiery sword” and all the lightnings. And they took 

5 me to the living waters, and to the fire of the west, which receives every setting of the sun. And I 
came to a river of fire in which the fire flows like water and discharges itself into the great sea towards 

6 the west. I saw the great rivers and came to the great ‘river and to the great! darkness, and went 

7 to the place where no flesh walks. I saw the mountains of the darkness of winter and the place 


8 whence all the waters of the deep flow. I saw the mouths of all the rivers of the earth and the 
mouth of the deep. 


181 I saw the treasuries of all the winds: I saw how He had furnished with them the whole creation 
2 and the firm foundations of the earth. And I saw the corner-stone of the earth: I saw the four 
winds which bear [the earth and] the firmament of the heaven. "And I saw how the winds stretch 

out the vaults of heaven", and have their station between heaven and earth: "these are the pillars 


aforetime E >Gss, 
3. E wrongly inserts ‘ and now’ at the beginning of 3. 

ali GS >E. 

Clem. Alex. Strom. ed. Dindorf. iii. 9 is based on this statement. 
4. no peace. See v. 4 (note). 


XVII-XIX. These chapters are foreign to the rest of this section. They are full of Greek elements, e.g. Pyriphlegethon, 
Styx, Acheron and Cocytus (xvii. 5, 6); the Ocean Stream (xvii. 5, 7, 8; xviii. 10); Hades in the West (xvii. 6). 

Again xviii. 6-9 is a duplicate account of xxiv. 1-3; xviii. 12-16 of xxi. 1-6; and xviii. 11 of xxi. 7-10. 

Again xix. I contradicts x. 11-14; xiv. 5. How could the imprisoned angels (xv. 12-xvi) assume many forms and 

seduce men to sacrifice to the demons? Still these chapters do belong to the Enoch tradition. 

XVII. 1. and brought supplied from G8. 

like flaming fire. Cf. Ps. civ. 4. 
appeared asmen. Cf. xix. 1, ‘assuming many different forms’, and 2 Cor. xi. 14. 
2. of darkness G8 (ofodn, ‘of whirlwind’ E = yrodadyn. Cf. Job xxxvii. 9. 
the point of E >Gé. : 
3. places of the luminaries: perhaps the chambers of the sun and moon cf. xli. 5. 
and the treasuries of the stars supplied from G8. 
of the thunder. Cf. xli. 3, xliv, lix, lx. 13-15 and notes. 
in the uttermost depths. E is thus easily emended. G has «is ra depoBaOn. > leeks 
fiery bow, with which the lightnings are shot. Cf. Ps. vii. 12; Hab. iil.9; Lam. ii. 4, iil. 12. 
arrows, i.e. lightnings. Ps. xviii. 14, Ixxvii. 17, 18. 4 
and a fiery sword E. >Gs. Cf. Ps. vii. 12; Deut. xxxii. 41. 

4. took E, ‘brought’ G8. ‘ ye : y 
The living waters G&, ‘ waters of life’ E. Cf. Ps. xxxvi.9 ; Prov. x. 11, xili.14, xiv. 27, xvi. 22; and esp. Rev. xxii. 17. 
fire of the west. See xxiii. (notes). This fire is not Gehenna as Enoch does not place that in the west. 
receives E, mrapéxov G8. 

. river of fire. The Pyriphlegethon. 
great sea. “Qxeavés. 
towards the west E, ‘of the west’ G8. te: : 1 aes 

6. Isaw G8, ‘and I saw’ E, also in verses 7 and 8, &c. The omission of the copula suits the Aramaic idiom. 

the great rivers. Are these the Styx, Acheron, and Cocytus? 
river and to the great supplied from G8. 
no flesh G8, ‘all flesh’ E. . 

7. the mountains of the darkness E. ‘the winds of the darkness G8. : 

8. The mouths, &c., i.e. Oceanus. Cf. ‘the springs of the great deep’ in Babylonian cosmogony: they are at the 

ends of the earth, and the mountains (cf. v. 7) are near by. 

XVIII. 1. treasuries of all the winds. See xxxiv-xxxvi, xli. 4 (note), Ix. 11, 12. 

foundations of the earth. Cf. O.T. 2 Sam. xxii. 16; Ps. xviil. 15. 
- . Job xxxviii. 6. : a 

i Geoeeiand ce E, but a dittograph of yanw ‘four’ in the Aramaic seems probable, misread xy wy ‘earth’. 

3. And Isaw... heaven E, > G§ through hmt. 

These are... heaven > G8 through hmt. 
pillars of the heaven. Cf. Job. xxvi. 11 for the words but not the idea. 


199 


wm 


BOOK OF ENOCH 18. 4—19. 1 


4 of the heaven”. I saw the winds of heaven which turn and bring the circumference of the sun and 
5 all the stars to their setting. I saw the winds on the earth carrying the clouds: I saw"the paths 
6 of the angels. I saw” at the end of the earth the firmament of the heaven above. And I proceeded 
and saw a place which burns day and night, where there are seven mountains of magnificent stones, 

7 three towards the east, and three towards the south. And as for those towards the east, (one) was 
of coloured stone, and one of pearl, and one of jacinth, and those towards the south of red stone. 

8 But the middle one reached to heaven like the throne of God, of alabaster, and the summit of the 
9, 1o throne was of sapphire. And I saw a flaming fire. And beyond these mountains Is a region the 
11 end of the great earth: there the heavens were completed. And Isaw a deep abyss, with columns "of 
heavenly fire, and among them I saw columns" of fire fall, which were beyond measure alike towards 

12 the height and towards the depth. And beyond that abyss I saw a place which had no firmament 
of the heaven above, and no firmly founded earth beneath it: there was no water upon it, and no 
13 birds, but it was a waste and horrible place. I saw there seven stars like great burning mountains, 
14 and to me, when I inquired regarding them, The angel said: ‘ This place is the end of heaven and 
15 earth: this has become a prison for the stars and the host of heaven. And the stars which roll 
over the fire are they which have transgressed the commandment of the Lord in the beginning of 
16 their rising, because they did not come forth at their appointed times. And He was wroth with them, 
and bound them till the time when their guilt should be consummated (even) for ten thousand years.’ 
191 And Uriel said to me: ‘ Here shall stand the angels who have connected themselves with women, 
and their spirits assuming many different forms are defiling mankind and shall lead them astray 
into sacrificing to demons "as gods’, (here shall they stand,) till "the day of "the great judgement in 


4. winds which turn... the sun. Cf. Ixxii. 5, Ixxiii. 2. 
bring... to... setting. = dvvovras (Active), dravetovras GS which Dillmann emends to divevorras, ‘ whirling’. 
5. carrying the clouds (¢, 8 only) explains the difficulties in Job xxxvi. 29, xxxvii. 16. G&gmqgu read ‘in the cloud’. 
at the end of the earth the firmament. The firmament’s ends rest on the earth’s ends, cf. xxxiii. 2, while its 
vault is supported by the winds, xviii. 2, 3. 

6-9. For the seven mountains see the other account in xxiv. 1-3. Also cf. Jubilees viii. 22. 

6. proceeded + ‘to the south’ E. This addition is obviously wrong. The mountains are in the NW., Ixxvii. 3, 
Ixx. 3. Moreover, as three are towards the east and three towards the south, this -v. (6) implies that the corner one 
must be in the NW. 

and saw a place G& > E which seems to have read «ls rév vdrov for efSov rémov. 

seven mountains. The Garden lies to the east of them xxxii. 1-2 and like them is in the NW. Ixx. 3. 4G£. too 
xxiv. I-3 (the mountains), xxiv. sqq. (the Garden or at least the tree of life). See further Ixxvii. 3, Ix. 22, 23, lx. 8, 
xxxil. I-3 for the Garden's position. For the number ‘ seven’ cf. 4 Ezra vi. 42, I En, Ixxvii. 5, 8. See full note in my 
new Comm. on I En. xviii. 6. With the mountains cf. those in lii, 2, lite 7. 

three 1° E, > Gs. 

7. jacinth (?) idcews E, corrupt for (?) idom8os, ‘jasper’. But G8 has rabev. So taxivdov or tavbivov is more probably 
original. We can neither be sure of identifying the stones or discovering the source of the ideas in our text. But cf. 
Ezek. xxviii. 13. 

8. like the throne of God. In xxv. 3 it 2s the throne of God. God’s mountain is in the north in Isa. -xiv-eig.0 (Cf 
Ezek. i. 4; Job xxxvii.22. Cf. ‘the holy mountain of God’, Ezek. xxviii. 13, 14, 16. 

alabaster. govxka GE=N5)p, 
sapphire. Ezek, i. 26. 

g. a flaming fire. Cf. xxiv. 1. 

And beyond these Gs. E attests, but here as always misrenders, as émt éxeivev for éréxewva (G8). _Cf.ver.12; 

10. Cf. xvili. 5, xxxili. 2. 

11. Is this the final place of punishment for the fallen angels? If so, cf. x. 6, 13, xviii. 11, xxi. 7-10, xc. 24. 

of heavenly fire... columns > G8. Cf. Gen. xix. 24; Ps. xi..6; Ezek. xxxviii. 22. 
height ... depth E. ~ Gg, 

12-16. The place of punishment for the disobedient stars, already occupied. Cf. xxi. 1-6. 

13-16. The stars are regarded as conscious, and therefore punished. Cf. Jude 13 dorépes mhavqra. 

13. and to me... them G8, E corrupt. 

14. host of heaven. Cf. Isa. xxiv. 21. 

15. the Lord G8, ‘ God’ E. 

rising + dri réos ew Tod odpavod kevds eotww GE—a gloss on v. 12. 

16. till the time = ten thousand years, xxi. 6. 

ten thousand years G8, énaura pvotnptov E corrupt. 


XIX. This chapter disagrees with xv. 12-xvi, as here the spirits of the fallen angels are free to seduce men to sacrifice 
to demons. In fact the fallen angels here have the function: of tempting men which is elsewhere assigned to the 
demons. The women too become female demons here. If, however, xix belongs to x--xvi, then xix is defective. ‘Their 
spate * should be followed by ‘of the giants’, which would be an Aramaic idiom likely to be misunderstood by a Greek 
translator. 

I. sacrificing to demons as gods. Cf. Deut. xxxii. 17; Ps. cvi. 27° Bataiva7e) subi <Cix, 
source of Tert. De Jdol. iv. : - oo ee 

as gods E > Gs. 
the day of E > Gg. 
the great judgement. See xly. 2 (note). 


200 


BOOK OF ENOCH 19: 2.91.8 


2 which they shall be judged till they are made an end of. 
3 went astray shall become sirens.’ And J, Enoch, alone sa 
no man shall see as I have seen. 


And the women also of the angels who 
w the vision, the ends of all things: and 


XX. Names and Functions of the Seven Archangels. 


20 1,2 And these are the names of the holy angels who watch. Uriel, one of the holy angels, who is 
3 over the world and over Tartarus. Raphael, one of the holy angels, who is over the spirits of men. 

4, 5 Raguel, one of the holy angels who ttakes vengeance ont the world of the luminaries. Michael, one 

6 of the holy angels, to wit, he that is set over the best part of mankind "and" over chaos. Saraqaél, 

7 one of the holy angels, who is set over the spirits, who sin in the spirit. Gabriel, one of the holy 


8 angels, who is over Paradise and the serpents and the Cherubim. Remiel, one of the holy angels, 
whom God set over those who rise. 


XXI—XXXVI. The Second Fourney of Enoch. 
XXI, Preliminary and final Place of Punishment of the fallen Angels (stars). 


21:1,2 And I proeéeded to where things were chaotic. And I saw there something horrible: I saw neither 
3 a heaven above nor a firmly founded earth, but a place chaotic and horrible. And there I saw 
4 seven stars of the heaven bound together in it, like great mountains and burning with fire. Then 
5 Isaid: ‘ For what sin are they bound, and on what account have they been cast in hither?’ Then 

said Uriel, one of the holy angels, who was with me, and was chief over them, and said: ‘ Enoch, voy 
6 dost thou ask, and why art thou eager for the truth ? These are of the number of the stars ‘of heaven 
which have transgressed the commandment of the Lord, and are bound here till ten thousand years, 
7 the time entailed by their sins, are consummated.’ And from thence I went to another place, which 
was still more horrible than the former, and I saw a horrible thing: a great fire there which burnt 
and blazed, and the place was cleft as far as the abyss, being full of great descending columns of 
8 fire: neither its extent or magnitude could I see, nor could I conjecture. Then I said: ‘How 


? 


2. the women ... of the angels G&, ‘lit. their women . . . of the angels’. An Aramaic idiom. E is corrupt. 
will become sirens. SoG8. E is corrupt os eipyraia. For sirens cf. Apoc. Bar. x. 8. oepyy in the LXX renders 
Moy’ e.g. Mic. i. 8. 
3. the ends of all things. Quoted by Clem. Alex. Zclog. Proph. (Dind. iii. 456) as dAas mdoas and Origen, De Princ. 
iv. 35, as ‘universas materias’, 


XX. There are seven archangels in this chapter, but only four are mentioned in i-xix, cf. xxi-xxxvi. See Ixxxi. 5. 
Other discrepancies, however, are reduced by the evidence of G8. ; 
1. G8’)? are defective, G8 omits and G8’ reads only ‘angels of the powers’. Both, however, in v. 8 end évépara 
¢' dpxayyédov. 
who watch. See i. 5, xii. 2. . ; 
2. Uriel’s province here explains, e.g. xix, xxi. 5, 9, xxvii. 2, xxxili. 3, 4. Cf. 4 Ezra iv. 1, where he is overseer of 
the world. 
Tartarus G*!,?, E = rpdpov, corrupt. ; : . by 
3. Raphael. See x. 4,7. His province here suits admirably in xxii. 3, 6. ‘In xxxii. 6, however, his province seems 
that assigned to Gabriel in xx. 7. : : x 
4. Raguel. There seems to be no connexion between name and function. Cf. xxiii. 4. 
ttakes vengeance on.t+ See xxiii. 4 (note). 
world of G8!;?, ‘world and’ E. . : 
5. Michael is Israel’s guardian angel, as in Dan. x. 13, 21, xii. 1, and elsewhere. Cf. xxiv. 6. 
(and) over chaos G8!)7. emi to Aa@ E. 
6. Saraqaél E, ‘ Sariel’ G8*?. 
spirits + ‘of mankind’ E. : . ; ; 
7. Gabriel, not Raphael, should be the speaker in xxxii, according to this verse. ; : ee 
8. Remiel. This clause (only in GS”) completes the seve, which number G8talso mentions. For Remiel cf. 4 Ezraiv. 36. 


XXI. 1-6. Cf. xviii. 12-16. -The place where the disobedient stars are punished. 
1. Origen cites in De. Princ. iv. 35 ‘ambulavi usque ad imperfectum.’ 
chaotic. So G81,?, and E is easily so emended. 
3. together E. ‘and cast down’ G8},”, 5 
. chief them G81, ‘chief over me’ E. oe ‘2 
; ier then eager for the truth G*4?, The Aramaic original = Dan. vii. 16 (cf. 19), and the Greek text 
used by E, had axpiBecav, not adnOevav. 
6. of heaven G82, >E, ; f , ae ies 
the Lord G8})2 but late MSS. read ‘ Most High God’, a title not found in Enoch, though ‘ Most High’ occurs 
in all the sections. E has ‘God’. See xcix. 3 (note). eee i 
" ten thousand years G1, ‘ten thousand ages’ E, i.e. ‘Alam for ‘am. 
i g1,2. “the number of the days’ E. : ra : : 
[ wee istoa place. Apparently the final prison of the angels here is the abyss of xviii. 11, 12, which was below 
the waste place, where the seven stars are bound already. For this final Prison, cf. x. 6, xvill. 11, liv. 6, xc. 24-5. 
if conjecture. Emu Gg1,2, All E MSS. prefix a gloss ‘ to look upon’. 
201 


” 


BOOK OF ENOCH 21. 9—22. 7 


9 fearful is the place and how terrible to look upon!’ Then Uriel answered me, one of the holy 
angels who was with me, and said unto me: ‘ Enoch, why hast thou such fear and affright?’ And 

1o I answered: ‘ Because of this fearful place, and because of the spectacle of the pain.’ And he said 
Tunto me": ‘ This place is the prison of the angels, and here they will be imprisoned for ever.’ 


XXII. Sheol or the Underworld. 


221 And thence I went to another place, and he showed me in the west ‘another! great and high 

mountain [and] of hard rock. 

E Gg 
2 And there was in it tfour} hollow places, deep And there were tfourf hollow places in it, deep 2 

and wide and very smooth. tHowy smooth are | and very smooth: fthreef of them were dark 

the hollow places and deep and dark to look at. | and one bright and there was a fountain of water 
in its midst. And I said: ‘ {Howft smooth are 
these hollow places, and deep and dark to view.’ 


3 Then Raphael answered, one of the holy angels who was with me, and said unto me: ‘ These 
hollow places have been created for this very purpose, that the spirits of the souls of the dead should 
4.assemble therein, yea that all the souls of the children of men should assemble here. And these 
laces have been made to receive them till the day of their judgement and till their appointed 
period [till the period appointed], till the great judgement (comes) upon them.’ 
E Gg 
5  Isaw the spirits of the children of men who I saw (the spirit of) a dead man making suit, 5 
were dead, and their voice went forth to heaven | and his voice went forth to heaven and made 
6 and made suit. Then I asked Raphael the angel | suit. And I asked Raphael the angel who was 6 








who was with me, and I said unto him: ‘This | with me, and I said unto him: ‘This spirit 
spirit—whose is it, whose voice goeth forth and | which maketh suit, whose is it, whose voice 
maketh suit?’ goeth forth and maketh suit to heaven ?’ 


7 And he answered me saying: ‘ This is the spirit which went forth from Abel, whom his brother 
Cain slew, and he makes his suit against him till his seed is destroyed from the face of the earth, and 
his seed is annihilated from amongst the seed of men.’ 


8. terrible, dewds, ‘terrible’ G8. E = ddvvnpds. 

9. Uriel E > G8},”, 
and I answered G8!;”._ > E which inserts ‘and he answered me’ after ‘ with me’. 
the spectacle of the pain E (édvvns), ‘the terrible (Sewvjs) spectacle ’ G8. 

Io. unto me E > Gs. 
for ever G8 gives a doublet. 


XXII. This chapter contains a very detailed account of Sheol or Hades. The writer places it in the far west, as the 
Babylonians, Greeks, and Egyptians did, and not in the underworld, as the Hebrews. In all other sections of Enoch 
the Hebrew view prevails. This is the earliest statement of the Pharisaic or Chasid doctrine of Sheol, but here it is 
already fullgrown. The departed have conscious existence, and moral, not social distinctions are observed in Sheol 
See Ixiii. 10, for the history of this doctrine. Cf. Dan. xii. ! ; 

1. [and] > Gs. 

2. tfour t, three are gloomy and one bright, according to our text, but vv. 8 and 9 show i 
not four (GS). E has there inserted ‘regarding it and’ ra avoid the inconsistency é Diets eae 

tfourt..tthreet. Read ‘three .. two’. 

hollow. xadoi E for xoidot. So too in ver. 3. 

thow +t. Read ‘why ’ to suit the reply ‘for this very purpose’ in v. 3. hollow places2°, So G. E has kuxAdpuara 
deep and dark. This seems to suit only the places of punishment. Contrast ‘one bright’ and wv. 9 ee 

3. Raphael has the same réle in Tobit. . y 

created E. éxpi@ncay GS corruptly. 

the spirits of the souls of the dead, Ge Es", E rest of MSS. corrupt. Cf. ix. 0. 
4. been made. So I emend G8E, which corruptly read ‘ made’. 

to receive them. Cf. promptuaria of 4 Ezra iv. 35, vii. 95, 1 En.c. 4, 5 (note). 

[till the period appointed.] A dittograph. 

5-7. Formerly thought to describe the first division of Sheol, which contains the soul i i 
their life were persecuted, and suffered a violent and undeserved death, The idea of ne ae ne ee ae 
cues for vengeance ree Be pes - all the sections of Enoch. Cf. ix. 1-3, 10, I1, xxil, 5-8, xlvii. 1, 2, ik 
ZO XCVMs 3, by XCIX. 359005 ClVaiss . also Rev. vi. 10; 4 Ezra iv. 35. i ; iicicd 
of Sheol, but the sight of a ea demanding vengeance. ; 35 i really these vere 

5. Spirits ..dead. E. dvOpamous vexpods évtruyydvovros GS defectiv. cy j 

6, 7. Abel’s soul cries fariyannenece. A Gen. rel Ve an@ CODE ite ee aa ate 

6. which maketh suit > E. 

answered + ‘and said to me’ E, a doublet of ‘saying’. 


202 


23 1, 2 


—. 


BOOK OF ENOCH 22. 8—23. 3 


E 

§ Then I asked regarding it, and regarding all 
the hollow places: ‘ Why is one separated from 
the other ?’ 

9 And he answered me and said unto me: 
‘These three have been made that the spirits 
of the dead might be separated. And such 
a division has been made (for) the spirits of the 
righteous, in which there is the bright spring of 

10 water. Andsuch has been made for sinners when 
they die and are buried in the earth and judge- 
ment has not been executed on them in their 

11 lifetime. Here their spirits shall be set apart 
in this great pain till the great day of judgement 
and punishment and torment of those who curse 
for ever and retribution for their spirits. There 

12 He shall bind them for ever. And such a division 
has been made for the spirits of those who make 
their suit, who make disclosures concerning their 


destruction, when they were slain in the days | 


13 of the sinners. Such has been made for the 
spirits of men who were not righteous but 
sinners, who were complete in transgression, and 
of the transgressors they shall be companions : 
but their spirits shall not be slain in the day of 
judgement nor shall they be raised from thence.’ 

14 Then I blessed the Lord of glory and said : 
‘Blessed be my Lord, the Lord of righteousness, 
who ruleth for ever.’ 





Gs 
Then I asked regarding all the hollow places: 8 
‘ Why is one separated from the other? ’ 


And he answered me saying: ‘These three g 
have been made that the spirits of the dead 
might be separated. And this division has been 
made for the spirits of the righteous, in which 
there is the bright spring of water. And this 
has been made for sinners when they die and 
are buried in the earth and judgement has not 
been executed upon them in their lifetime. 
Here their spirits shall be set apart in this great 
pain, till the great day of judgement, scourgings, 
and torments of the accursed for ever, so that 
(there may be) retribution for their spirits. 
There He shall bind them for ever. And this 
division has been made for the spirits of those 
who make their suit, who make disclosures con- 
cerning their destruction, when they were slain 
in the days of the sinners. And this has been 
made for the spirits of men who shall not be 
righteous but sinners, who are godless, and of 
the lawless they shall be companions: but their 
spirits shall not be punished in the day of judge- 
ment nor shall they be raised from thence.’ 

Then I blessed the Lord of glory and said: 


-_ 


3 


| ‘Blessed art Thou, Lord of righteousness, who 


ruleth over the world.’ 


XXIII. The fire thai deals with the Luminaries of Heaven. 


From thence I went to another place to the west of the ends of the earth. And I saw a burning 


3 fire which ran without resting, and paused not from its course day or night but (ran) regularly. And 


8. The three divisions of Sheol are now given. 


hollow places. xpipdrey E, kvkkopdrwy G8, both corrupt for ckowWwpdror. 


g. The first division is for the souls of the righteous, whether martyred or not. 


Thus good and ill fortune in life 


do not continue even after death, despite 5-7. ‘The bright spring’ seems to refer to an existing tradition. For the 
phrase ‘ water of life’ in Babylonian literature see K.A.7\° 523 seqq. 


spirits 7. 
bright. 
10. 
escaped punishment in life. 
this. G8 corruptly reads ‘thus’. 
Il. great pain. Cf. ciii. 7, 8; Luke xvi. 23-5. 
great day of judgement. See xlv. 2 (note). 


E has ‘ brightness’. 


Rest of MSS. read ‘souls’, but ‘nafs’ often = ‘ spirits’. 


Chixvn 12) Ixixe 12, .xebn 7: 


The second division is for those sinners who lived prosperously and attained to honourable burial, having 


the accursed = rév xarnpapéver, which E wrongly takes actively. 


so that, &c., emended by Radermacher. 


for ever, in Greek, ‘till the age’, i.e. till the final judgement. 


12. The third division is for the sinners who suffered in their life and therefore incur less penalty in Sheol. 


suffering unrighteous cry to God for vengeance. 


13. their spirits shall not be slain, There are degrees of suffering in Sheol. 
even this did not imply annihilation. 


‘the slaying of the spirit’, but 


The 


The worst penalty seems to be 
See cviii. 3 (note), also xcix. II. 


their spirits + ‘because those who suffer affliction here are punished less’ G8, a gloss. 


shall not be punished G8. ‘shall not be slain’ E. 
nor shali they be raised. The 
the Resurrection here general, or only for Israel? 


Apocrypha. 


sinners in the second division will rise, but only for a severer condemnation. Is 
If general, this declaration is unique in pre-Christian Jewish 


14. After each fresh revelation Enoch generally bursts forth into a doxology. Cf. xxv. 7, XXVil. 5, XXXVi. 4, XXxixX, 


9-13, xlviii. 10, Ixxxi. 3, Ixxxiii. 11, Ixxxiv, xc. 40. 
Lord of glory. See xxv. 3 (note). 
Lord of righteousness. Cf. xc. 40, cvi. 3. 


XXIII. 1, 2. Enoch is still in the west, but proceeds to another quarter in it, where there is a restless river of fire. 


xvii. 4 seems to deal with the same subject. 
1. west of the ends GS. E = ‘ west, to the ends’. 
2. burning E. > Gs. 
but ranregularly E. G& = 


dya (corrupt for ddAa) dtauevor. 
203 


BOOK OF ENOCH 28. 4—25. 4 


4 I asked saying: ‘ What is this which rests not ?’ Then Raguel, one of the holy angels who was with 
me, answered me "and said unto me": ‘ This course ‘of fire! "which thou hast seen "is the fire in the 
west which fpersecutest all the luminaries of heaven.’ 


XXIV—XXV. The Seven Mountains in the North-West and the Tree of Life. 


241 "And from thence I went to another place of the earth", and he showed me a mountain range of 
2 fire which burnt "day and™night. And I went beyond it and saw seven magnificent mountains all 
differing each from the other, and the stones (thereof) were magnificent and beautiful, magnificent 
as a whole, of glorious appearance and fair exterior: "three towards" the east, "one" founded on the 
other, and three towards the south, "one"upon the other, and deep rough ravines, no one of which 
3 joined with any other. And the seventh mountain was in the midst of these, and it excelled them 
4in height, resembling the seat of a throne: and fragrant trees encircled the throne. And amongst 
them was a tree such as I had never yet smelt, neither was any amongst them nor were others like 
it: it had a fragrance beyond all fragrance, and its leaves and blooms and wood wither not for ever : 

5 and its fruit "is beautiful, and its fruit "resembles the dates of apalm. Then I said: ‘'How! beautiful 
is this tree, and fragrant, and its leaves are fair, and its blooms "very" delightful in appearance.’ 
6 Then answered Michael, one of the holy "and honoured" angels who was with me, and was their 


leader. 
251 And he said unto me: ‘Enoch, why dost thou ask me regarding the fragrance of the tree, 
2.and ‘why’ dost thou wish to learn the truth?’ Then I answered him "saying™: ‘I wish to 


3 know about everything, but especially about this tree.’ And he answered saying: ‘This high 
mountain "which thou hast seen", whose summit is like the throne of God, is His throne, where the 
Holy Great One, the Lord of Glory, the Eternal King, will sit, when He shall come down to visit 

4 the earth with goodness. And as for this fragrant tree no mortal is permitted to touch it till the 
great judgement, when He shall take vengeance on all and bring (everything) to its consummation 


4. And said untome E. >Ggs. 
of fire G8. >E. 
which thou hast seen E. > Gs. 
tpersecutest éxdi@xov GS (E supports) corrupt for éxdicav. 


XXIV. Enoch has been in the extreme West in xxiii: now he goes to the NW. First he sees a mountain 
range of fire, and then the seven great mountains, one of which is the throne of God.. 
1. And from thence... ofthe earth E. >Gs. 
day andE. >Gé. 

2. beyond it. éméxewa airay. E = ‘towards it’: cf. xviii. 9. 
and beautiful E. ‘in beauty’ Gs. 
three towards 1° E. >Gs. 
one *22E. >Gs, 
rough G8. ‘crooked’ E. 

3. excelled them in height 0,4. G8 omits‘them’. All other MSS. of E read ‘their height’. 

resembling G8. E easily emended. 
fragrant E. ‘of goodly appearance’ G8 = cderd9 for edadn. 
4. The tree of life. Cf. xxv..4-6. 
neither was any amongst them E. ‘and no one else had enjoyed them’ G8. 
is beautiful and its fruit E. > Gs through hmt. 
5. How GS. >E. 
fragrant G8. E = ‘of goodly appearance’. 
its blooms GS. E corrupt. 
very E. >Gs. 
6. Michael, Israel’s patron angel, is in charge of these treasures of the Messianic Kingdom. From xx. 7, we should 
expect Gabriel here. 
and honoured E. >Gs, 
XXV. 1. ask + ‘and why didst thou marvel’ G8. 
why 2° Gs. >E. 
wish to learn the truth G8, ‘ enquire accurately to learn’ E. 
2. Then I + ‘Enoch’ a-g,8. >G8. ciel 
saying E. >Gs, : 
3. This high mountain, i.e. the middle one of the seven. Cf. xviii. 6-9, xxiv. 1-3. It is not Sinai, but the throne 
of God when He descends to bless the earth. Cf. Ixxvii. 1. 
which thou hast seen E. >Gs. 
the Holy Great One...Glory E. G8 = ‘the Great Lord the Holy One of Glory’. 
Holy Great One. See i. 3 (note). 
Lord of Glory. Cf. xxii. 14, (xxv. 7), xxvii. 3, 5, xxxvi. 4, xl. 3, Ixiii. 2, Ixxxiii. 8. 
Eternal King. Cf. wv. 5, 7, xxvii. 3; only found in i-xxxvi. 
He shall come down. This mountain is in the north-west. In Ixxvii, God will descend in the south. 

4. great judgement. See xlv. 2 (note). 

4, 5. This is the tree of life. After the final judgement men by eating of it will be endowed with a long life—not 
eternal life. Cf. v. 9) X- 17, xxv. 6. Cf. Apoc. Bar. Ixxiii. 2, 3, 6,73 Ixxiv. This materialistic conception of the tree of 
life, based on Gen. ii. 9, iii. 22, appears later, e.g. 4 Ezra vili. 52 ; ? Rev. ii.7, xxii. 2 A 

204 


BOOKY OR ENOCH 251) s=97. 3 


S5forever. It shall then be given to the righteous and holy. Its fruit shall be for food-to the elect: it 
shall be transplanted to the holy place, to the temple of the Lord, the Eternal King. 
6 Then shall they rejoice with joy and be glad, 
And into the holy place shall they enter ; 
And its fragrance shall be in their bones, 
And they shall live a long life on earth, 
Such as thy fathers lived : 


And in their days shall no "sorrow" or plague 
Or torment or calamity touch them.’ 


7 Then blessed I the God of Glory, the Eternal King, who hath prepared such things for the righteous, 
and hath created them and promised to give to them. 


XXVI. Ferusalem and the Mountains, Ravines, and Streams. 
261 And I went from thence to the middle of the earth, and I saw a blessed place ‘in which there were 
2 trees! with branches abiding and blooming [of a dismembered tree]. And there I saw a holy mountain, 
3 "and" underneath the mountain to the east there was a stream and it flowed towards the south. And 
I saw towards the east another mountain higher than this, and between them a deep and narrow 
4 ravine: init also ranastream ‘underneath! the mountain. And to the west thereof there was another 
mountain, lower than the former and of small elevation, and a ravine ‘deep and dry! between 
5 them: and another deep and dry ravine was at the extremities of the three 'mountains!. And all 
the ravines were deep "and narrow", (being formed) of hard rock, and trees were not planted upon 
6them. And I marvelled "at the rocks, and I marvelled” at the ravine, yea, I marvelled very much. 


XXVII. The Purpose of the Accursed Valley. 


27: Then said I: ‘ For what object is this blessed land, which is entirely filled with trees, and this 


2 accursed valley "between"? ’ "Then Uriel, one of the holy angels who was with me, answered and 
said : 


5. then G8, E = ‘this’. 
holy Gs, ‘ humble’ E. 
Its fruit ...tothe elect. SoG. Cf. Ezek. xlvii. 12. E is very corrupt. 
elect. See i. 3 (note). ; 
transplanted, i.e. the tree of life was moved from the earthly Eden to the Garden of Righteousness, and will 
thence be moved to Jerusalem. - 
to the holy place, i.e. Jerusalem when purified. For the divine New Jerusalem see xc. 29. 

6. In this verse I have followed G&. E differs in lines 2 and 3, where gg, 0,0 read for ‘shall... bones’ ‘and they 
shall draw the fragrance thereof into their bones,’ i.e. into themselves. If we accept this, we might read ‘ Then shall 
they rejoice with joy And be glad in the holy place’, &c. enn 

no sorrow or plague. Cf. Isa. lxv. 19, 20. torment.. touch them cf. Wisd. ili. 1. 

7. For doxology cf. xxii. 14 (note). 

' who, G. E = ‘because’. 

created them, G8, ‘ created such things’, E. 


XXVI. Enoch visits Jerusalem and its vicinity. Pe se ee 
1. the middle of the earth—Jerusalem. Cf. Ezek. xxxviii. 12, v. 5. In Jubilees, viii. 12, 19, it is called the earth’s 
éppards or navel, as Delphi was among the Greeks. In 1 En. xc. 26, Gehenna is ‘in the midst of the earth’. 
blessed place, all MSS. of E except. g read ‘ blessed planted place’. Cf. xxvii. 1, Ixxxix. go; Dan. xi. 16, 41, 45. 
branches abiding and blooming. Cf. the blessing of Joseph, Gen. xlix. 22: also John xv. 5. 
2. a holy mountain, Zion. 
and 2° > G8, 
a stream, the brook of Siloah. 
flowed E, G8 has dvew for puow. , 
3. another mountain, the Mount of Olives. 
between them E. ‘between it’ G. 
a ravine, the valley of the Kedron, or of Jehoshaphat. 
underneath G8, ‘towards’ or ‘ alongside’ E. 
4. another mountain, i.e. the Mount of Offence. 
a ravine, i.e: the Yas of Ene 
deep and dry G8, ‘ underneath it’ E. we 
. I. and this accursed valley between E. G8 = ‘and (why is) this valley accursed ?’ i.e. G8 has lost 7. 
Ge =e cet associated with fe worship of Moloch, repressed by Josiah (2 Kings xxii. Aol a eos by 
Jeremiah (Jer. vii. 31, 32, xix. 2, 6, xxxii. 35). In Isa. Ixvi. 24, the rebellious and apostate Jews su - A a eee te 
the presence of the righteous, as here. There are two stages in the growth of the idea. (1) Int noe x He 9, ie 
1, 2, Ixii. 12, 13, xc. 26, 27, the apostate Jews are there corporally and spiritually punished for ever. AE coaigs a ; e 
wicked are to be swept away after awhile. Cf. xlviii. 9, Ixii. 12, 13. (2) It is a place of Spa Pate Be only, He 
apostate Jews xci-civ. Cf. xcvili, 3. In the N.T. (e.g. Matt. v. 29, 30) Gehenna is for the ie - Sener ue 
Later Judaism regarded Gehenna as the purgatory of faithless Jews, and the place of eternal perdition for the 
Gentiles. Weber /wd. Theol. 341 sqq. 
2, Then Uriel.. said: This E. > G8. ee 
ie) 


BOOK OF ENOCH 27. 2—8l. 2 


‘ This” accursed valley is for those who are accursed for ever: here shall all ‘the accursed’ be gathered 
together who utter with their lips against the Lord unseemly words and of His glory speak hard 
things. E Ge 
Here shall they be gathered together, and here Here shall they be gathered together, and here 
3 shall be their place of judgement. In the last | shall be the place of their habitation. In the last 3 
days there shall be upon them the spectacle of | times, in the days of the true judgement in the 
righteous judgement in the presence of the | presence of the righteous for ever: here shall the 
righteous for ever: here shall the merciful bless | godly bless the Lord of glory, the Eternal King. 
the Lord of glory, the Eternal King. 
4 In the days of judgement over the former, they shall bless Him for the mercy in accordance with 
5 which He has assigned them (their lot).’. Then I blessed the Lord of Glory and set forth His 'glory' 
and lauded Him gloriously. 





XXVII—XXXIII. Further Fourney to the East. 


281 And thence I went "towards the east, into the midst "of the mountain range" of the desert, and 
21 saw a wilderness and it was solitary, full of trees and plants. "And" water gushed forth from 
3 above. Rushing like a copious watercourse [which flowed] towards the north-west it caused clouds 


and dew to ascend on every side. } ; 
291 And thence I went to another place in the desert, and approached to the east of this mountain 
z2range. And"there" I saw aromatic trees exhaling the fragrance of frankincense and myrrh, and the 


trees also were similar to the almond tree. 
30 1,2 And beyond these, I went afar to the east, and I saw another place, a valley (full) of water. And 
3 therein there was a tree, the colour (?) of fragrant trees such as the mastic. And on the sides of 
those valleys I saw fragrant cinnamon. And beyond these I proceeded to the east. 
311 And I saw other mountains, and amongst them were 'groves of! trees, and there flowed forth from 
2 them nectar, which is named sarara and galbanum. And beyond these mountains I saw another 


valley. G8 has yj—a transliteration of ‘Nj as in Neh. xi. 35, &c. 
the accursed > E. 
unseemly words. Cf. v. 4 (note). 
habitation Gs. ‘judgement’ E. 
2-3. The text differs, according as we follow G8 or E. 
3. spectacle E. Cf. xviii. 9, Ixii. 12. 
the godly =ciceBeis emended from doeBeis. E corrupt: ?emend to ‘those who have obtained mercy ’. 
Lord of glory. See xxv. 3. 
Eternal King. See xxv. 3 (note). 
5. His "glory! Gs. > ‘glory’ E. lauded Gs. ‘remembered’ E, zakarkti for zamarkt. 


XXVIII. The Wilderness between Jerusalem and the Jordan according to Ezek. xlvii. 8, 12 was one day to be 
well watered and covered with trees. 
I. towards the east > G8. 
of the mountain range > G8. 
and plants. E > ‘and’. Both G8 and E misrender the Aramaic original as ‘seeds’. 
2. and > G8. 
3. rushing G8. E ¢datvdpevoy corrupt for depdpevov. 
which flowed. Added in E. 
caused... to ascend G8. E so emended by change of a vowel point. 
clouds. G8 E read dédwp, i.e. 9 for py. 


XXIX. 1. Enoch goes further East to the region of fragrant trees. 
and thence, E transposes before + ‘ water’ (=‘ clouds’) in preceding verse. 

2. there > G8. ' 
aromatic. A corruption in the Aramaic leads to a false reading—‘ of judgement’. 
exhaling G8. E=m)éov for mvéovra. : 
almond tree G8. > E, but after w)éov in line before has kuaskuas=? xapias (G8). 


XXX. 1. beyond G8. See xviii. 9 note. 
went G8. ‘mountains’ E. 
afar GS. ‘not afar’ E. 
another + ‘great’ G8, 
water + ‘like that which fails not’ E—a gloss? 
z. therein was a tree G8. ‘I saw a beautiful tree’ E. 
the colour G&S. ‘like’ E. : 
3. beyond. See xviii. 9 (note). 


XXXI. I. groves GS. > E, i ; 
nectar. E prefixes ‘as it were’. a 
sarara E. ocappay G8, a transliteration of "WY a kind of balsam. 


206 


BOOK OF ENOCH: 381. 3—32. 6 


mountain 'to the east of the ends of the earth’, "whereon 2 
unt : ; : were aloe-trees", and all the trees were full 
3 of stacte, being like almond-trees. And when one burnt it, it smelt sweeter than any fragrant odour. 
E G 
g 
321 And after these fragrant odours, as I looked To the north-east I beheld seven mountains 
towards the north over the mountains I saw | full of choice nard and mastic and cinnamon 
seven mountains full of choice nard and fragrant | and pepper. 
trees and cinnamon and pepper. 


2 And thence I went over the summits of ‘all! these mountains, far towards the east ‘of the earth! 

and passed above the Erythraean sea and went far from it, and passed over "the angel” Zotiél. 
E G 

3 And I came to the Garden of Righteousness, And I came to the Cane of Righteousness 
and saw beyond those trees many large trees | and from afar off trees more numerous than 
growing there and of goodly fragrance, large, | these trees and great—ttwof trees there, very 
very beautiful and glorious, and the tree of | great, beautiful, and glorious, and magnificent, 
wisdom whereof they eat and know great wisdom. | and the tree of knowledge, whose holy fruit they 

eat and know great wisdom. 





- (That tree is in height like the fir, and its leaves are! like (those of) the Carob tree: and its fruit 

5 is like the clusters of the vine, very beautiful: and the fragrance of the tree penetrates afar. Then 

6 I said: ‘'How' beautiful is the tree, and how attractive is its lok!’ Then Raphael the holy angel, 
who was with me, answered me "and said": ‘This is the tree of wisdom, of which thy father old 
(in years) and thy aged mother, who were before thee, have eaten, and they learnt wisdom and their 
eyes were opened, and they knew that they were naked and they were driven out of the garden.’ 


z. to the east of the ends of the earth G8. >E. 
whereon were aloe trees E. >G8. This aloe is the modern eagle wood. See Zvzcyc. Bb. i, 120-1. 
all G8. E corrupt. 
of stacte i.e. craxrns emended from G «& auvtns, and E=orepeds. 
3. burnt rpiBac.v G. E=)dSeow, probably corrupted from G’s reading. G in turn follows a misreading of 
pbs ‘burn’ as pps ‘ pound’. 
it G8 reads 6:6 corrupt for airé. E=rdv kaprov. 
smelt sweeter GS. ‘was better’ E. 


XXXII. The earthly Garden of Eden and the Tree of Knowledge. 
1. and after... odours >G8 through hmt. : 

To the north-east G8, ‘towards the North’ E. That G8 is right appears from wv. 2 ‘far towards the East’ 
in both G8 and E. So the Garden of Righteousness in Ixx. 3, Ixxvii. 3 in the NW. is distinct from the primitive 
earthly Garden of Righteousness or Eden in the NE. mentioned here. Also the seven mountains here in the NE. 
must be distinct from the seven mountains, one being God’s throne, in the NW. in xviil. 6, xxiv, 2 seqq. The garden 
here seems not to be the abode of the departed righteous, unlike the garden in Ix. 8, 23, Ixi. 12, Ixv. 2, Ixx. 3, Ixxvil. 3. 
Instead their souls have a division in Sheol. xxii. 9. 

2. Erythraean sea, The Persian and Indian Oceans. Cf. Ixxvii. 6, 7. 

went G8. E corrupt. 

far from it E. G§ corrupt. 

theangel E. > G8. 

Zotiél. Seemingly the angel who guarded the entrance to Paradise. he 

3. Garden of Righteousness. Cf. Ixxvii. 3; also Ix. 8, 23, Ixi. 12, with notes. This garden is in the East; that 
in xxvii. 3 in a part of the North; in Ixx. 3 in the NW. ; i ; 

In xxxvii-Ixx, as well as in the Noachic fragments, this garden is the abode of the departed righteous; while 
in i-xxxvi a special division in Sheol is assigned to their spirits. Can this division and the garden be the same place? 
Both are in the West Ixx. 3, 4 and xxii. 1. See my Commentary zm oc. 

beyond. So E which wrongly makes paxpdev govern the following words. . 

growing E (= ¢vdpeva), G8 reads dvo pév, which would require ‘the tree of life’ before ‘and the tree of wisdom’. 
But the tree of life is near the chief of the Seven Mountains in the NW. See xxxii. 1, xxv. 5, xvill. 9 (notes). 

4. That tree...its leaves are GS. > E through hmt. ; : 
the fragrance...afar E in g, but gm add, after ‘ penetrates’, ‘proceeds’, while 4 add ‘and proceeds’, G8 
reads ‘its fragrance penetrates afar from the tree’, ; 
5. Then Gs. ‘and’ E. G8 preserves the Aramaic idiom. Cf. ix. 1, &c. 

How G8, és. > Eas in xxiv. 5. 

the tree G8. ‘this tree’ E. 

and how G§& g + ‘beautiful and’ E. ; } ; 

6. Adam and Eve here seem to be still alive. If x. 1 belongs to this section the Samaritan chronology is followed. 
See Ixv. 2 (note). Note that Adam’s sin is not regarded as the cause of man’s fall. 

Then Gs. ‘and’ E. 

Raphael. xx. 7 leads us to expect Gabriel here. 

and said E. >G8. a : 

thy father. Gé& breaks off with ‘thy father ate’. 

207 


= 


Ww 


» 


BOOK OF ENOCH 38. 1—87. 2 


33.1 And from thence I went to the ends of the earth and saw there great beasts, and each differed 
from the other ; and (I saw) birds also differing in appearance and beauty and voice, the one differing 
from the other. And to the east of those beasts I saw the ends of the earth whereon the heaven 

2 rests, and the portals of the heaven open. And I saw how the stars of heaven come forth, and 

3 I counted the portals out of which they proceed, and wrote down all their outlets, of each individual 
star by itself, according to their number and their names, their courses and their positions, and their 

4 times and their months, as Uriel the holy angel who was with me showed me. He showed all things 
to me and wrote them down for me: also their names he wrote for me, and their laws and their 
companies, 


XXXIV—XXXV. Enoch’s Fourney to the North. 


341 And from thence I went towards the north to the ends of the earth, and there I saw a great and ~ 
2 glorious device at the ends of the whole earth.. And here I saw three portals of heaven open in 
the heaven: through each of them proceed north winds: when they blow there is cold, hail, frost, 
3 snow, dew, and rain. And out of one portal they blow for good: but when they blow through 
the other two portals, fit is with violence and affliction on the earth, and they blow with violence.f 
And from thence I went towards the west to the ends of the earth, and saw there three portals 
of the heaven open such as [ had seen in the feast}, the same number of portals, and the same number 
of outlets. 


XXXVI. The Fourney to the South. 


36: And from thence I went to the south to the ends of the earth, and saw there three open portals 
2 of the heaven: and thence there come dew, rain, fand windt. And from thence I went to the east 
to the ends of the heaven, and saw here the three eastern portals of heaven open and small portals 
3 above them. Through each of these small portals pass the stars of heaven and run their course 
4 to the west on the path which is shown to them. And as often as I saw I blessed always the Lord 
of Glory, and I continued to bless the Lord of Glory who has wrought great and glorious wonders, 
to show the greatness of His work to the angels and to spirits and to men, that they might praise 
His work and all His creation: that they might see the work of His might and praise the great work 
of His hands and bless Him for ever. 


SECTION Il. CHAPTERS XX XVII- 
THE PARABLES. 


371 The second vision which he saw, the vision of wisdom—which Enoch the son of Jared, the son 
2 of Mahalalel, the son of Cainan, the son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, saw. And this 

is the beginning of the words of wisdom which I lifted up my voice to speak and say to those which 
dwell on earth: Hear, ye men of old time, and see, ye that come after, the words of the Holy 


XXXIII. 2. whereon the heaven rests. See xviii. 5 (note). 
3. The portals of the stars are described at length in Ixxii-]xxxii. 
4. Uriel here writes down the accounts, but in v. 3 it is Enoch who writes. 
companies, or ‘companions’. So Ea. E@ reads ‘functions.’ 
XXXIV. The portals of the North winds, and the nature of those winds. Cf. Ixxvi. For the winds of the 
four quarters cf. Rev. vii. 1. 
1. device (a-7z) ‘ wonder’ 77222, 
2. and >g. north winds. So apparently gv, B and also #142”. ‘winds through the north’ g. 
XXXV, XXXVI. Portals of the West and South and East winds. 
XXXV. the teastt. Read the North. Or, better, transpose this chapter after xxxvi. 3: 
XXXVI. 1. come + ‘the south wind’ a-g, 8. ‘from the south’ w. 


_ tAnd windt. Meaningless. But cf. xxxiv. 2. Perhaps these stood originally ‘and from thence come the south 
winds, and when they blow there is dew and rain’. 


2, 3. Above the winds’ portals are the stars’ portals in the East. 
4. to spirits and to men ggz? (but gg read nafasat, w nafasata), other MSS. ‘to the spirits of men’. 
the work of His might. ¢ reads ‘the might of His work’. 
XXXVII. 1. This genealogy helps to show that the Parables form an independent work. 
The second vision. The first seems to be i. 2. 
2. beginning. The Ethiopic word used here and in v. 3 may also = ‘sum’, 
and say. ‘Say’, a-m, dy,a. 
men of old time, including Cainan, Mahalalel, and Jared, according to th i 
Parables. See liv. 7 (note), lxx. 4 (note). ‘ ° : , Se eee) eae 
words of the Holy One gyt, fv,. Other MSS. ‘holy words’. 


2c8 


BOOK OF ENOCH 87. 3—88. 4 
E, ee sane I et speak ae the Lord of Spirits. It were better to declare ( 
or old time, but even from those that come after we will not withhold the beginni f wi 
4 Till the present day such wisdom has never been given by the Lord of Spirits a ayey binge 
according to my insight, according to the good pleasure of the Lord of Spirits by whom the lot of 


5 eternal life has been given to me. Now three Parables were imparted to me i 
: . DLes , and I lifted 
voice and recounted them to those that dwell on the earth. ‘ BE ware, 


them only) to the men 


XXXVIII—XLIV. The First Parable. 


XXXVITI. The Coming Fudgement of the Wicked. 
| 38 1 The first Parable. g § »f the Wicke 


When the congregation of the righteous shall appear, 
And sinners shall be judged for their sins, 
And shall be driven from the face of the earth: 


2 And when the Righteous One shall appear before the eyes of the righteous, 
Whose elect works hang upon the Lord of Spirits, 


And light shall appear to the righteous and the elect who dwell on the earth, 
Where then will be the dwelling of the sinners, 


And where the resting-place of those who have denied the Lord of Spirits ? 
It had been good for them if they had not been born. 


3 When the secrets of the righteous shall be revealed and the sinners judged, 
And the godless driven from the presence of the righteous and elect, 
4 From that time those that possess the earth shall no longer be powerful and exalted : 


Lord of Spirits. Only in 2 Macc. iii. 24 in contemporary or earlier writings, yet cf. ‘the God of the spirits 
of all flesh’? Num. xvi. 22, xxvil. 16. In Enoch it occurs in xxxvil. 4 (twice), xxxvili. 2 (twice), 4, 6, xxxix. 2, 7 (twice), 
8, 9 (twice), 12, xl. I, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, xli. 2 (twice), 6, 7, xliil. 4 (twice), xlv. 1, 2, xlvi. 3 (twice), 6, 7, 8, xlvii. 1, 2 (twice), 
4, xiviii. 2, 3, 5, 7 (twice), 1o (twice); xlix. 2, 4, 1. 2, 3 (twice), 5, li. 3, lii. 5, 9, liii. 6, liv. 5, 7, lv. 3, 4, lvii. 3, Iviii. 4, 6 
(twice), lix. 1, 2, lx. 6, 8,24, 25 (twice), Ixi. 3, 5, 8, 9 (thrice) 11, 13 (twice), Ixii. 2, 10, 12, 14, 16 (twice), Ixlii. 1, 2 (twice), 
7, 12 (twice), lxv. 9, 11, Ixvi. 2, xvii. 8, 9, Ixvili. 4 (twice), lxix. 24 (twice), 29, Ixx. 1, xxi. 2,17. We find it in all 104 
times, and 28 of these at least in the Interpolations. In the genuine portions it fits the context most closely : 
cf. xxxix. 12, xl. I-10, xlvi. 3-8, &c.: but in the Interpolations it is never so appropriate: cf. xli. 6, 7, lix. 1, 2 (context 
= natural phenomena). 

3. to the men of old time. For ’éllfi I read lalla. 

4. Gf. 2 En. xivi. 2; also 1 En-xcii. 10 seqq. 

by i.e. ’Emqédma = "3571. 

the lot of eternal life. Cf. xl. 9, lviii. 3, xii. 14. The life of a member of the Messianic kingdom is eternal 
in xxxvii-Ixx ; in i-xxxvi it is limited in duration, v. 9, x. 17, xxv. 6, in the Dream Visions, Ixxxiii-lxxxix, its duration 
is uncertain. The kingdom itself is temporary in xci-civ, and the real recompense of the righteous is the eternal 
life which follows on the close of the Messianic kingdom and the final judgement. 

5. Parables. Cf. Num. xxxii. 7, 18, Job xxvii. 1 = elaborate discourses, in the form of a vision, a prophecy, or 
a poem. 

8 those that dwell on the earth. This phrase has a good ethical sense in the genuine portions of this section, 
aS Xxxvii. 2, xl. 6, 7, xlviii. 5. So Rev. xiv. 6. In the Interpolations it has a bad sense in liv. 9, lv. 1, Ix. 5, Ixv. 6, 12, 
Ixvi. 1, Ixvii. 8, and doubtful or merely geographical elsewhere, never good. In the Rev. it always has the bad 
sense except in xiv. 6. 


XXXVIII. The time of requital is coming. When righteousness appears, and the light of the Lord of Spirits 
shines on the face of the righteous and elect, where will the sinners and deniers dwell? ; 
1. the congregation of the righteous. Peculiar to the Parables, and explained by xxxviii. 3, lili. 6, Ixii. 8. 
Cf. Ps. i. 5, cxlix. 1, Pss. Sol. xvii. 18. , - 
driven from the face of the earth. Cf. Ps. 1. 4, and 1 En. i. 1, xxxviii. 3, xli. 2, xlv. 2, 6, xlvi. 8, xviii. 9, 10, 
lili. 2. 
2. the Righteous One mf. a-s read ‘ righteousness’ i.e. s€déq for sad&q cf. liii.6. For other titles of the Messiah 
cf. xxxix. 6, xl. 5, xlv. 3, xlix. 2, 4, li. 3, 5, lii. 6, 9, Iv. 4, Ixi. 5, 8, To. 
works g prefixes ‘hope and’. ; 
hang upon the Lord of Spirits. Cf. Judith viii. 24. ; . : ; 4 
denied the Lord of Spirits, a frequent charge against the sinners: in fact their chief offence. Cf. xli. 2, 
xlv. 2, xlvi. 7, xviii. 10, Ixiii. 7, Cf. Jude 4. They deny too the heavenly world xlv. 1, the Messiah, xlviii. 10, the 
spirit of God Ixvii. 10, the righteous judgement, Ix. 6, while the righteous believe in the name of the Lord xiii. 4. 
The phrase is borrowed by the Interpolations, Ixvii. 8, Io. 
denied ‘ outraged’ ¢. ; 
It had been good, &c., cf. Matt. xxvi. 24. : . ra be) 
3. the secrets of the righteous revealed. The blessings in store for them are still hidden, lviii. 5, as also 
the Messiah, Ixii. 7. , ‘ 
and the sinners g. Other MSS. omit ‘and’ and so make ‘the sinners, &c.’ the apodosis. andy 
4. The supremacy and oppression of the earth’s great ones are drawing speedily to a close. This is the 
Parables’ constant theme, xlvi. 4-8, xlviii. 8-10, lili. 5, Ixil. 1-12, Ixiii; borrowed too by the Interpolations Ixvii. 8-13. 
It distinguishes xxxvii-lxx from xci-civ. ; : ; ; 
From that time. MSS. prefix ‘and’, i.e. waw introducing the apodosis. 


ae 209 


BOOK OF ENOCH 388. 4—39. 6b 


And they shall not be able to behold the face of the holy, 
For the Lord of Spirits has caused His light to appear 
On the face of the holy, righteous, and elect. 


5 Then shall the kings and the mighty perish 
And be given into the hands of the righteous and holy. 


6 And thenceforward none shall seek for themselves mercy from the Lord of Spirits 
For their life is at an end. 


XXXIX. The Abode of the Righteous and of the Elect One: the Pratses of the Blessed. 


39: [And it fshall come to pass in those days that elect and holy children fwill descend from the 
2 high heaven, and their seedf will become one with the children of men. And in those days Enoch 
received books of zeal and wrath, and books of disquiet and expulsion.] 
And mercy shall not be accorded to them, saith the Lord of Spirits. 
3 And in those days a whirlwind carried me off from the earth, 
And set me down at the end of the heavens. 


4 And there I saw another vision, the dwelling-places of the holy, 
And the resting-places of the righteous. 


5 Here mine eyes saw their dwellings with His righteous angels, 
And their resting-places with the holy. 


And they petitioned and interceded and prayed for the children of men, 
And righteousness flowed before them as water, 


And mercy like dew upon the earth: 
Thus it is amongst them for ever and ever. 


6a And in that place mine eyes saw the Elect One of righteousness and of faith, 
7a And I saw his dwelling-place under the wings of the Lord of Spirits. 
66. And righteousness shall prevail in his days, 


And the righteous and elect shall be without number before Him for ever and ever. 


the holy and righteous and elect, xlviii. 1. 


has caused...to appear. MSS. read ‘is seen’ but a, d have ‘the Lord of Spirits’ in the nom. and g has ‘ His 
light’ in the acc. 


His light, transfigures His saints. Light is the blessing of the kingdom. See v. 7, i. 8, xlv. 4, xxxviii. 2, 1. i 
Ivili. 3, xxxvill. 4, lvili. 3-6. 
The idea is still further developed in xci-cviii, e. g. xcii. 4, civ. 2, cviii. 11, 12, 13. 
5. Then g. ‘and then’ other MSS. 
the kings and the mighty a. ‘the mighty kings’ #78. Cf. Ixii. 1, 3, 6, 9, Ixiii. 1, 2, 12, Ixvii. 8, 12. 
are the Jewish native rulers and the Sadducees, for they have denied the Lord and His Anointed (xlviii. 10), 
and a heavenly world (xlv. 1), they have persecuted the houses of His congregations and the faithful. Only 
xlvi. 7 seems to point to heathen rulers ‘their faith is in the gods which they have made with their hands,’ but 
this may refer only to the heathen or Sadducean attitude of the Maccabean princes (cf. Pss. Sol. i. 8, viii. 14, Xvll. 17), 
e.g. John Hyrcanus, Aristobulus, and above all Alexander Jannaeus. 
perish and > g. 
given into the hands of the righteous. 
is not catastrophic. 
righteous and holy. xviii. 1, 4, 7, li. 2 (Ixv. 12). 
6. The time for mercy is past, 1. 5. 
thenceforward. g reads ‘there’. 
for themselves a, cov,d. 
XXXIX, I, 2%, Interpolated. It seems to be a fragment of the older Book of Enoch such as we find in vi-xxxvi. 
The tenses should be past and not future. 
elect and holy children, &c. g reads ‘ holy and elect’. Cf. cvi. 13. 
2. Enoch received, i.e. did not write himself. 
zeal and wrath ‘ wrath and zeal’ g. 

3. A real translation here, like Elijah’s, and no dream as in xiv. 8, 9. 

4. dwelling-places, or ‘dwellings’ or ‘abiding places’. See xxxix. 7, 8, xli. 2 ; 2 En. Ixix. 2; John xiv. 2, a vision 
of the future Messianic kingdom under the protection of the Lord of Spirits. The unities of time and place are 
curiously neglected. 

5. His righteous angels a. ‘the angels’ f. 

water and dew = abundance. Cf. xlix. 1, Amos v. 24. 
6-7. The text is slightly out of order. 
6. that place a—m. ‘those days’ m, 2B. 
the Elect One a~g, ‘the place of the elect’ g, B-ax. 
the Elect One of righteousness and of faith. See xlvi. 3 (note). 
7*, his gm. ‘their’ gtu, B. 
6°. his days a. ‘their days’ 278. 


They 


Cf. xlviii. 9, also xli. 2, Ixii. 11. This seems to imply that the judgement 


In the former passages it is used of members of the kingdom. 


For‘ elect’ cf. 1 Tim. v. 21. 


210 


BOOK OF ENOCH 39. 7b—40. 9 


76 And all the righteous and elect before Him shall be fstrongt as fiery lights, 
And their mouth shall be full of blessing, 


And their lips extol the name of the Lord of Spirits, 
And righteousness before Him shall never fail, 
[And uprightness shall never fail before Him. | 

g There I wished to dwell, 
And my spirit longed for that dwelling-place : 


And there heretofore hath been my portion, 
For so has it been established concerning me before the Lord of Spirits. 
9 In those days I praised and extolled the name of the Lord of Spirits with blessings and praises, 
because He hath destined me for blessing and glory according to the good pleasure of the Lord ot 
. Io Spirits. For a long time my eyes regarded that place, and I blessed Him and praised Him, saying : 
11 ‘ Blessed is He, and may He be blessed from the beginning and for evermore. And before Him 
there is no ceasing. He knows before the world was created what is for ever and what will be from 
12 generation unto generation. Those who sleep not bless Thee: they stand before Thy glory and bless, 
praise, and extol, saying: ‘‘ Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Spirits: He filleth the earth with 
13 spirits.” ’ And here my eyes saw all those who sleep not: they stand before Him and bless and say : 
14 ‘ Blessed be Thou, and blessed be the name of the Lord for ever and ever.’ And my face was changed ; 
for I could no longer behold. 


XL—XLI. 2. The Four Archangels. 


40: Andafter that Isawthousands of thousands and ten thousand times ten thousand, I sawa multitude 
2 beyond number and reckoning, who stood before the Lord of Spirits. And on the four sides of the 
Lord of Spirits I saw four presences, different from those that sleep not, and I learnt their names : 

for the angel that went with me made known to me their names, and showed me all the hidden things. 
And I heard the voices of those four presences as they uttered praises before the Lord of glory. 

4, 5 The first voice blesses the Lord of Spirits for ever and ever. And the second voice I heard blessing 
6 the Elect One and the elect ones who hang upon the Lord of Spirits. And the third voice I heard 
pray and intercede for those who dwell on the earth and supplicate in the name of the Lord of Spirits. 

7 And I heard the fourth voice fending off the Satans and forbidding them to come before the Lord 

8 of Spirits to accuse them who dwell on the earth. After that I asked the angel of peace who went 
with me, who showed me everything that is hidden: ° Who are these four presences which I have 

g seen and whose words I have heard and written down?’ And he said to me: ‘ This first is Michael, 
the merciful and long-suffering: and the second, who is set over all the diseases and all the wounds 


7%, be tstrongt a-= PIM which may be corrupt for 7)=‘shine’. 72?B-a read ‘be beautiful’. 
fiery lights = stars, cf. Dan. xii. 3. 
[and uprightness, &c.], a dittography. 5 
8. Enoch predestined to a place in the kingdom. Cf. Ixxi. 14-17, xc. 31; Dan. xu. I. 
and there g,z. Other MSS. ‘there’. ; : wha 
g. As in xxxvii. 4 we have the free grace of God brought forward, though in that passage ‘according to my insight’ 
occurs as well. 
12. Those who sleep not. Cf. xxxix. 13, xl. 2, Ixi. 12 (and Interpolations Ixxi. 7). 
Lord of Spirits. ‘Lord of Hosts’ in the Trisagion, Isa. vi. 3. 
13. all + ‘the wakeful ones’ g. : ; ant 
14. Cf. Ascensio Isaiae vii. 25. Here Enoch is ‘ blinded by excess of light. 
for a. ‘till’ 2*B-e. 
XL. 1. thousands, &c., Dan. vii. Io. (Interpolations lx. 1, Ixxi. 8). ‘ 
2. The angels of the presence come from Isa. Ixiii.. 9. This list is taken over by the Interpolations, Ixxi. 9. For 
the chiefs’ names contrast ix. I, xx. 
those that sleep not a-7, ‘those that stand’ 228. 
the angel that went with me. Cf. xliii. 3, &c., and ‘the angel of peace’ xl. 8, &c. 
4. Michael ‘who is ae God?’ in uv. ee ron oe 7 a 
: 1 is the ‘healer’ in v. 9. Seabit Alls 1k 75 exile 4. . : i 
: hens One, Isa. xlii. 1. Used only in the Parables (see xlvi. 3) and Luke ix. 35, xxill. 35. 
and the elect ones, ‘of the elect ones’ g. 
6. Gabriel here intercedes, but in ne 2 is a over os powers. 
i de . .. supplicate. ese verbs are in E 
We Bey dari aie the sentence and hope of the inheritors of eternal life (v. 9), and here restrains the Satans. 
These are ruled by a chief, Satan (iii. 3) to whom the Watchers became subject and so fell (liv. 6). They had 
access into heaven, xl. 7 (cf. Job i. oF os anes to evil (Ixix. 4, 6), they accused (xl. 7), they punished, 
ili i ii iii. 1. (Interpolations Ixvi. I. 
as Set ators i Be aa the fallen angels, as does Ixix. N.T. Demonology resembles that of Enoch. 
8. angel of peace. Cf. xl. 2, Test. xii Patr. Dax vi. 5, also Asher vi. 6. 
- “hidden +‘I said unto him’ adcdex. 
9. Michael a, ‘the holy Michael’ 8. 


the plural in all MSS. but d. 


211 jo By, 


BOOK OF ENOCH 40. 9—4l1. 8 


of the children of men, is Raphael: and the third, who is set over all the powers, is Gabriel: and the 
fourth, who is set over the repentance unto hope of those who inherit eternal life, is named Phanuel. 
ro And these are the four angels of the Lord of Spirits and the four voices I heard in those days. 
1 And after that I saw all the secrets of the heavens, and how the kingdom is divided, and how the 
2 actions of men are weighed in the balance. And there I saw the mansions of the elect and the man- 
sions of the holy, and mine eyes saw there all the sinners being driven from thence which deny the 
name of the Lord of Spirits, and being dragged off: and they could not abide because of the punish- 
ment which proceeds from the Lord of Spirits. 


XLI. 3-9. Astronomical Secrets. 


3 And there mine eyes saw the secrets of the lightning and of the thunder, and the secrets of the 
winds, how they are divided to blow over the earth, and the secrets of the clouds and dew, and there 
4 I saw from whence they proceed in that place and from whence they saturate the dusty earth. And 
there I saw closed chambers out of which the winds are divided, the chamber of the hail and winds, 
the chamber of the mist, and of the clouds, and the cloud thereof hovers over the earth from the 
5 beginning of the world. And I saw the chambers of the sun and moon, whence they proceed and 
whither they come again, and their glorious return, and how one is superior to the other, and their 
stately orbit, and how they do not leave their orbit, and they add nothing to their orbit and they take 
nothing from it, and they keep faith with each other, in accordance with the oath by which they 
6 are bound together. And first the sun goes forth and traverses his path according to the command- 
7 ment of the Lord of Spirits, and mighty is His name for ever and ever. And after that I saw the hidden 
and the visible path of the moon, and she accomplishes the course of her path in that place by day 
and by night—the one holding a position opposite to the other before the Lord of Spirits. 
And they give thanks and praise and rest not ; 
For unto them is their thanksgiving rest. 
8 For the sun changes oft for a blessing or a curse, 
And the course of the path of the moon is light to the righteous 
And darkness to the sinners in the name of the Lord, 
Who made a separation between the light and the darkness, 
And divided the spirits of men, 
And strengthened the spirits of the righteous, 
In the name of His righteousness. 


Gabriel a, ‘the holy Gabriel’ 8. 
repentance unto hope a-g and many § MSS. ‘repentance unto repentance’ g, ‘repentance and hope’ adbcex. 
For our text cf. Acts xi. 18; 2 Cor. vii. 10. 
is named a, ‘is’ B. 
to. Lord of Spirits a, ‘Most High God’ B. 


XLI. 1. What kingdom can this be? Is it the Messianic Kingdom, or the kingdom of this world, or a division 
(into seven parts) of heaven? 
actions of men are weighed. Cf. lxi. 8; Job xxxi. 6; Prov. xvi. 2; Ps. Ixii. 9; Dan. v.27. The Talmud 
materializes this conception. 
2. and !° g. >a-g, B. 
driven thence, xxxviii. 1. 
deny, &c., xxxviii. 2. 
3-8. This section is alien to the context. It may, however, belong to the Parables. Cf. Job, &c. It belongs 
certainly in character and detail to xiii. 1, 2, xliv, lix, Ixix. 13-25. See xliii. 
3. Lightning and thunder are often treated of. Cf. xvii. 3 
secrets of the winds. On the wind’s functions cf. xviii. I-5, XXxlv-xxxvi, Ixxvi. 
dusty earth 271u, ‘dust of the earth’ m2. 
4. And there mg, ‘there’ gu. 
the chamber, &c. Based on Job xxxviii. 22. 
and winds. > ‘and’ 6-Zov,d. 
and of the clouds > gu’. 
5. for the sun and moon see further Ixxii. 5. 
the oath. Sun, moon, and stars seem conscious ; they are subject only to God, xli. 6; they praise and rest 
not, xli. 7. Cf. Ixix. 24, xliii. 1, 2. 
by which they are bound together. So % alone, probably a fortunate conjecture. 
6. traverses, ‘returns’ gc. 
7. hidden ... path of the moon, i.e. when the moon is invisible. See Ixxiii-Ixxiv. 
before + ‘the glory of’ mz, 
8. Note the doctrine of predestination. 
the sun afy, ‘the shining sun’ mt?B—py. 


212 


BOOK OF ENOCH 41. 9—45. 2 


9 __ For no angel hinders and no power is able to hinder: for H i j 
Pe jhdecs thom all Geos tine ; lor He appoints a judge for them all and 


XLII. The Dwelling-places of Wisdom and of U nrighteousness. 


421 Wisdom found no place where she might dwell ; 
Then a dwelling-place was assigned her in the heavens. 


2 Wisdom went forth to make her dwelling among the children of men, 
And found no dwelling-place : 


Wisdom returned to her place, 
And took her seat among the angels. 


3 And unrighteousness went forth from her chambers : 
Whom she sought not she found, 
And dwelt with them, 


As rain in a desert 
And dew on a thirsty land. 


XLITI—XLIV. Astronomical Secrets. 


43:1 And I saw other lightnings and the stars of heaven, and I saw how He called them all by their 

z2names and they hearkened unto Him. And I saw how they are weighed in a righteous balance 

according to their proportions of light : (I saw) the width of their spaces and the day of their appear- 

ing, and how their revolution produces lightning: and (I saw) their revolution according to the 

3 number of the angels, and (how) they keep faith with each other. And I asked the angel who went 

4 with me who showed me what was hidden: ‘ What are these?’ And he said to me: ‘ The Lord 

of Spirits hath showed thee their parabolic meaning (lit. ‘their parable’): these are the names 

of the holy who dwell on the earth and believe in the name of the Lord of Spirits for ever and ever.’ 

Also another phenomenon I saw in regard to the lightnings: how some of the stars arise and 
become lightnings and cannot part with their new form. 


XLV—LVII: The Second Parable. 
XLV. The Lot of the Apostates: the New Heaven and the New Earth. 


451 And this is the second Parable concerning those who deny the name of the dwelling of the holy 
ones and the Lord of Spirits. 
2 And into the heaven they shall not ascend, 
And on the earth they shall not come: 


Such shall be the lot of the sinners 


g. The judge appointed is the Messiah. Read this verse directly after xli. 2. Cf. Acts xvii. 31. 

no angel hinders and no power mg*u B-y. ‘neither angel nor power’ g?/ly. 
He appoints. So g only. ? 
a judge a only has the acc. The rest of the MSS. read ‘the judge sees them all’. 

XLII. A fragment out of connexion with its present context. Where it should come, I do not know. 

1. 2. A favourite theme—the praise of wisdom. She dwelt in heaven, Ixxxiv. 3; Job xxviii, 12-14, 20-4; Baruch 
iii. 29; Sirach xxiv. 4: came down among men, Prov. 1. 20, viii, ix. I-10: no place was found for her, 1 En. xciv. 5. 
She will return in Messianic times, v. 8, xlviii. 1, xlix. 1, 3, xci. 10; 2 Bar. xliv. 14; 4 Ezra vill. 52. 

2. went forth a, ‘ came’ adcex. : 

3. The wicked refused Wisdom when she came ; they welcomed Unrighteousness when she sought them not. 

XLIII, XLIV. This passage shows the interest felt by the wise in Israel in ethical and cosmic questions at 
once. Cf. Job, Sirach, and Wisdom. But these sections on natural phenomena frequently disturb the context 
in this work. iy 

XLIII. 1. by their names. Ps. cxlvii. 4; Isa. xl. 26. 

2. weighed, &c. Cf. xli. 5. : , : 

now their Petataank praaudes lightning ¢¢/(mz). ‘and revolution: how one flash of lightning produces 
another’ 7°8. 
poi xlVieze F 4 RY. 

a 4. The stars represent the holy: cf. Dan. viii. 10. See too civ. 2; Dan. xii. 3; Matt. xili. 43. For the stars as 
angels cf. Job xxxvili. 7 ; Deut. iv. 19. 

4. holy a, ‘ righteous’ f. : eS : BE nits 2% 

believe. Cf. ‘faith’ in xxxix. 6, lviii. 5, Ixi. 4, 11, and ‘ denial’ xxxvill. 2. 

XLIV. Shooting stars. Cf. xliii. 2. 

XLV. 1. The Second Parable begins. a 

deny the name of the dwelling, i.e. the Sadducees. Cf. xxxviil. 2, and note. 
and the Lord a, ‘and of the Lord’ f. 
-2, andl°a-4. >7,8. : 
The transformed earth (v. 5) will be for the righteous only. 
213 


BOOK OF ENOCH 45. 2—46. 3 


Who have denied the name of the Lord of Spirits, 
Who are thus preserved for the day of suffering and tribulation. 


3 On that day Mine Elect One shall sit on the throne of glory 
And shall try their works, 
And their places of rest shall be innumerable. 


And their souls shall grow strong within them when they see Mine elect ones, 
And those who have called upon My glorious name: 
4 Then will I cause Mine Elect One to dwell among them. 


And I will transform the heaven and make it an eternal blessing and light : 
5 And I will transform the earth and make it a blessing : 


And I will cause Mine elect ones to dwell upon it: 
But the sinners and evil-doers shall not set foot thereon. 


6 For I have provided and satisfied with peace My righteous ones 
And have caused them to dwell before Me: 


But for the sinners there is judgement impending with Me, 
So that I shall destroy them from the face of the earth. 


XLVI. The Head of Days and the Son of Man. 


46: And there I saw One who had a head of days, 
And His head was white like wool, 
And with Him was another being whose countenance had the appearance of a man, 
And his face was full of graciousness, like one of the holy angels. 
2 And I asked the angel who went with me and showed me all the hidden things, concerning that 
3 Son of Man, who he was, and whence he was, (and) why he went with the Head of Days? And he 
answered and said unto me: 
This is the Son of Man who hath righteousness, 
With whom dwelleth righteousness, 
And who revealeth all the treasures of that which is hidden, 


Because the Lord of Spirits hath chosen him, 


denied the name... of the Lord of Spirits. See xxxviii. 2 (note). 

day of suffering and tribulation. Also called ‘that great day’, liv. 6, ‘day of judgement and consummation’, 
x. 12, ‘ of destruction’, xcviii. 10, ‘of darkness’, xciv. 9. See my Commentary further 27 doc. 

The phrase refers to (1) the Deluge in x. 4, 5, 12, liv. 5, 7-10, xci. 5, xcili. 4, (2) final world-judgement at the 
beginning of the Messianic Kingdom, x. 6, 12°, xvi. I, xix. I, xxii. 4, 11, xxv. 4, xlv. 2, liv. 6, lv. 4, xc. 20-7. (3) 
Judgement of the sword by the righteous, also at the Messianic Kingdom’s beginning, I. 2, xc. 19, xCi. 12, xcv. 7, xcvi. I, 
xcvill. 12. (4) Final world judgement at its close, xciv. 9, xcvili. 10, c. 4, cili. 8, civ. 5. In xlviii. 8-10 (2) and (3) 
seem to be combined, and in xcix. 9, 15 (3) and (4). 

3. Mine Elect One, a-m. ‘the Elect One’, m7Z?8. See xl. 5. 

throne of glory. Cf. lv. 4, Ixii. 3, 5. Also Ixi. 8, lxii. 2, Ixix. 27, 39 (as judge). The throne is that of the Head 
of Days, xlvii. 3, li. 3. 

try. The translator read 71° for jN) or if the original was in Aramaic he followed the wrong meaning of 13). 

And their places of rest, &c. This comes better in v. 5 or 6. 

souls, a, ‘spirits’ 8. See xxii. 

elect ones, a-7m. ‘Elect One’ m, abcfhoxy’. 

glorious a. ‘holy and glorious’ 7°8. 

4. Elect One, m7,8-c. ‘elect ones’, gguncy?. 

4, 5. After the judgement the Messianic Kingdom is set up in a transformed heaven (xlv. 4, li. 4) and earth (xli. 2, 
xlv. 5), with angels and men as members xxxix. 4 (note). Isa. Ixv. 17 and Ixvi. 22, have the idea, but without the 
logical consequence of a blessed immortality, as in 1 Enoch, 2 Bar. xxxii. 6, lvii. 2; 4 Ezra vii. 75. 

6. destroy them..earth. Cf. Ixix. 27. 


XLVI. 1. Here and in the following chapters Dan. vii. has been drawn upon. The title, ‘Head of Days’ i.e. ‘The 

Everlasting’, occurs in xlvi. 2, xlvii. 3, xlviil. 2, and in the Interpolations lv. 1, lx. 2, lxxi. 10-14, but not so appropriately. 

2. the angel. The MSS. wrongly read ‘one of the angels’. See note on xl. 2. 
that Son of Man. Cf. xlvi. 4, xlvili. 2, Ixii. 9, 14, lxili. 11, Ixix. 26, 27, Ixx. 1, Ixxi. 1, in all of which passages the 
demonstrative occurs; it is missing only in Ixii.7. But, ‘that’ and ‘this’ in our translator are usually renderings- 
of the Greek article, and so here. Thus in Enoch this title is the distinct designation of the personal Messiah, and 
the Greek equivalent must have been 6 vids rod dvOpmrov and not vids avOpazov. 

_ 3. The Messiah in the Parables is (1) Judge of the world, (2) Revealer of all things, (3) Champion and Ruler of the 
righteous. As (1) Judge he has righteousness (xxxviii. 2, xxxix. 6, lili. 6, and here. Cf. Ps. xlv. 4~7, Ixxii; Isa. xi. 
3-5), wisdom (xlix. 1, 3, li. 3), and power (xlix. 3, Ixii. 6). As (2) Revealer He will bring to light the invisible worlds 
of righteousness and sin, xlvi. 3, xlix. 2, 4, and raise the dead, li. 1, Ixi. 5, and judge all, li. 2, lv. 4, Ixi. 8, Ixii. 2 a 
ae a As (3) Champion he upholds, vindicates, and rewards the righteous, xxxix. 7, xlviii. 4, 7, li. 5, liii, 6, Ixii. 7, 

2, ? » 

who hath righteousness. Cf. Isa. ix. 6-7, xi. 3 seqq.; Jer. xxiii. 5 ; Zech. ix.g; Pss. Sol. xvii. 
hath chosen him. Hence he is called the ‘be. ae ie a. ae a Pn 


214 


BOOK OF ENOCH 46. 3—47. > 


And whose lot hath the pre-eminence before the Lord of Spirits in uprightness for ever. 
4 | And this Son of Man whom thou hast seen 

Shall fraise upf the kings and the mighty from their seats, 

[And the strong from their thrones] 

And shall loosen the reins of the strong, 

And break the teeth of the sinners. 
5 [And he shall put down the kings from their thrones and kingdoms] 

Because they do not extol and praise Him, 

Nor humbly acknowledge whence the kingdom was bestowed upon them. 
6 And he shall put down the countenance of the strong, 

And shall fill them with shame. 

And darkness shall be their dwelling, 

And worms shall be their bed, 


And they shall have no hope of rising from their beds, 
Because they do not extol the name of the Lord of Spirits. 
7 And these are they who fjudget the stars of heaven, 
[And raise their hands against the Most High], 
+And tread upon the earth and dwell upon itt. 
And all their deeds manifest unrighteousness, 
And their power rests upon their riches, 
And their faith is in the gods which they have made with their hands, 
And they deny the name of the Lord of Spirits, 
g And they persecute the houses of His congregations, 
And the faithful who hang upon the name of the Lord of Spirits. 


XLVII. The Prayer of the Righteous for Vengeance and their Foy at its coming. 


47: And in those days shall have ascended the prayer of the righteous, 


And the blood of the righteous from the earth before the Lord of Spirits. 
2 In those days the holy ones who dwell above in the heavens 
Shall unite with one voice 
And supplicate and pray [and praise, 
And give thanks and bless the name of the Lord of Spirits] 
On behalf of the blood of the righteous which has been shed, 
And that the prayer of the righteous may not be in vain before the Lord of Spirits, 
That judgement may be done unto them, 
And that they may not have to suffer for ever. 


hath the pre-eminence, aef/'%. ‘hath surpassed everything’ 23-effk. 
4, 6. Cf. O.T. e.g. Isa. xiv. 9, 11; Ps. iil. 7, Iviti. 6; Lam. ili. 16. 
4. traise upt. Read ‘ put down’ as in the dittograph in v. 5. : , i 

mighty from their seats. Cf. Luke i. 52 (a quotation ?). vw. 5 is a dittograph of this. 

break the teeth, &c. Cf. Ps. iii. 7. of 
5. whence the kingdom. Cf. Wisdom vi. 23; Rom. xiii. I. : eat 
6. worms ..their bed. Hardly refers to Antiochus Epiphanes’ death in 2 Macc. 1x. 5, 9, but to burial in general 

cf. Isa. Ixvi. 24. Acts xii. 23 has a strangely similar connexion of thought to ‘because they do not extol’. 
7. This verse is an echo of Dan. viii. 10. We may reconstruct it thus: 
“And these are they who cast down the stars of heaven 
And tread to the earth those who dwell upon it.’ 

We require a distich here, and the title “ Most High’ does not occur elsewhere in the Parables. 

+judget = 12.7" corrupt perhaps for 17°71" ‘cast down a: 

the stars, here = the righteous, as in Dan. vill. Io. ; ; 

tread. Cf. ‘stamped upon them’ in Dan. viii. 10. So read ‘to the earth’. 

and dwell upon it possibly = 42 12¥") corrupt for mavy, 

ifest a-g. &. ‘and manifest’ 2abcox. : 
Le eee a ‘their (‘and all their’ gvz) works are Poh neat all Noa except g7,¢71,0. 
i n their riches. Cf. Ps. xlix. 6, lii. 7; En. xciv. 6 (note). . 

nate Fee aes expression for the idolatrous tendencies of the Sadducean court. See xxxviii. 5 (note). 
8. persecute g7, ‘are driven forth’ mgz,. ane 

the eee atin, ‘from the houses’ ¢,/78. Cf, lili. 6. at 

. 1. The judgement follows the dethronement of the mighty. , 

ec iaous. fice in the plural, but in the next line in the singular (collective). G8 £5 

the blood, &c. Alex. Jannaeus was the first to shed the blood of the righteous, 95 B.C. See xxxvill. 5 (note). 
2, On the angels’ intercession. See xv. 2 (note). 9 

the prayer of the righteous. Cf. Rev. vi. 10; En. xcvii. 5 (note). 


215 


48 1 


BOOK OF ENOCH 47. 3—48. 7 


In those days I saw the Head of Days when He seated himself upon the throne of His glory, 
And the books of the living were opened before Him: 

And all His host which is in heaven above and His counsellors stood before Him, 

And the hearts of the holy were filled with joy ; 


Because the number of the righteous had been offered, 
And the prayer of the righteous had been heard, a: 
And the blood of the righteous been required before the Lord of Spirits. 


XLVIII. The Fount of Righteousness: the Son of Man—the Stay of the Righteous: Judgement 
of the Kings and the Mighty. 


And in that place I saw the fountain of righteousness 
Which was inexhaustible : ; 
And around it were many fountains of wisdom: 


And all the thirsty drank of them, 

And were filled with wisdom, 

And their dwellings were with the righteous and holy and elect. 
And at that hour that Son of Man was named 

In the presence of the Lord of Spirits, 

And his name before the Head of Days. 


Yea, before the sun and the signs were created, 
Before the stars of the heaven were made, 
His name was named before the Lord of Spirits. 


He shall be a staff to the righteous whereon to stay themselves and not fall, 
And he shall be the light of the Gentiles, 
And the hope of those who are troubled of heart. 


All who dwell on earth shall fall down and worship before him, 
And will praise and bless and celebrate with song the Lord of Spirits. 


And for this reason hath he been chosen and hidden before Him, 
Before the creation of the world and for evermore. 


And the wisdom of the Lord of Spirits hath revealed him to the holy and righteous ; 
For he hath preserved the lot of the righteous, 


3. books of the living. In O.T. these are the registers of actual Israelite citizens, with a right to the zemporal 
blessings of the chosen people. Cf. Exod. xxxii. 32, &c.; Ps. Ixix. 28; Isa. iv. 3; also Jubilees xxx. 20, 22. In Dan. 
xii. I, they refer to an immortality of blessedness. Cf. N.T. Phil. iv. 33; Rev. iil. 5, xiii. 8, &c., and the idea in Luke 
x. 20; Heb. xii, 23. Cf. too Enoch ciii. 4, ‘the memorial of the righteous.’ ‘ 

There were also books recording good and evil deeds. Ps. lvi. 8 ; Mal. iii. 16; Jubilees xxx. 22; also Dan. vii. 
10; Rev. xx. 12; Asc. Isa. ix. 22, and in Enoch evil deeds only (as Isa. Ixv. 6), Ixxxi. 4, Ixxxix. 61-77, xc. 17, 20, xcviii. 
7, 8, civ. 7; also 2 Bar. xxiv. I. 
Further there were the heavenly tablets of God’s plans. Cf. Exod. xxv. 9,40; Dan. x.21. Also in Enoch Ixxxi. 1, 
2, XClil. 1-3, ciii. 2, 3, cvi. 19, cvii. 1, cviii. 7 (‘ books of the holy ones’ as ciii. 2). See my Commentary 27 doc. 
4. the number of the righteous had been offered. Cf. 2 Bar. xxiii. 53 4 Ezra iv. 36; Rev. vi. 10, 11. 
the righteous 7. Other MSS. read ‘righteousness’. ‘ 
been offered, a late sense of 27) misrendered ‘ drawn nigh’ here. 
XLVIII. 1. And 94,8. > gmu. 
fountains of wisdom. Cf. xlii. 1,2 (note). Cf. Isa. lv. 1. 
2. at that hour, i. e. when Enoch was beholding these visions. 
The Parables assert the actual pre-existence of the Son of Man. See vv. 3 and 6, xlvi. 1, 2, xlix. 2, Ixii. 7. Cf 
4 Ezra xil. 32, xiii. 26. 
3. the signs, of the Zodiac, NIN19, Job xxxviii. 32. See also viii. 3, Ixxii. 13, 19. 
4. righteous + ‘and to the holy’ 8. 
whereon to stay themselves. Cf. Ixi. 3. 
_ the light of the Gentiles. Isa. xlii. 6,xlix.6. He will become their light through his future coming and character 
being made known to them. 

troubled of heart. Cf. Isa. Ixi. 1, 2. 

5. All shall fall down, even his deniers, Ixii. 6, 9, Ixili, xc. 37. Cf. Ps. Ixxii. QO; 115) Phileas ros 
praise and bless a, ~ 9,8. 
the Lord a-y, ‘the name of the.Lord’, 77,8. 

6. and 9,8. >a-g. 
hidden. 4 Ezra xiii, 52. 
before Him. ¢ reads after ‘for evermore’. 

7. revealed, through O.T. prophecy. Cf. Ixii. he 
holy and righteous ~ ¢z,/, 
preserved the lot, &c., i.e. guard their future inheritance. 


216 


BOOK OF ENOCH 48. 749, 4 


Because they have hated and despised this world of unrighteousness, 

And have hated all its works and ways in the name of the Lord of Spirits : 
For in his name they are saved, 

And according to his good pleasure hath it been in regard to their life. 


8 In these days downcast in countenance shall the kings of the earth have become, 
And the strong who possess the land because of the works of their hands, 


For on the day of their anguish and affliction they shall not (be able to) save themselves. 
9 \ And I will give them over into the hands of Mine elect : 

As straw in the fire so shall they burn before the face of the holy : 

As lead in the water shall they sink before the face of the righteous, 

And no trace of them shall any more be found, 


10 And on the day of their affliction there shall be rest on the earth, 
And before them they shall fall and not rise again : 


And there shall be no one to take them with his hands and raise them: 
For they have denied the Lord of Spirits and His Anointed. 
The name of the Lord of Spirits be blessed. ~ 


XLIX. The Power and Wisdom of the Elect One. 


49, For wisdom is poured out like water, 


And glory faileth not before him for evermore. 


2 For he is mighty in all the secrets of righteousness, 
And unrighteousness shall disappear as a shadow, 
And have no continuance ; 
Because the Elect One standeth before the Lord of Spirits, 
And his glory is for ever and ever, 
And his might unto all generations. 


3 And in him dwells the spirit of wisdom, 
And the spirit which gives insight, 
And the spirit of understanding and of might, 
And the spirit of those who have fallen asleep in righteousness. 


4 And he shall judge the secret things, 
And none shall be able to utter a lying word before him ; 
For he is the Elect One before the Lord of Spirits according to His good pleasure. 


hated and despised this world, &c. Cf. cviii. 8-10 ; Gal. i. 4. 
in his name they are saved. Cf. 1 Cor. vi. 11; Acts iv. 12. 
according to his good pleasure... life g: ‘his good pleasure hath been for their life’ owy,4: ‘he is the 
avenger of their life’ #ztu,8-owy,b: g is corrupt: ¢= bafaqadti: méu = faqadé. 
8. day of their anguish. See xlv. 2 (note). 
g. into the hands. Cf. xxxviii. 5 (note). 
As straw ...aslead. Cf. Exod. xv. 7, Io. 
Gehenna is here visible to the righteous, cf. xxvii. 2, 3, xc. 26,27; 4 Ezra vi. 1, but not so in En. Ixii. 12, 13; Rev. 
xx. 14; or in the last clause here-—‘no trace’. Really the Parables transform the conception of Gehenna, and the 
spectacle is only temporary in this verse. 
before the face of the righteous a, ‘before. . holy’ 8. 
10. rest. Cf. lili. 7. : 
And before them ( > ‘and’ g) a, ‘and before him’ 8. 
fall and not rise again. Ps. xxxvi. 12. me th ; ! 
the Lord... and His Anointed. Ps. ii. 2. In O.T. Messiah is not an exact technical term, but is used of 
the Davidic kings, and even Cyrus (Isa. xlv.1). It is first found in the later sense in the Parables here, xlviii. 10, li. 4: 
then in Pss. Sol. xvii. 36, xviii. 6, 8; 4 Ezra vil. 29, xi. 32; 2 Bar. xxix.) 3, (ce: 
XLIX. The Messiah’s acts follow from his attributes. Cf. Isa. x. 
I. wisdom. Cf. Isa. xi. 9. 
2. Cf. xlvi. 2 (note). 4 
disappear as a shadow, &c. Job xiv. 2. 
continuance, lit. ‘ standing-ground’. ; 
glory ... for ever. Rete ms 6,73 ee ie 2. 
i i s im who gives 7,{. r , . 
Zs ae ae ae SCC ee Belly realizes the eschatological hopes of those who in the past were faithful. 
4. Cf. v. 2, xliii. 3 (note). — i 
a lying word. Cf. lxil. 3, Ixvil. 9. 
Elect One. Cf. xlvili. 6. 


w 
fo] 
Sy 


50 1 


51: 


Sa 


BOOK OF ENOCH 50. 1—51. 3 


L. The Glorification and Victory of the Righteous: the Repentance of the Gentiles. 


And in those days a change shall take place for the holy and elect, 

And the light of days shall abide upon them, 

And glory and honour shall turn to the holy, ; 

On the day of affliction on which evil shall have been treasured up against the sinners. 


And the righteous shall be victorious in the name of the Lord of Spirits : 
And He will cause the others to witness (this) 

That they may repent 

And forgo the works of their hands. 


They shall have no honour through the name of the Lord of Spirits, 
Yet through His name shall they be saved, 

And the Lord of Spirits will have compassion on them, 

For His compassion is great. 


And He is righteous also in His judgement, 

And in the presence of His glory unrighteousness also shall not maintain itself: 
At His judgement the unrepentant shall perish before Him. 

And from henceforth I will have no mercy on them, saith the Lord of Spirits. 


LI. The Resurrection of the Dead, and the Separation by the Fudge of the Righteous and the Wicked. 


And in those days shall the earth also give back that which has been entrusted to it, 
And Sheol also shall give back that which it has received, 
And hell shall give back that which it owes. 


For in those days the Elect One shall arise, 
And he shall choose the righteous and holy from among them : 
For the day has drawn nigh that they should be saved. 


And the Elect One shall in those days sit on My throne, 


L. Interpolated or at least containing incongruous details due to literary reminiscence. As in Ixxxiii-xc and xci-civ 
the judgement of the sword precedes the Messianic kingdom which comes gradually together with the conversion of the 
heathen, and the final judgement follows. But in xxxvii-Ixx the Son of Man suddenly appears and begins his reign 
with the resurrection and final judgement, with no place of repentance or time for conversion; cf. Ixii, lxiii. 

1, A gradual change from the night of oppression to the light of glory and honour; cf. lviii. 5, 6. 

holy and elect ; cf. lxii. 8. 
2. For the period of the sword; cf. xc. 19, 34, xci. 12. 

On the day a: 8 prefixes ‘and’. 

day of affliction ; cf. xlviii. 10, xlv. 2 (note). 

on which gmt. > gu, B. 

evil ¢ wrongly in acc. 

shall have been gg, ‘shall be’ B—/y, ‘is’ uz. 

repent. Cf. the Gentiles’ conversion in xc. 30-4, xci. 14. 
3. They are saved without honour. 

through the name of a, ‘ before’ 778. 
4,5. The final judgement. The unrepentant perish. Cf. lx. 5, 25; also 4 Ezra vii. 33-4; 2 Bar. Ixxxv. 12. 


LI. 1. There are three Jewish doctrines of the resurrection. (1) All Israelites are to rise. Dan, xii. 2 Et eh 
i-xxxvi (except xxii. 13), xxxvii-Ixx, Ixxxiii-xe ; Ps. Ixv (title) in LXX3; 2 Mace. vii. 9, &c.; 2 Bar. l-li. 6. (2) All 
righteous Israelites, Isa. xxv. 8, xxvi. 19; Ps. xvi. 10, 11, xvii. 15, xlix. 15, xxiii. 24-7 ; Job xiv. 13-15, xix. 26-7; 1 En. 
xci-civ; Pss. Sol. ili. 16, xiii. 9, xiv. 7, xv. 15; 2 Bar. xxx; Joseph. Avé. xviii. 1. 3; Bell. Zud. ii. 8. 14s shisi as 
the received Talmudic view. (3) All mankind are to rise, 4 Ezra vii. 32, 37; Test. 12 Patr. Benj. x. 6-8. 

Some Jews believed the soul was immortal, but the body would not rise. Wisdom of Sol. iii. 1, CCCu mln paveRLO) 
vill. 20 (compared with ix. 15, xv. 8) ; Jubilees xxiii. 30. 

the earth also...received. So g save that it substitutes a gloss ‘those who are treasured Up a ient cope Cte 
4 Ezra vii. 32. ¢w are defective: ‘ Sheol shall give back that which has been entrusted to it, that which it has received.’ 
8 conflates g and Zu. 

The earth gives up the body just as Sheol and Abaddon give up the soul. They are both reunited at the 
Resurrection that they may be judged together, according to Sanh. 91°. 

Sheol and hell here = the intermediate state. See Ixiii. 10 (note). 

hell=destruction or Abaddon, Job xxvi.6; Rev. ix. 10. Here the body rises, cf. Ixii. 15, i-xxxvi, Ixxxiii-xc. Also 
2 Macc. vii. 9 seqq.; 2 Bar. xxx, ]-li. 6; 4 Ezra vii. 32, 37. In xci-civ the soul and spirit rise. Cf. Pss. Sol. iii. 16, &c. 

2-5. These verses are out of order. The ‘he’ in v. 2 refers to the Elect One in v. 30rv. 5. If we bring 5° before 2 
we get five stanzas of three lines each, and the first four begin with ‘in those days’. 

2. choose. Cf. Matt. xxv. 32. 

the day has drawn nigh, &c. Cf. Luke xxi. 28. 

3. Cf. xlviii. 1, xlix. 3, Ixi. 7, 11, also xlii. 2 (note). 

the Elect One gm ,8, ‘Mine Elect One’ g#. 
My throne a, ‘ His throne’ 728. 


218 


BOOK OF ENOCH 51. 3—52. 8 


And his mouth shall pour forth all the secrets of wisdom and counsel: 

For the Lord of Spirits hath given (them) to him and hath glorified him. 
4 And in those days shall the mountains leap like rams, 

And the hills also shall skip like lambs satisfied with milk, 

And the faces of [all] the angels in heaven shall be lighted up with joy. 
50 And the earth shall rejoice, 


¢ And the righteous shall dwell upon it, 
2 And the elect shall walk thereon. 
LIT. The Seven Metal Mountains and the Elect One. 
521 


And after those days in that place where I had seen all the visions of that which is hidden—for 

2 [had been carried off in a whirlwind and they had borne me towards the west—There mine eyes saw 
all the secret things of heaven that shall be, a mountain of iron, and a mountain of copper, and 
a mountain of silver, and a mountain of gold, and a mountain of soft metal, and a mountain of lead. 

3 And I asked the angel who went with me, saying, ‘ What things are these which I have seen in 

4secret?’ And he said unto me: ‘ All these things which thou hast seen shall serve the dominion 
of His Anointed that he may be potent and mighty on the earth.’ 


5 And that angel of peace answered, saying unto me: ‘ Wait a little, and there shall be revealed unto 
thee all the secret things which surround the Lord of Spirits. 
6 And these mountains which thine eyes have seen, 
The mountain of iron, and the mountain of copper, and the mountain of silver, 
And the mountain of gold, and the mountain of soft metal, and the mountain of lead, 
All these shall be in the presence of the Elect One 
As wax before the fire, 


And like the water which streams down from above [upon those mountains], 
And they shall become powerless before his feet. 
7 And it shall come to pass in those days that none shall be saved, 
Either by gold or by silver, 
And none be able to escape. 
8 And there shall be no iron for war, 
Nor shall one clothe oneself with a breastplate. 
Bronze shall be of no service, 
And tin [shall be of no service and] shall not be esteemed, 
And lead shall not be desired. 


his ... counsel. Emended. g,8 = ‘all the secrets of wisdom shall go forth from the counsel of his mouth’. 

a-g put ‘all the secrets’ in the acc. and gw insert ‘and’ after ‘ wisdom’. etre 

4. mountains leap. Cf. Ps. cxiv. 4,6; and for the whole verse cf. Test. 12 Patr. Levi XVili. 5. 
angels...joy. Cf. Luke xv.10, We can translate either ‘the angels . . as to their faces’ or ‘ the angels—their 
faces’. 

[all] Omit, and read “éllfi for kuélld, as often. 

5. Cf. Ps. xxxvii. 3, 9, II, 29, 34. 

walk g, ‘go’ mtu, ‘go and walk’ B (and g over an erasure). 

LI. The mountains, and the metals symbolize the future kingdoms of the world. In Dan. ii. 31-45 the metals 
have this meaning, but the mountain is the Messianic kingdom. 

This chapter, however, seems to contain two independent documents. In verses I-4 the mountains serve to 
exalt the Messiah’s dominion, in 5-9 they are destroyed before his presence. Again, verse 4 and verse 5 give two 
independent answers to verse 3. Of the two sources suggested by Beer for the Parables, verses 3-4 thus belong 
to the Son of Man source, verses 5-9 the Elect One source. Verses I-2 are common to both sources. 

i 5 i XXXIX. 3. Seal 

zs Be Wo eipeet en here. Five are given in Ixvii. 4, and tin is added in lii. 8. Cf. Origen, 
Contra Celsum, vi. 22 for the gates of the seven metals in the mysteries of Mithra. - 
4. These world powers show the Messiah’s might by melting before him, as metals before the fire. 
5. that angel. Here ‘ ee 7a article. 
i § alt see’ P. 
eee ioc of Spirits a-m: ‘the Lord of Spirits has established’ 7,¢7@. 
i i nsom or weapon. 
Q eee anes peer se 3 En tcOxs Mic. i. 3, 4, where also ‘ water’ and ‘ streams down’, 
streams down +‘upon those mountains’ MSS. 
7. Zeph. i. 18 ; cf. Isa. xii. 17. 
ee itunes clothe oneself with a breastplate (or ‘coat of mail’). So g, but #8 = ‘garment for a coat 
of mail’ (or ‘breastplate’). In a-a there is a dittograph. 
[shall be... and]. A dittograph. 
and shall not be esteemed > 7. a 


BOOK OF ENOCH 52. 9—54. 6 


9 And all these things shall be [denied and] destroyed from the surface of the earth, 
When the Elect One shall appear before the face of the Lord of Spirits.’ 


LIII—LIV. 6. The Valley of fudgement: the Angels of Punishment: the C ommunities of 
the Elect One. 


531 There mine eyes saw a deep valley with open mouths, and all who dwell on the earth and sea and 
islands shall bring to him gifts and presents and tokens of homage, but that deep valley shall not 
become full. 

2 And their hands commit lawless deeds, 
And the sinners devour all whom they lawlessly oppress: 
Yet the sinners shall be destroyed before the face of the Lord of Spirits, 
And they shall be banished from off the face of His earth, 
And they shall perish for ever and ever. 
3 For I saw all the angels of punishment abiding (there) and preparing all the instruments of Satan. 
4 And Il asked the angel of peace who went with me: ‘For whom are they preparing these instruments? ’ 
5 And he said unto me: ‘ They prepare these for the kings and the mighty of this earth, that they 
may thereby be destroyed. 
6 And after this the Righteous and Elect One shall cause the house of his congregation to appear : 
henceforth they shall be no more hindered in the name of the Lord of Spirits. 
7 And these mountains shall not stand as the earth before his righteousness, 
But the hills shall be as a fountain of water, 
And the righteous shall have rest from the oppression of sinners.’ 


541 And I looked and turned to another part of the earth, and saw there a deep valley with burning 
zfire. And they brought the kings and the mighty, and began to cast them into this deep valley. 
3 And there mine eyes saw how they made these their instruments, iron chains of immeasurable weight. 
4 And I asked the angel of peace who went with me, saying: ‘ For whom are these chains being pre- 
5 pared?’ And he said unto me: ‘ These are being prepared for the hosts of Azazél, so that they may 
take them and cast them into the abyss of complete condemnation, and they shall cover their jaws 

with rough stones as the Lord of Spirits commanded. 
6 And Michael, and Gabriel, and Raphael, and Phanuel shall take hold of them on that great day, 
and cast them on that day into the burning furnace, that the Lord of Spirits may take vengeance 


be [denied] and destroyed. Two alternative renderings, cf. 113%, 


LIII. The valley of Jehoshaphat, where God was to assemble and judge the Gentiles, Joel iii. 2, 12. 

In Joel Theodotion renders rv ydpav ris kpicews and the Targ. Jon. ‘plain of the decision of judgement’. The 
Midrash Mishle 684 holds that God will judge the whole world in this valley. Though usually identified with the 
Kidron, the valley originally had no locality assigned to it. See Excyc. Bid. ii. 2353. 

I. there a-g, ‘and there’ g. 
deep valley with open mouths mgtu,8-n. ‘open and deep-mouthed valley ’ & 
not become full. This seems inexplicable. 
1, 2, The presents and homage of the mighty ones avail not, as they are sinners and oppressors, and therefore 
torments await them. 
2. whom they lawlessly oppress. I emend jésdméwii ‘ produce’ into jésAmawai ‘ oppress’, cf. v. 7. 
shall perish. All MSS. insert a negative. 
3. angels of punishment. See xl. 7 (note), also cf. liv. 3-5. 
abiding mg¢(gu). Other MSS. ‘going’. 
5. these > gu,n-2x. 
prepare 8. >a. 
this earth: ‘this ’=Greek article. 
6. house of his congregation. See xxxviii. 1 (note) = synagogue. Cf. Ps. Ixxiv. 8, 
7. Cf. lil. 6, and Isa. Ixiv. 3; Zech. iv. 7. There is a return to the figurative language of.lii, where the mountains 
= the kingdoms of the earth. 

his righteousness a-g. ‘His face’ g,/°8-m. 

LIV. The writer passes from the valley of judgement and the fetters still in making to the valley of Gehenna 
where the kings are cast. The fallen angels and the kings are mentioned together as in Isa. xxiv. 21, 22. 


I. a deep valley, Gehenna. See xlviii. 9 (note), and cf. lvi. 3, 4. This valley of Hinnom lay to the south of 
Jerusalem. 


: 3-5. The first judgement of the Watchers, cf. x-xvi. The ‘abyss’ here is only the preliminary place of punishment, 
Chex lize 
4. chains, ‘chains of (‘ and’ g/) instruments’ mgt,.B-—dn, 
5. and they shall cover. g reads ‘to cover’. 
6. Their second judgement. 
on that great day. See xlv. 2 (note). 


Note that in the Parables the guilt of the Watchers lay in becomi bject t ; : i < 
ee. g y ng subject to Satan. Cf. xl. 7; Jubilees x. 8 seqq. 


cast them 77,8. > mg. 
furnace a-g, ‘fire’ g,y, ‘furnace of fire’ B-y. -Cf. x6, xvii. 17, bert, 7~10, xc. 24, 25. Not Gehenna. 
220 


BOOK OF ENOCH 54. 6—56. 4 


on them for their unrighteousness in becoming subject to Satan and leading astray those who dwell 
on the earth.’ | 


LIV. 7.—LV. 2. Noachic Fragment on the first World Fudgement. 


7 And in those days shall punishment come from the Lord of Spirits, and He will open all the 

chambers of waters which are above the heavens, and of the fountains which are beneath the earth, 

8 And all the waters shall be joined with the waters: that which is above the heavens is the masculine, 

g and the water which is beneath the earth is the feminine. And they shall destroy all who dwell 

1o on the earth and those who dwell under the ends of the heaven. And when they have recognized 
their unrighteousness which they have wrought on the earth, then by these shall they perish.’ 

551 And after that the Head of Days repented and said: ‘ In vain have I destroyed all who dwell 

2 on the earth.’ And He sware by His great name: ‘ Henceforth I will not do so to all who dwell 

on the earth, and I will set a sign in the heaven: and this shall be a pledge of good faith between 


Me and them for ever, so long as heaven is above the earth. And this is in accordance with My 
command. 


LV. 3—LVI. 4. Final fudgement of Azazel, the Watchers and their children. 


3. When I have desired to take hold of them by the hand of the angels on the day of tribulation 
and pain because of this, I will cause My chastisement and My wrath to abide upon them, saith 
4 God, the Lord of Spirits. Yet mighty kingst who dwell on the earth, ye shall have to behold Mine 
Elect One, how he sits on the throne of glory and judges Azazél, and all his associates, and all his 
_ hosts in the name of the Lord of Spirits.’ 
56°: And I saw there the hosts of the angels of punishment going, and they held scourges and chains 
2 of iron and bronze. And I asked the angel of peace who went with me, saying: ‘To whom are 
3 these who hold the scourges going?’ And he said unto me: ‘ To their elect and beloved ones, that 
they may be cast into the chasm of the abyss of the valley. 
4 And then that valley shall be filled with their elect and beloved, 
And the days of their lives shall be at an end, 
And the days of their leading astray shall not thenceforward be reckoned. 


My 


LIV. 7—LV. 2. Interpolated. A digression on the first world-judgement—the Deluge and so a Noachic fragment. 
Cf. xxxix. 1, 2%, liv. 7-lv. 2, lx, Ixv—Ixix. 25. These all (1) disturb the context; (2) claim to be by Noah Ix. 7-11, 24, 
25, Ixv—Ixviii. 1; (3) misunderstand the Parables, e.g. combine lii. 1, 2 with liv. 1; (4) give a definite date, Ix. 1; (5) in 
Ixviii. 2-5 contradict liv. 4-6, lv. 3, 4; (6) confuse the Satans and the fallen angels, Ixix, and make Semjaza the leader, 
not Azazel; (7) misuse borrowed technical terms and phrases, Ix. 11, 24, Ixvil. 8, 10: also liv. 9, lv. 1, Ix. 10, Ixvi. 1 ; 
(8) use the Samaritan chronology, not that of the LXX, see Ixv. 2 (note). : 

Jubilees x. 13, xxi. Io mention a Book of Noah, whence these passages were interpolated to supply Enoch’s 
silence about the Flood. = : : 

7. above the heavens. All MSS. but ,d wrongly add ‘and in addition to the fountains which are beneath the 

avens ’. 
ph In primitive Babylonian cosmology water = the primitive element or the original male and female elements. 

g. all who dwell, &c. Cf. xxxvii. 5 (note). 

10. And >g. ; . ; 

when, emended : ‘inasmuch as’ ¢z,ew. ‘on this account’ gwgf*8-ew. The translator misread 2 (Heb.) or "8 
(Aramaic). Yet ‘on this account’ may be right, but requires ‘ shall recognize i 


LV. 1. the Head of Days, inappropriately introduced by interpolator. 
repented. Cf, Gen. viii. 21. 
2. so 9,08. >gml'u,x. 
Een ee otdence with My command g/, ‘this is My command’ m, ‘this command is according to My 
desire’ g, ‘after this according to My command’ w2°8. 
3. resumes liv. 6. , : 
day of tribulation and pain. See xlv. 2 (note). 
because of this. Text = ‘before this’. _ 
I will cause... to abide a-gz, ‘shall abide’ 7,8-d. 
ti t... wrath a, ~ 6. ; i 
4. ‘The Tapas to a need ple judgement, and thence infer theirown. Perhaps we should read ‘ Ye kings 
and mighty’. f 
of glory a-g, ‘of My glory’ gf. 
LVI. 1-4. The Watchers and the demons are now judged. The demons, or ‘beloved’ (x. 12, xiv. 6), at last fill the 
valley. See lili. 1... 
1. they held g¢,8. > tu. ; 
scourgesand g. >g/,8: mu read ‘and’. 
.2. these who g7*, ‘these’ mgz'u, ‘who’ B-7. 
the scourgesg. >a-gP. 
3. chasm of > g¢. 
4.andl°>¢. ; 
reckoned, i.e. continued. se 


BOOK OF ENOCH 56. 5-—57. 3 


LVI. 5-8. Last Struggle of the Heathen Powers against Israel. 


5 And in those days the angels shall return 
And hurl themselves to the east upon the Parthians and Medes: 


They shall stir up the kings, so that a spirit of unrest shall come upon them, 
And they shall rouse them from their thrones, 


That they may break forth as lions from their lairs, 
And as hungry wolves among their flocks. 


6 And they shall go up and tread under foot the land of His elect ones, ' 
[And the land of His elect ones shall be before them a threshing-floor and a highway :] 
7 But the city of my righteous shall be a hindrance to their horses. 


And they shall begin to fight among themselves, 
And their right hand shall be strong against themselves, 


And a man shall not know his brother, 
Nor a son his father or his mother, 


Till there be no number of the corpses through their slaughter, 
And their punishment be not in vain. 


8 In those days Sheol shall open its jaws, 
And they shall be swallowed up therein, 


And their destruction shall be at an end; 
Sheol shall devour the sinners in the presence of the elect.’ 


LVII. The Return from the Dispersion. 


571 And it came to pass after this that I saw another host of wagons, and men riding thereon, and 
2 coming on the winds from the east, and from the west to the south. And the noise of their wagons 
was heard, and when this turmoil took place the holy ones from heaven remarked it, and the pillars 

of the earth were moved from their place, and the sound thereof was heard from the one end of heaven 


3 to the other, in one day. And they shall all fall down and worship the Lord of Spirits. And this 
is the end of the second Parable. 


5-LVII. 3%. Another section from the ‘ Elect One’ source (see p. 169) which depicts the last struggle of the heathen 
powers against the Messianic kingdom set up in Jerusalem, and would suit Ixxxiii-xc or xci-civ, but not xxxvii-Ixix, 
where we have a superhuman Messiah with universal dominion, legions of angels, and the immediate presence of the 
Almighty, destroying all his enemies with the breath of his mouth. Not only is there a break in the context here, 
but the Parables deal only in general terms and avoid names and clear indications of date. Not Jerusalem, as Heres 
but a new heaven and earth will be the seat of the kingdom. The date seems clear. The Syrians ceased to be 
formidable after’ 100 B.c.: while the Romans are not referred to here. Thus the Elect One Source, if this section 
belongs to it, may be fixed as written between 100-64 B.C. 

5. The Gentiles are stirred up, not by God directly as in Ezek, xxxviii. 14-17, but by angels, as in Dan. x. 13 seqq. 

return 277'7, ‘assemble’ 7?¢u,3. 

6. His elect ones 1° oy¢. ‘their elect ones’ 72u,8-e. 

[And ... highway]. The construction is against the insertion of these words. 
threshing-floor. Cf. Isa. xxi. 1o. 

7. The attack fails, Zech. xii. 2, 3; the invaders disagree, Ezek. xxxviii. 21; Zech. xiv. 13; Hag. ii. 22, and destroy 

one another. Cf. c. 1-3. 

But 7u8. > emg. 

his brother a, ‘his neighbour and his brother’ B. 

no number .. slaughter. ¢ reads ‘ for their number through their death and chastisem 
shall not bein vain’. In fact only a scribe in ¢ inserts a negative. Possibl 
the corpses be more than myriads ’, supposing DN corrupt for nian, 

8. in a-g, ‘and in’ g,8. 

Sheol shall open its jaws. Cf. Num. xvi. 31-3; Isa.v. 14. See lxiii. 10, 
Shall be atanend g. >48, ‘shall not end’ g, ‘has sunk down’ m, ‘has been destroyed’ w, 


LVII. Dispersed Israel returns from east and west. 

I. on the winds. Perhaps read ‘like the winds’. 
from the west. ‘to the west’ g. 

2. was heard gy,8, ‘was’ stu. 
the pillars..moved. Cf. Hag. ii. 6, 7; Joel iii. 16. 2 
one end... other a-g, ‘ the end of the earth to the end of the heaven’ @. 


ent shall be corpses and it 
y then we should restore ‘ till the number of 


Cf. Isa. xxvii. 13, xliii. 5, 6, xlix. 12 22,0205 


222 


BOOK OF ENOCH 58. 1—60!'1 


LVIJI—LXXI. The Third Parable. 


58 LVIII. The Blessedness of the Saints. 
I And I began to speak the third Parable concerning the righteous and elect. 


2 Blessed are ye, ye righteous and elect, 
For glorious shall be your lot. 


3 And the righteous shall be in the light of the sun, 
And the elect in the light of eternal life : 
The days of their life shall be unending, 
And the days of the holy without number. 


4 And they shall seek the light and find righteousness with the Lord of Spirits: 
There shall be peace to the righteous in the name of the Eternal Lord. 
5 And after this it shall be said to the holy in heaven 


That they should seek out the secrets of righteousness, the heritage of faith : 
For it has become bright as the sun upon earth, 
And the darkness is past. 


6 And there shall be a light that never endeth, 
And to a limit (lit. ‘ number’) of days they shall not come, 
For the darkness shall first have been destroyed, 
[And the light established before the Lord of Spirits] 
And the light of uprightness established for ever before the Lord of Spirits. 


LIX. The Lights and the Thunder. 


591 [In those days mine eyes saw the secrets of the lightnings, and of the lights, and the judgements 

they execute (lit. ‘ their judgement’): and they lighten for a blessing or a curse as the Lord of 

2 Spirits willeth. And there I saw the secrets of the thunder, and how when it resounds above in the 

heaven, the sound thereof is heard, and he caused me to see the judgements executed on the earth, 

whether they be for well-being and blessing, or for a curse according to the word of the Lord of Spirits. 

3 And after that all the secrets of the lights and lightnings were shown to me, and they lighten for 
blessing and for satisfying. | 


Book of Noah—a Fragment. 
LX. Quaking of the Heaven: Behemoth and Leviathan: the Elements. 


60: inthe year 500, in the seventh month, on the fourteenth day of the month in the life of {Enochf. 
In that Parable I saw how a mighty quaking made the heaven of heavens to quake, and the host 
of the Most High, and the angels, a thousand thousands and ten thousand times ten thousand, were 


LVIII. The third Parable begins. Much seems to have been lost, to make room for the Noachic fragments. As 
it stands, it embraces lviii, Ixi-Ixiv, lxix. 26-9. The main theme is the final judgement by the Son of Man, especially 
over the great ones, and the ensuing bliss of the righteous. 

2. your lot, preserved for them by the Messiah xlvili. 7. 

3. light of the sun. See XXXviii. 4 (note), and verse 4 here. is 

eternal life. See xxxvii. 4 (note). Cf. Dan. xii. 2; Pss. Sol. ili. 16. 2 ‘ 

4. the Eternal Lord or ‘ Lord of the ages *, See Ixxxi. 10. Cf. i. 3, xii. 3, Ixxxil. 7, Ixxxiv. 2. ; } 

5. secrets of righteousness, i.e. their hidden recompense, as in xxxviii. 3, and xlviii. 7, They must still ‘seek’, 
and so their life is progressive. 

heritage of faith. Cf. xxxix. 6, Ixi. 4, II. 
6. never endeth, emended for MSS. ‘cannot be numbered’. 
[And ... Spirits]. Dittograph of following line. 
LIX. An intrusion of the same class as xli. 3-8, xlili, xliv, probably from a Noah-Apocalypse. 
1. Cf. Job xxxvi. 31, XXXVil. 5, 13, xxxviii. 24-7, for their ethical ends. 
In a, ‘and in’ B. 
of the lights a,ev, ‘the lights’ B-ev. ; 
a blessing or acurse. Cf. xli. 8; Job xxxvi. 31. 
2. Cf. Ix. 13-15. 
he caused a-z, ‘they caused’ abdovx,a,b. — 
judgements. Text has read oixnpara for Kpivara. ; 
on the earth. All MSS. but z add ‘and the voice of the thunder’. 

ee eign: (note), also notes on Ix. 1, 2, 6, 10, 11, &c 

ic fragments. See liv. 7 (note), also notes on Ix. I, 2, 0, 10, IT, XC. 

Ee etek “Ths date is drawn pak Cea. v. 32, and is a date in the life of Noah, not of Enoch; so for 
‘ ? ‘ ines 4 a 
tthe ato month, &c., the eve of the Feast of Tabernacles according to the Levitical Law. a 

In that Parable, unsuitable to the words ‘I saw’, and so no doubt inserted by the interpolator. Read ‘in that 
uD teas 
Le Bee of the Most High, &c. Cf. i. 6, 7, 9, for the theophany, also for the host xl. 1, Ixxi. 8, 13. 
223 


BOOK OF ENOCH 60. 2-10 


2 disquieted with a great disquiet. And the Head of Days sat on the throne of His glory, and the angels 
and the righteous stood around Him. 
3 And a great trembling seized me, 
And fear took hold of me, 
And my loins gave way, 
And dissolved were my reins, 
And I fell upon my face. 
4 And Michael sent another angel from among the holy ones and he raised me up, and when he had 
raised me up my spirit returned; for I had not been able to endure the look of this host, and the 
5 commotion and the quaking of the heaven. And Michael said unto me: ‘ Why art thou disquieted 
with such a vision? Until this day lasted the day of His mercy; and He hath been merciful and 
6 long-suffering towards those who dwell on the earth. And when the day, and the power, and the 
punishment, and the judgement come, which the Lord of Spirits hath prepared for those who worship 
not the righteous law, and for those who deny the righteous judgement, and for those who take 
His name in vain—that day is prepared, for the elect a covenant, but for sinners an inquisition. 


25 When the punishment of the Lord of Spirits shall rest upon them, it shall rest in order that the 
punishment of the Lord of Spirits may not come, in vain, and it shall slay the children with their 
mothers and the children with their fathers. Afterwards the judgement shall take place according 
to His mercy and His patience.’ 


7 And on that day were two monsters parted, a female monster named Leviathan, to dwell in the 

8 abysses of the ocean over the fountains of the waters. But the male is named Behemoth, who 
occupied with his breast a waste wilderness named fD{idainf, on the east of the garden where the 
elect and righteous dwell, where my grandfather was taken up, the seventh from Adam, the first 

9 man whom the Lord of Spirits created. And I besought the other angel that he should show me 
the might of those monsters, how they were parted on one day and cast, the one into the abysses 

10 of the sea, and the other unto the dry land of the wilderness. And he said to me: ‘Thou son of 
man, herein thou dost seek to know what is hidden.’ 


2. Head of Days. See xlvi. 1 (note); liv. 7 (note). 
the righteous could hardly have been before God’s throne before the Deluge, as few if any righteous had as 
yet died. 

Bus. XIVeTA, 24. 

loins gave way. Ps. Ixix. 23; Isa. xlv. 1. 
dissolved. All MSS. but w,dy add ‘and’. Hence 8 supplies an extra verb ‘ melted’ to ‘ reins,’ 
4. Cf. Dan. v. 6, viii. 17, x. 9, 10. Michael as chief archangel (xl. 4, 9) sends ‘the angel of peace’ (v. 24). 
5. Michaela. ‘the holy Michael’ 8. 
merciful and long-suffering. Cf. Ix. 25, 1. 3, 5, Ixi. 13. 
6. Cf. 4 Ezra vii. 37. The Deluge has here features belonging properly to the Messianic judgement of the Parables. 
Lord of Spirits. See xxxviii. 2 (note). 
worship not. Only z has the negative. If we omit it, we might restore ‘corrupt’ instead of ‘ worship’, 
law. Text = ‘judgement’. Heb. ODD has both meanings. 

25. punishment...rest. Cf. Ixii. 12. 

Afterwards ... according to His mercy, i.e. after the Deluge. Cf. Gen. viii. 21, 22; En. Ix. 5 (note). 

There is a dittograph preceding this verse ‘in order that the punishment of the Lord of Spirits may not be (4cx: 
‘may not come’ e; all other MSS. omit negative and verb) in vain and may slay the children with their mothers and 
the children with their fathers’. Before the last sentence ‘Afterwards, &c.’ all MSS. insert another dittograph ‘ when 
the punishment of the Lord of Spirits shall rest upon these’, 

7-10. A fragment dealing with Creation myths. 

_ 7. This strange fancy about Behemoth and Leviathan occurs first in Job xl, xli, but Jewish expounders find it also 
In Gen. i. 21; Ps.]. 10; Isa. xxvii. 1. See 4 Ezra vi. 49-52; 2 Bar. xxix. 4, where these monsters are to be the food 
of the righteous in the Messianic age. See too Weber, Jud. Theol. 202, 389, 402. 
that day, i.e. Creation. 
fountains of the waters. Cf. Gen. vii. 11 3; Job xxxviii. 16; En. Ixxxix. 7. 

8. tDiaidaint ~, Diinadain g, ‘Dandain’ #, Déndain m,8-eh, Déin (?) 2. Cf. 

Jewish Encyc. viii. 39. 

the garden. See xxxii. 3 (note). Whether the earthly or the heavenly garden, it is empty in xx li. 3- 
the righteous dead are in the West xxii; it is the abode of the righteous. at elect in Raocis aa Sees ae 
Iba, Tee lx. 8, 23: of the earliest fathers in Enoch’s time, lxx. 2-4; of Enoch and Elijah in Elijah’s time, Ixxxix, 52: 
of Enoch in Ixy. 2 (see note), and here. This passage (Ix. 8) and the LXX are the oldest witnesses for the translation of 
Enoch into Paradise. Cf. Latin version of Sir. xliv. 16, Ethiopic of Gen. v. 24. See Weber id. 22cr 

Seventh from Adam. Cf. xciii. 3; Jude 14; Jubilees vii. 39. 
7-9, 24. Both 4 Ezra vi. 49-52 and 2 Bar. xxix. 4 seem to have drawn on our text. 
g. the other angel, see vv. 4 and 11. For the answer see v.24. 9,@-2 read ‘that’ for ‘the’. 


5 Thou son of man, = Noah. Cf. Ezekiel’s use of the phrase, and contrast the use in the Parables xlvi. 1 
note). 


‘land of Nod’ Gen. iv. 16. See 


-3 
224 


BOOK OF ENOCH 60. 11—61. 1 


11 And the other angel who went with me and showed me what i i 
first and last in the heaven in the height, and beneath the earth in the’ eae - tho'ends OFS 
12 heaven, and on the foundation of the heaven. And the chambers of the winds, and how the winds 
are divided, and how they are weighed, and (how) the portals of the winds are reckoned, each accord- 
ing to the power of the wind, and the power of the lights of the moon, and according to the power 
that is fitting: and the divisions of the stars according to their names, and how all the divisions 
13 are divided. And the thunders according to the places where they fall, and all the divisions that 
are made among the lightnings that it may lighten, and their host that they may at once obey. 
14 For the thunder has }places of rest} (which) are assigned (to it) while it is waiting for its peal; and 
the thunder and lightning are inseparable, and although not one and undivided, they both go together 
15 through the spirit and separate not. For when the lightning lightens, the thunder utters its voice, 
and the spirit enforces a pause during the peal, and divides equally between them ; for the treasury 
of their peals is like the sand, and each one of them as it peals is held in with a bridle, and turned 
back by the power of the spirit, and pushed forward according to the many quarters of the earth. 
16 And the spirit of the sea is masculine and strong, and according to the might of his strength he draws 
it back with a rein, and in like manner it is driven forward and disperses amid all the mountains 
17 of the earth. And the spirit of the hoar-frost is his own angel, and the spirit of the hail is a good 
18 angel. And the spirit of the snow has forsaken his chambers on account of his strength—There is a 
19 special spirit therein, and that which ascends from it is like smoke, and its name is frost. And the spirit 
of the mist is not united with them in their chambers, but it has a special chamber ; for its course 
is ¢glorious} both in light and in darkness, and in winter and in summer, and in its chamber is an angel. 
20 And the spirit of the dew has its dwelling at the ends of the heaven, and is connected with the 
chambers of the rain, and its course is in winter and summer : and its clouds and the clouds of the 
21 mist are connected, and the one gives to the other. And when the spirit of the rain goes forth from 
its chamber, the angels come and open the chamber and lead it out, and when it is diffused over the 
whole earth it unites with the water on the earth. And whensoever it unites with the water on 
22 the earth... For the waters are for those who dwell on the earth; for they are nourishment 
for the earth from the Most High who is in heaven: therefore there is a measure for the rain, 
23and the angels take it in charge. And these things I saw towards the Garden of the Righteous. 
24 And the angel of peace who was with me said to me: ‘ These two monsters, prepared conformably 
to the greatness of God, shall feed... 


LXI. Angels go off to measure Paradise: the F¥udgement of the Righteous by the Elect One: the 
Praise of the Elect One and of God. 


61:1 And I saw in those days how long cords were given to those angels, and they took to themselves 
wings and flew, and they went towards the north. 


11-13. Along account about physical secrets. The answer to v. 9 comes in v. 24 and is given by the angel of peace. 
11. the other angel, &c. Borrowed from xlvi. 2. Cf. xlili. 3. 
12. The powers of nature are personified or regarded as conscious intelligences. Cf. Jubilees ii. 2 ‘angels of the spirit 
of fire’, &c.; Rev. vii. 1, 2, xiv. 18, xix. 17; Asc. Isa. iv. 18. 
chambers. All MSS. but g read ‘in the chambers’. 
how they are weighed. Cf. xliii. 2, Job. xxviii. 25. 
portals. So Flemming emends. 
lights of the moon. Its various phases. 
13. Cf. Job xxxvil. 1-5. ethan ; 
16. The ebb and flow of the sea, which is also supposed to supply the springs in the mountains. 
17. a good angel. Hail often hurts, but yet is not in charge of a demon. 
19. Unlike the previous phenomena, mist appears in all seasons, and by night and by day. 
is glorious. Text may = 139. If so, it should have been rendered ‘ is oppressive’. , 
in its chamber is an angel ¢w, ‘its chamber is an angel’ g7g, ‘in its chamber is light and its angel’ P. 
20. The dew dwells at the ends of the heaven. Cf. XXxiV. I, 23 XXXVI. I and Ixxv.5. ‘ 
21. The rain is so important for the well-being of man (Job xxxvii. 12, 13) that its spirit 1s not independent, but 
subordinated to the angels. Cf. Job xxviii. 26, xxxvili. 25-8. 
and 1° > g¢. ; 
‘And whensoever ... on the earth a-g (# omits ‘ with the water on the earth’). 
22. for mt,B—doyb. > u. g,doy,b read ‘from the place of’. g=acorruption of #7, 
23. the Garden. See v. 8 (note). Note that the seas and the Garden adjoin as in Ixxvil. 3, 4. 
- 24. goes back to v.9. The angel of peace is out of place here. See vv. 4, 9, II. 


LXI. 1. The true text of the Parables is resumed, but the opening verses are difficult. 
those angels. The reference may be lost. g reads ‘the two angels’. ; 
wings, only assigned to angels in the latest books of the O. T. cf. 1 Chron. xxi. 16. 
towards the north, perhaps Paradise. See xxxil. 3 (note) ; Ixx. 3. 


425 Q 


1105.2 


N 


Ww 


6 


7 


10 


BOOK OF ENOCH ‘61; 2410 


And I asked the angel, saying unto him: ‘Why have those (angels) taken these cords and gone 
off?’ And he said unto me: ‘ They have gone to measure.’ 


And the angel who went with me said unto me: 

‘These shall bring the measures of the righteous, 

And the ropes of the righteous to the righteous, me 

That they may stay themselves on the name of the Lord of Spirits for ever and ever. 


The elect shall begin to dwell with the elect, 
And those are the measures which shall be given to faith 
And which shall strengthen righteousness. 


And these measures shall reveal all the secrets of the depths of the earth, 
And those who have been destroyed by the desert, 

And those who have been devoured by the beasts, 

And those who have been devoured by the fish of the sea, 


That they may return and stay themselves 

On the day of the Elect One; 

For none shall be destroyed before the Lord of Spirits, 
And none can be destroyed. 


And all who dwell above in the heaven received a command and power and one voice and one light 
like unto fire. 

And that One (with) their first words théy blessed, 

And extolled and lauded with wisdom, 

And they were wise in utterance and in the spirit of life. 


And the Lord of Spirits placed the Elect One on the throne of glory. 
And he shall judge all the works of the holy above in the heaven, 
And in the balance shall their deeds be weighed. 


And when he shall lift up his countenance 

To judge their secret ways according to the word of the name of the Lord of Spirits, 
And their path according to the way of the righteous judgement of the Lord of Spirits, 
Then shall they all with one voice speak and bless, 

And glorify and extol and sanctify the name of the Lord of Spirits. 


And He will summon all the host of the heavens, and all the holy ones above, and the host of God, 


. the angel of peace, in the Elect One sections. 
the cords a. ‘the long cords’ 8. 
have gone > mud. to measure (g)¢uB8. ‘to begin’ gm. 
3-5. The measures and ropes seem to represent the nature of the ideal community of the righteous living and departed, 
and the union and communion of such with one another and with the Lord of Spirits. 
3-4. Belong to Son of Man source, as ‘the angel who went with me’ interprets. 
3. to the righteous gown. > m.B-n. 
Stay themselves on. Cf. xlviii. 4, Ixi. 5. 
4. righteousness a. {8 prefixes ‘the voice of’. 
5. The righteous alone rise here; in li. 1, 2 all Israel. 

devoured 1°. ¢ omits next nine words through hmt. 

by a beasts ¢w, ‘by the treasuries’ gm. @-n reads ‘and by the beasts’ after ‘of the sea ’, omitting ‘and.. 
devoured ’. 

6. all who dwell above in the heaven, i.e. the angels as in wv. 8, 10, 12, ix. 3, xlvii, 2. 

one voice. Cf. 2 Bar. xxx. 2 ‘in one assemblage of one thought’. 

7. that One = the Lord of Spirits, or else the Elect One, v. 5. Or better, for Za read ba and render ‘with their 
first words they blessed ’. 
8. See xlv. 3 (note): cf. Ps. cx. 1. 

glory a. ‘His glory’ B. 

the holy, i.e. the angels. Cf. Ixi. 6. But g reads ‘the righteous ’. 

Shall their deeds be weighed mw, 8. ‘they (‘he’ t,abcdefhkl) shall weigh their deeds’ & See xli. 1 (note). 

g. ways, ‘cause’ ¢, 

the word of the name, or ‘command of the name’. 

Lord of Spirits 2° a. ‘Most High God’ B. 

sanctify a, 7. ‘praise’ B-z. 

to. He willsummon. Or if jeséw‘é is a misrendering of Bojoe, render ‘the host ... shall cry out’. 

Cherubin, Seraphin, and Ophannin. Cf. xiv. 11, 18, xx. 7, Ixxi, 7. The Cherubim were primarily symbolic 
figures, the means of revealing or concealing God’s presence, but here = an order of angels. Cf. Rev. v.6; 2 En. xix. 6, 
xx. I. The Seraphim served in His immediate presence. They are not classed together in O.T. The Ophannim 
(i.e. wheels) come from Ezek. i.15. The Talmud classes them with Cherubim and Seraphim, Weber, Jiid. Theol. 168, 205. 

226 


BOOK OF ENOCH 61. 10—62, 5 


the Cherubin, Seraphin and Ophannin, and all the angels of power, and all the i 
II cipalities, and the Elect One, and the other powers Bares ae (and) over the woe nares 
shall raise one voice, and bless and glorify and exalt in the spirit of faith, and in the spirit of wisdom 
and in the spirit of patience, and in the spirit of mercy, and in the spirit of judgement and of peace, 
and in the spirit of goodness, and shall all say with one voice: ‘‘ Blessed is He, and may the name 
of the Lord of Spirits be blessed for ever and ever.” 
12 All who sleep not above in heaven shall bless Him: 
All the holy ones who are in heaven shall bless Him, 
And all the elect who dwell in the garden of life: 


And every spirit of light who is able to bless, and glorify, and extol, and hallow Thy blessed name, 
And all flesh shall beyond measure glorify and bless Thy name for ever and ever. 


13 For great is the mercy of the Lord of Spirits, and He is long-suffering, 
And all His works and all that He has created 
He has revealed to the righteous and elect 
In the name of the Lord of Spirits.’ 


LXII. Fudgement of the Kings and the Mighty: Blessedness of the Righteous, 


62:1 And thus the Lord commanded the kings and the mighty and the exalted, and those who dwell 
on the earth, and said: 
‘Open your eyes and lift up your horns if ye are able to recognize the Elect One.’ 
z And the Lord of Spirits seated him on the throne of His glory, 
And the spirit of righteousness was poured out upon him, 
And the word. of his mouth slays all the sinners, 
And all the unrighteous are destroyed from before his face. 
3 And there shall stand up in that day all the kings and the mighty, 
And the exalted and those who hold the earth, 
And they shall see and recognize 
How he sits on the throne of his glory, 
And righteousness is judged before him, 
And no lying word is spoken before him. 


4 Then shall pain come upon them as on a woman in travail, 
[And she has pain in bringing forth] 
When her child enters the mouth of the womb, 
And she has pain in bringing forth. 


5 And one portion of them shall look on the other, 
And they shall be terrified, 


angels of power and...of principalities. Cf. Rom. vili. 38; Eph. i. 21; Col. i. 16; Test. 12 Patr. Levi iii. 8. 
the other powers on the earth, i.e. the lower angel-powers over nature. 

11. The seven virtues of the praising angels. Cf. xlix. 3. 

glorify + ‘and praise’ B. 
exalt > g. 
in the spirit of patience z/,a. ‘in patience’ other MSS. 
Blessed is He, &c. Cf. xxxix. 10; and Rev. iv. 9, II, v. 13. 
12. who sleep ee See i. 5 knot. as 
the holy ones a, dwxy: is holy ones’ B-dw-y. 
wracH of life. ‘See ie 8 (note). The LXX ecole is followed here as in all the Parables. Cf. liv. 7 (note). 
spirit of light, i.e. good spirit, human or angelic. Cf. cvili. 11 ; Luke xvi. 8. 
blessed a. ‘holy’ 8. 

13. mercy. See lx. 5 (note). 

LXII. A long account of the judgement, esp. of the kings and mighty. Short accounts occur in xlvi. 4-8, 
xlviii. 8-10, liii-liv. 3. They behold the Messiah with anguish, and pray for mercy, but are carried off to torment. 
The righteous are glorified. 

1. the kings, &c. See xxxviil. 5. 

lift up your horns. Cf. Ps. Ixxv. 4. d 
2. seated him. So Dillmann emends for MSS. ‘sat’. Cf. Isa. xi. 4. 
word of his mouth. The judgement is forensic. 
all the sinners, cf. lxix. 27 (note). 
. from before a. ‘and from before’ B. J : 
3. righteousness a. ‘ the righteous in righteousness’ 8-0, 4, * the righteous’ wo, b. 
no lying word. xlix. 4. 
* 4. Cf. Isa. xiii. 8, xxi. 3, XXVI. 17. 
[and ... forth] dittograph of line 4. 
5. one portion, &c. Isa. xiii. 8. Cf. Wisdom v. I seqq. 
227 Q2 


6 


7 


9 


Io 


Lm f 


12 


BOOK OF ENOCH 62, 5-15 


And they shall be downcast of countenance, 
And pain shall seize them, 

When they see that Son of Man 

Sitting on the throne of his glory. 


And the kings and the mighty and all who possess the earth shall bless and glorify and extol him 
who rules over all, who was hidden. 

For from the beginning the Son of Man was hidden, 

And the Most High preserved him in the presence of His might, 

And revealed him to the elect. 


And the congregation of the elect and holy shall be sown, 
And all the elect shall stand before him on that day. 


And all the kings and the mighty and the exalted and those who rule the earth 
Shall fall down before him on their faces, 

And worship and set their hope upon that Son of Man, 

And petition him and supplicate for mercy at his hands. 


Nevertheless that Lord of Spirits will so press them 
That they shall hastily go forth from His presence, 
And their faces shall be filled with shame, 

And the darkness grow deeper on their faces. 


And He will deliver them to the angels for punishment, 

To execute vengeance on them because they have oppressed His children and His elect 
And they shall be a spectacle for the righteous and for His elect : 

They shall rejoice over them, 

Because the wrath of the Lord of Spirits resteth upon them, 

And His sword is drunk with their blood. 


And the righteous and elect shall be saved on that day, 
And they shall never thenceforward see the face of the sinners and unrighteous, 


And the Lord of Spirits will abide over them, 
And with that Son of Man shall they eat 
And lie down and rise up for ever and ever. 


And the righteous and elect shall have risen from the earth, 
And ceased to be of downcast countenance. 


And they shall have been clothed with garments of glory, 


Son of Man a-m, ‘Son of the woman’ m,8. See xlvi. 2 (note). 
Sitting on the throne of his glory. Cf. Matt. xxv. 31. 
6. the kings and the mighty a-z. ‘the mighty Kings’ w,8. 
rules over all. Dan. vii. 14. 
who was hidden, or ‘that was hidden’, i.e. the unseen universe. : 
6,7. hidden. Cf. xlviii. 6, 7. Revealed by the Lord of Spirits to the elect, who thus became a congregation, 
the plant of righteousness of x. 16. 
7. from the beginning. So mgd, B-a. 
8. congregation. Cf. xxxviii. 1 (note). . 
elect and holy a, ‘holy and elect’ p. 
Io. shame, and darkness. Cf. xlvi. 6; 4 Ezra vii. 55. grow deeper o7¢,8-~ Cf. Nah. ii. 10. 
11. He will deliver them to, &c. So Flemming emends. m@ read ‘the angels of punishment shall take 
them in charge’. 
angels for punishment. See xl. 7 (note). Cf. lili. 3—liv. 2. 
12. spectacle. See xlviii. 9 (note). 
sword, used figuratively as in Ixiii. 11. 
drunk. Cf. Isa. xxxiv. 6. 
13. saved, cf. xlviii. 7. i 
_14. God Himself (Isa. Ix. 19, 20; Zeph. iii. 15-17) and the Messiah (xxxix. 6, 7, xlv. 4) will dwell with the 
righteous and elect for ever. 
eat: ‘abide and eat’ B-7}, 
eat and lie down. Zeph. iii. 13. 
15, 16. garments of glory ...of life. Cf. 2 Cor. v. ; Rev. iii. 18, iv. 4, vi. LI, Vii. : ‘zZre 
il. 39, 45; Herm. Sim. viii. 2, also 1 En. cviii. 12. alae Mae ce BY PES 4A) ee 
15. of glory a,zz. ‘of life’ B-zy. 


2.28 


BOOK OF ENOCH 62. 16—63. 9 


16 And these shall be the garments of life from the Lord of Spirits : 
And your garments shall not grow old, 
Nor your glory pass away before the Lord of Spirits. 


LXIM. The unavailing Repentance of the Kings and the Mighty. 
63 1 In those days shall the mighty and the kings who possess the earth implore (Him) to grant them 
a little respite from His angels of punishment to whom they were delivered, that they might fall 
2 down ,and worship before the Lord of Spirits, and confess their sins before Him, And they shall 
bless and glorify the Lord of Spirits, and say : 

‘ Blessed is the Lord of Spirits and the Lord of kings, 

And the Lord of the mighty and the Lord of the rich, 

And the Lord of glory and the Lord of wisdom, 
3 And splendid in every secret thing is Thy power from generation to generation, 

And Thy glory for ever and ever: 


Deep are all Thy secrets and innumerable, 
And Thy righteousness is beyond reckoning. 


4 We have now learnt that we should glorify 

And bless the Lord of kings and Him who is king over all kings.’ 
5 And they shall say : 

‘Would that we had rest to glorify and give thanks 

And confess our faith before His glory ! 


6 And now we long for a little rest but find it not: 
We follow hard upon and obtain (it) not: 


And light has vanished from before us, 
And darkness is our dwelling-place for ever and ever: 


7 For we have not believed before Him 
Nor glorified the name of the Lord of Spirits, [nor glorified our Lord] 


But our hope was in the sceptre of our kingdom, 
And in our glory. 


8 And in the day of our suffering and tribulation He saves us not, 
And we find no respite for confession 


That our Lord is true in all His works, and in His judgements and His justice, 
And His judgements have no respect of persons. 


g And we pass away from before His face on account of our works, 
And all our sins are reckoned up in righteousness.’ 


garments of life 78, a-g prefix ‘ your garments’. 
from a-, 2’, ‘ with’ p. : 
not grow old; cf. Deut. vill. 4, xxix. 5. 


LXIII. A last despairing appeal by the kings and mighty. They justify God’s judgement. Cf. Wisdom v. 3-8. 
1. the mighty and the kings a, ‘kings’ aekknvw, ‘ mighty kings’ dcdf tlopxy a,b. 
His angels a-tz B, ‘the angels’ 7,9”. c 
2. They confess what before they denied, xlvi. 5. 
ea Cf, xix. 2, optn : ; 
splendid . . . power a-vz7, ‘every secret thing is lighted up and Thy power B. irae 
5. glorify and give thanks a-g. ‘glorify Him and thank Him’ g,8 (+‘and bless Him’ 8). 
6. And now 9,8. ‘now’.a-g. mee 
follow hard upon g#',b. > u,z. ‘are driven away’ mg, ¢ B-2,a,0. 
obtain, &c.: g reads ‘ obtain not light ; it has’, &c. 
darkness is our dwelling-place. Cf. xlvi. 6. 
7. believed or ‘confessed’. ee 
"of spirits gg, e/v. ‘of lords’ m. ‘of kings’ Zu, B-é/v. 
four Lord] a, ‘the Lord in all His work’ B. ie 
sceptre 7, i0,2,0. ‘throne’ Zu, fv. ‘sceptre of the throne’ 7,dhkli. 
8. No place of repentance when the final judgement has come. 
our Lord is true, &c. Cf. Jub. iv. 21. a 
9 


BOOK OF ENOCH 68. 1o—65, 6 


10 Now they shall say unto themselves: ‘Our souls are full of unrighteous gain, but it does not 
prevent us from descending from the midst thereof into the fburdenf of Sheol. 
11 And after that their faces shall be filled with darkness 
And shame before that Son of Man, 
And they shall be driven from his presence, 
And the sword shall abide before his face in their midst. 


12 Thus spake the Lord of Spirits: ‘ This is the ordinance and judgement with respect to the mighty 
and the kings and the exalted and those who possess the earth before the Lord of Spirits. 


LXIV. Vision of the fallen Angels in the Place of Punishment. 


64 1,2 And other forms I saw hidden in that place. I heard the voice of the angel saying: ‘ These are 
the angels who descended to the earth, and revealed what was hidden to the children of men and 
seduced the children of men into committing sin.’ 


LXV. Enoch foretells to Noah the Deluge and his own Preservation. 


65 1,2 And in those days Noah saw the earth that it had sunk down and its destruction was nigh. And 
he arose from thence and went to the ends of the earth, and cried aloud to his grandfather Enoch : 

3 and Noah said three times with an embittered voice: ‘ Hear me, hear me, hear me.’ And I said 

unto him: ‘Tell me what it is that is falling out on the earth that the earth is in such evil plight 

4 and shaken, lest perchance I shall perish with it?’ And thereupon there was a great commotion 

5 on the earth, and a voice was heard from heaven, and I fell on my face. And Enoch my grand- 


- father came and stood by me, and said unto me: ‘ Why hast thou cried unto me with a bitter cry 
and weeping ? 

6 And acommand has gone forth from the presence of the Lord concerning those who dwell on the 
earth that their ruin is accomplished because they have learnt all the secrets of the angels, and all 
the violence of the Satans, and all their powers—the most secret ones—and all the power of those 


10. Riches avail not to save them. Cf. lii, 7 Lill 1, 250 Psy xlixe 712) 

unrighteous gain, Cf. Luke xvi. 9, 11; Sir. v. 8. 

from the midst thereof gw. ‘from the flame thereof’ mz, 8-0. 

into the tburdent. Possibly Bap = ‘ stronghold’ was misread as Bapos, ‘burden’. Or we might read ‘ into 
the burden of the flame of Sheol’. 

Sheol. See my Commentary for a full discussion of this word’s history. (1) The oldest view occurs in e.g. 
Job xxx. 23; Num. xvi. 30. It is the place appointed for all living, is beneath the earth, and is the land of destruction, 
forgetfulness, and silence. The individual does exist, but without joy or contact with God or man. Good and bad 
fare alike, but the family, and national and social distinctions of the world above are reproduced. Cf. the Homeric 
Hades. (2) In the second century B.c. the doctrine of future retribution and the Resurrection altered the conception 
to that of a place of reward, and also that of an intermediate state (cf. li. 1). (3) Owing to the Resurrection being 
limited to the righteous, Sheol came to mean hell, or Gehenna, as the preliminary or permanent abode of wicked souls 
(Ixiii, 10, xcix. 11). See Charles, he Doctrine of a Future Life,—passim. 

II. Bousset suggests that this verse is an interpolation. It resembles Ixii. 10. 
darkness and shame. Cf. xlvi. 6, lxii. to. 
12, Thus a-g, ‘as’ g, ‘and thus’ p. 


LXIV. A digression on the fallen angels, judged in the second Parable, liv. 3, &c., lv. 3, 4. It is out of the 
context here, as ‘that place’ in v. 1 cannot be Sheol referred to in Ixiii. 10. 
2. I heard, ‘and I heard’ m, vx. 
angel, ‘angels’ 7. 
descended + ‘from heaven’ ¢, 8. 


LXV—LXIX. 25. Professedly part of a Noah Apocalypse (see liv. 7), giving here three accounts (1) Ixv. 1-Ixvii. 3, 
the coming Flood and Noah’s escape; (2) Ixvii. 4-Ixix. I, the fallen angels’ punishment, and that of the kings and 
the mighty ; (3) Ixix. 2-25, the angels’ fall and the secrets they disclosed. 

LXV. 1. Note that the vision is Noah’s. — It opens with a sinking of the earth here as with a quaking of the 
heavens in lx. 1. 

and 9,8. >a-g. 
Noah. “I Noah’ ¢, and so in first person for verses 1 and 2. 

2. the ends of the earth, i.e. where the entrance to heaven is. Cf. cvi. 8. 
grandfather, really great-grandfather. Cf. lx. 8. 

3. I said a, v: ‘he said’ #8-zv. 

4. a voice, the command of verse 6. 

6-10%. Text out of order. Clearer if verses 9-10* followed at once on verse 5. 

6. those who dwell on the earth, borrowed from the Parables. Cf. XXXvii. 5 (note). 

have learnt all the secrets, &c. Cf. Vil, Vili, Ixix. 
all their powers—the most secret ones &é, ‘their secret powers’ B-an, ‘the powers of their most secret 
secrets’ m. ‘their powers’ gz. 


230 


BOOK OF ENOCH 65. 6-67. 4 


who practise sorcery, and the power of witchcraft, and the power of those who make molten images 
7 for the whole earth: And how silver is produced from the dust of the earth, and how soft metal 
8 originates in the earth. For lead and tin are not produced from the earth like the first : it is a fountain 
g that produces them, and an angel stands therein, and that angel is pre-eminent.’ And after that my 
grandfather Enoch took hold of me by my hand and raised me up, and said unto me: ‘ Go, for I have 
to asked the Lord of Spirits as touching this commotion on the earth. And He said unto me: ‘“ Because 
of their unrighteousness their judgement has been determined upon and shall not be withheld by 
Me for ever. Because of the sorceries which they have searched out and learnt, the earth and those 
11 who dwell upon it shall be destroyed.’”’ And these—they have no place of repentance for ever, 
because they have shown them what was hidden, and they arc the damned: but as for thee, my 
son, the Lord of Spirits knows that thou art pure, and guiltless of this reproach concerning the secrets. 
12 And He has destined thy name to be among the holy, 
And will preserve thee amongst those who dwell on the earth, 
And has destined thy righteous seed both for kingship and for great honours, 
. And from thy seed shall proceed a fountain of the righteous and holy without number for ever.’ 


LXVI. The Angels of the Waters bidden to hold them in Check. 


6G: And after that he showed me the angels of punishment who are prepared to come and let loose 
all the powers of the waters which are beneath in the earth in order to bring judgement and destruc- — 
2 tion on all who [abide and] dwell on the earth. And the Lord of Spirits gave commandment to 
the angels who were going forth, that they should not cause the waters to rise but should hold them 


3 in check ; for those angels were over the powers of the waters. And I went away from the presence 
of Enoch. 


LXVII. God's Promise to Noah: Places of Punishment of the Angels and of the Kings. 


671 And in those days the word of God came unto me, and He said unto me: ‘ Noah, thy lot has come 
2 up before Me, a lot without blame, a lot of love and uprightness. And now the angels are making 
a wooden (building), and when they have completed that task I will place My hand upon it and 
preserve it, and there shall come forth from it the seed of life, and a change shall set in so that the 
3 earth will not remain without inhabitant. And I will make fast thy seed before me for ever and ever, 
and I will spread abroad those who dwell with thee: it shall not be unfruitful on the face of the earth, 
but it shall be blessed and multiply on the earth in the name of the Lord.’ 
4 And He will imprison those angels, who have shown unrighteousness, in that burning valley 


the power of witchcraft. Cf. vii. 1, viii. 3. The Deluge is due to the corruption wrought through the angels. 
8. from the earth > g. 
is pre-eminent. So7z. Other MSS.=celer est, praecurrit. 
g. my hand gg. ‘his hand’ mu, B. 4 
10. withheld. Text=‘ reckoned’, i.e. JWM’ corrupt for J#9? in Hebrew, or NON‘ for YIN’ in Aramaic. 
sorceries. So Halévy Dvn for Dw IN = ‘months’ in text. This emendation is possible in Aramaic as well as 
Hebrew. Or 8M might be corrupt in Aramaic for ND =‘secrets’. 
Il. place of repentance. Text =‘return’. In Hebrew 772\Wn and in Aramaic N1"N mean both ‘repentance’ and 
‘return’. 
12. Noah is to found a new and righteous generation. 
thy righteous seed em¢u(g), ‘thy seed in righteousness’ f. 
both for kingship ¢(), ‘both for kings’ 8, ‘both kings’ guzu. 
fountain. Cf. Deut. xxxiii. 28; Ps. lxviil. 26. 


LXVI. 1. angels of punishment. They deal solely with the second judgement in the Parables. Here they wrongly 
are said to be the agents of the Deluge, and angels over the power of the waters. See xl, 7 (note). -Cialives7 
and Ix. 16. Cf. Rev. xvi. 5. 

[abide and]. A dittograph > ¢: w, 6x omit ‘and dwell’. 
2. the waters. Text corruptly reads ‘the hands’. oe 
The angels are to pause that the ark may be built. Cf. Rev. vil. I seqq. 


TEXOVililia ty GiaGen.. vi. 9; 
2. In lxxxix. 1, Noah himself makes the ark. : 
have completed 7. Soa-¢inacorrupt form. ‘have gone B. 
pCieixvscl2. : 
: it eiall not be unfruitful. Emended. > ddoxy,. Or we might emend to ‘they shall not tempt (thy seed)’. 


LXVII. 4—LXIX. 1. This section deals with the fallen angels’ punishment. Characteristic features of the second 
judgement are here transferred to the first, and localities distinct in the parables are here confused, e.g. the burning 
valley of Gehenna is placed among the metal mountains (Ixvii. 4), while in liv. I it is in another part of the earth’. 

4. The Deluge and the judgement of the fallen angels are mentioned together here as in x. 2, 4, but here (1) the 
prison is the burning valley (= the Gehenna of liv, though there it 1s a furnace of fire that receives the angels), and 
(2) this is the preliminary prison, not the final. i 


BOOK OF ENOCH 67. 4—68. 2 


which my grandfather Enoch had formerly shown to me in the west among the mountains of gold 

5 and silver and iron and soft metal and tin. And I saw that valley in which there was a great con- 

6 vulsion and a convulsion of the waters. And when all this took place, from that fiery molten metal 
and from the convulsion thereof in that place, there was produced a smell of sulphur, and it was 
connected with those waters, and that valley of the angels who had led astray (mankind) burned 

7 beneath that land. And through its valleys proceed streams of fire, where these angels are punished 
who had led astray those who dwell upon the earth. ; 

8 But those waters shall in those days serve for the kings and the mighty and the exalted, and those 
who dwell on the earth, for the healing of the body, but for the punishment of the spirit ; now their 
spirit is full of lust, that they may be punished in their body, for they have denied the Lord of Spirits 

9 and see their punishment daily, and yet believe not in His name. And in proportion as the burning 
of their bodies becomes severe, a corresponding change shall take place in their spirit for ever and ever; 

10 for before the Lord of Spirits none shall utter an idle word. For the judgement shall come upon them, 

11 because they believe in the lust of their body and deny the Spirit of the Lord. And those same 
waters will undergo a change in those days; for when those angels are punished in these waters, 
these water-springs shall change their temperature, and when the angels ascend, this water of the 

12 springs shall change and become cold. And I heard Michael answering and saying: * This judge- 
ment wherewith the angels are judged is a testimony for the kings and the mighty who possess the 

13 earth.’ Because these waters of judgement minister to the healing of the body of the kings and the 
lust of their body; therefore they will not see and will not believe that those waters will change 
and become a fire which burns for ever. 


LXVIII. Michael and Raphael astonied at the Severity of the fudgement. 


681 And after that my grandfather Enoch gave me the teaching of all the secrets in the book in the 
Parables which had been given to him, and he put them together for me in the words of the book 

2 of the Parables. And on that day Michael answered Raphael and said: ‘The power of the spirit 
transports and makes me to tremble because of the severity of the judgement of the secrets, the 
judgement of the angels: who can endure the severe judgement which has been executed, and before 


in the west, borrowed from lii. 1. It increases the geographical confusion. 

5, 6. Features of the Deluge, and volcanic disturbances are combined, the latter connected with the angels’ 
punishment. 

6. burned beneath that land. A subterranean fire was believed to exist under the Gehenna valley. Cf. xxvii. 
I (note). Cf. too the fate of Sodom. 

8. The hot springs result from the meeting of the water and fire underground by which the angels were punished. 
Herod the Great resorted to such a spring, Callirhoe to the east of the Dead Sea, Joseph. Avz. xvii. 6.5. Cf. the 
hot springs of Machaerus, Joseph. Be//. Jud. vii. 6. 3. 

in those days—those of the writer. 

healing of the body gm, bx. ‘healing of the soul and body’ gtu, B-bx. 

punishment of the spirit i.e. in the final judgement. 

punished in their body. At present the sin of their spirit entails suffering on the body only, which is healed 

by the waters, but in Gehenna spirit and body alike will suffer. 

denied the Lord of Spirits. Cf. xxxvili. 2 (note), liv. 7 (note). 

see their punishment daily, i.e. can read their future torments in the present ones of the angels. 
9. The kings will repent under torment, but without avail. 

an idle word. Cf. xlix. 4 (note). 
1o. deny the Spirit of the Lord. This phrase is unique in Enoch. 
11. With the angel’s departure the waters cool. Cf. Origen, c. Celsum v. 52. 

in these waters a, ‘in those days’ B-v. 

12. Michael a, ‘the holy Michael’ 8. 

13. The waters heal now, and their healing virtue blinds the kings to the fire below which is reserved for their 
future torment. Cf. v. 8. 

kings. Text=‘angels’ i.e. wondn for wadp. 
lust m, ‘desire’ ggzu, ‘death’ B-y. 


LXVIII. 1. Note that the Parables already exist as a complete work in the hands of the redactor, who confesses 

to combining them with the Noah fragments. The meaning of this chapter is far from clear. 

words of the book. ‘book of the words’ g. 
mee dialogue of Michael and Raphael sets forth the severity of the judgement over the fallen angels, or rather 
the Satans, 

The power of the spirit. A strange phrase. Halévy suggests that ‘power’ here = 7? in the sense of 
‘punishment’. 

makes me to tremble. Text=‘ provokes me’ = ‘31°7N', 

because of a~g, ‘and because of’ g,(. 

judgement of the secrets, Perhaps the penalty for the secrets divulged by the Satans. 

of the angels 78. > a-g. : 

executed + ‘and abides’ 8. 


292 


HOOK OF ENOCH 68. 3-=69. ‘11 


3 which they melt away?’ And Michael answered again, and said to Raphael: ‘ Who is he whose 
heart is not softened concerning it, and whose reins are not troubled by this word of judgement 
4 (that) has gone forth upon them because of those who have thus led them out?’ And it came to 
pass when he stood before the Lord of Spirits, Michael said thus to Raphael: ‘ I will not take their 
part under the eye of the Lord; for the Lord of Spirits has been angry with them because they do 
5 as if they were the Lord. Therefore all that is hidden shall come upon them for ever and ever; for 


neither angel nor man shall have his portion (in it), but alone they have received their judgement 
for ever and ever.’ 


LXIX. The Names and Functions of the (fallen Angels and) Satans: the secret Oath. 


69: And after this judgement they shall terrify and make them to tremble because they have shown 
this to those who dwell on the earth. 

2 And behold the names of those angels [and these are their names: the first of them is Samjaza, 
the second Artaqifa, and the third Armén, the fourth Kékabél, the fifth ¢Taraélf, the sixth Raimjal, 
the seventh Danjal, the eighth tNéq4élt, the ninth Baraqél, the tenth Az4zél, the eleventh Arm4rés, 
the twelfth Batarjal, the thirteenth +Busaséjalf, the fourteenth Handnél, the fifteenth +Tdrélt, 
and the sixteenth Simapésiél, the seventeenth Jetrél, the eighteenth Tamaél, the nineteenth Tarél, 

3 the twentieth fRama€ly, the twenty-first fAz4zélf. And these are the chiefs of their angels and 
their names, and their chief ones over hundreds and over fifties and over tens]. 

The name of the first Jeqon: that is, the one who led astray [all] the sons of God, and brought them 

5 down to the earth, and led them astray through the daughters of men. And the second was named 
Asbeél: he imparted to the holy sons of God evil counsel, and led them astray so that they defiled 

6 their bodies with the daughters of men. And the third was named GAadreél: he it is who showed the 
children of men all the blows of death, and he led astray Eve, and showed [the weapons of death 
to the sons of men] the shield and the coat of mail, and the sword for battle, and all the weapons 

7 of death to the children of men. And from his hand they have proceeded against those who dwell 

8 on the earth from that day and for evermore. And the fourth was named Pénémie: he taught the 

g children of men the bitter and the sweet, and he taught them all the secrets of their wisdom. And 
he instructed mankind in writing with ink and paper, and thereby many sinned from eternity to 

to eternity and until this day. For men were not created for such a purpose, to give confirmatiou 
11 to their good faith with pen and ink. For men were created exactly like the angels, to the intent 
that they should continue pure and righteous, and death, which destroys everything, could not have 
taken hold of them, but through this their knowledge they are perishing, and through this power 


3. Michaela. ‘the holy Michael’ 8. So too inv. 4. 

answered + ‘me’ ggz. 

is not softened 8. ‘is not convicted’ a. 

word of judgement (that) has gone forth gg. ‘word: judgement &c.’ mtu, B. 

because of those who have thus led them out, i. e. the Satans who seduced these angels. 
4. do as if they were the Lord. Cf. Isa. xiv. 11-13. 
5. all that is hidden a. ‘the hidden judgement’ 8. 

neither angel nor man suffers their torments, but these fallen angels alone. 


LXIX. 1. make them to tremble. Text = ‘irritate them’ = f/PIN' which has both meanings. 
2, 3. I have bracketed 3 and most of 2 as an intrusion. These angels are those who fell in the days of Jared, 
but in v. 4 seqg. we have Satans. So perhaps read in 2 ‘ behold the names of those Satans,’ and go on to 4. 
2. The thirteenth is superfluous and not in vi. 7, where see note. ‘ nit t 
4. In the Parables the Satans and the fallen angels are distinguished. The latter fell in the days of Jared in i—xxxvi, 
and xci-civ. Here, however, the functions of the two are confused, Azazel causes all sin in i-xxxvi (x. 8), and Semjaza 
IOs Vils. 351X< 7 
Jeq6n a-z, Jeqtin §, i.e. ‘inciter’. 
the sons of God. Cf. Job xxxviii. 7. Emended for text ‘ the sons of the angels’, i.e. sobs was misread as srondn. 
z,0cd, &c., add ‘holy’, which may go with ‘sons’ or ‘angels’. 
5. Asbeél ‘deserter from God’ or (Schmidt) ‘thought of God’. ; 
6. GAdreél, a Satan, as he led astray Eve. In viii. 1 it is Azazel that makes weapons of war. In Aramaic Gadreel 
= ‘God is my helper’ 2X’) 1). 
[the weapons ... men] dittograph from end of verse. 
. Pénémiie. Cf. 2°35 ‘the inside’. 
nies The art of writing is a proof of the degeneracy of the human race. Word of mouth should be sufficient pledge 
for the righteous. F " e 
aie Man was originally righteous and immortal. Cf. Wisdom, i. 13, 14; 11. 23, 24. Cf. Talmud, Weber, Sid. Theol. 
215, 216, 222, 248. He lost his uprightness and immortality through the devil’s envy, Wisdom ii. 24; the evil 
knowledge introduced by the Satans or angels, 1 En. Ixix. 11; his own evil act, 1 En. xcviii. 4. 
pure and righteous a-g, ‘pure and holy’ g, ‘righteous and pure’ f. 


2433 


BOOK OF ENOCH 69, 11-25 


12 fit is consuming me}. And the fifth was named Kasdeja : this is he who showed the children of 
men all the wicked smitings of spirits and demons, and the smitings of the embryo in the womb, 
that it may pass away, and [the smitings of the soul] the bites of the serpent, and the smitings 

13 which befall through the noontide heat, the son of the serpent named Taba‘ét. And this is the 
ttaskf of Kasbeél, the chief of the oath which he showed to the holy ones when he dwelt high — 

14 above in glory, and its name is Bigd. This (angel) requested Michael to show him the hidden name, 
that he might enunciate it in the oath, so that those might quake before that name and oath who 

15 revealed all that was in secret to the children of men. And this is the power of this oath, for it is 
powerful and strong, and he placed this oath Akae in the hand of Michael. 

16 And these are the secrets of this oath . . . 

And they are strong through his oath : 
And the heaven was suspended before the world was created, 
And for ever. 


17 And through it the earth was founded upon the water, 
And from the secret recesses of the mountains come beautiful waters, 
From the creation of the world and unto eternity. 


18 And through that oath the sea was created, ; 
And fas its foundationf He set for it the sand against the time of (its) anger, 
And it dare not pass beyond it from the creation of the world unto eternity. 


‘9 And through that oath are the depths made fast, 
And abide and stir not from their place from eternity to eternity. 
70 And through that oath the sun and moon complete their course, 
And deviate not from their ordinance from eternity to eternity. 


?! And through that oath the stars complete their course, 
And He calls them by their names, 


And they answer Him from eternity to eternity. 


22 [And in like manner the spirits of the water, and of the winds, and of all zephyrs, and (their) paths 
23 from all the quarters of the winds. And there are preserved the voices of the thunder and the light 
of the lightnings: and there are preserved the chambers of the hail and the chambers of the hoar- 
24 frost, and the chambers of the mist, and the chambers of the rain and the dew. And all these believe 
and give thanks before the Lord of Spirits, and glorify (Him) with all their power, and their food 
is in every act of thanksgiving: they thank and glorify and extol the name of the Lord of Spirits 
for ever and ever. | 
25 And this oath is mighty over them, 
And through it [they are preserved and] their paths are preserved, 
And their course is not destroyed. 


‘tit is consuming met. Perhaps read ‘they are being consumed ’. 
12, Cf. Ps. xci. 5, 6, and Rosenmiiller’s Scho/ia on these verses. 
: Rea unknown name. Schmidt, O.7. and Semitic Studies, p. 341, conjecturally restores the lost clause of 12 
and all 13. 
13. task = }»)y emended from text = ‘number’ = yD. I cannot interpret this verse. 
14. this a, ‘and this’ 8. 
show him a-g, ‘show them’ . 
the hidden name that + ‘they might enunciate that (+ ‘evil and’ ) hidden name’ wz: + ¢ they might see that 
hidden name and’ £. 
16. heaven was suspended. Cf. Job xxvi. 7. 
17. earth...water. Cf. Ps. xxiv. 2, cxxxvi. 6. 
from... mountains...waters. Cf. Ps. civ. Gy 16 
beautiful waters a-w, aefhikp. ‘beautiful (>,ly,2) waters for the living’ z,dclxy,.2. 
18. tas its foundation+ seemingly corrupt for ‘to limit it’. 
the sand. Cf. Jer. v.22; Job xxvi. 10; Ps. civ. 9. 
19. depths made fast. Cf. Prov. viii. 28. 
20. to eternity 7,8. > a-g. 
21. calls them by their names. Cf. xliii. 1 (note). 
22-24. An interpolation. 
22. quarters. So I render with Flemming, otherwise ‘bands’. 
23. the voices of the thunder a. 8 prefixes ‘chambers of’. 
apo ae of the hail. Cf. lx. 11, 19-21. This verse seems to be an interpolation within an interpolation. 
2AmCta xin 7: 
25 Resumes the ‘ oath’ of verses 14-21. 


234 


26 


28 


2) 


701 


BOOK OF ENOCH 69. 26—71. x 


Close of the Third Parable. 
And there was great joy amongst them, 
And they blessed and glorified and extolled 
Because the name of that Son of Man had been revealed unto them. 


And he sat on the throne of his glory, 
And the sum of judgement was given unto(the Son of Man, 
And he caused the sinners to pass away and be destroyed from off the face of the earth, 


_ And those who have led the world astray. 


With chains shall they be bound, 

And in their assemblage-place of destruction shall they be imprisoned, 
And all their works vanish from the face of the earth. 

And from henceforth there shall be nothing corruptible ; 


For that Son of Man has appeared, 

And has seated himself on the throne of his glory, 
And all evil shall pass away before his face, 

And the word of that Son of Man shall go forth 
And be strong before the Lord of Spirits. 


This is the third Parable of Enoch. 


LXX. The final Translation of Enoch. 
And it came to pass after this that his name during his lifetime was raised aloft to that Son of 


2 Man and to the Lord of Spirits from amongst those who dwell on the earth. And he was raised aloft 
3 on the chariots of the spirit and his name vanished among them. And from that day I was no 


longer numbered amongst them: and he set me between the two winds, between the North and the 


4 West, where the angels took the cords to measure for me the place for the elect and righteous. And 


711 


i 


there I saw the first fathers and the righteous who from the beginning dwell in that place. 


LXXI. Two earlier Visions of Enoch. 


And it came to pass after this that my spirit was translated 
And it ascended into the heavens : 
And I saw the holy sons of God. 


26-29. These verses form the conclusion of the third Parable ; we have returned to its main theme. __ 4 
26. the name of that Son of Man had been revealed. Cf. Rev. ii. 17, ill. 12. See also 1 En. xlviii. 7, Ixii. 7. 
27. on the throne of his glory. See xlv. 3 (note). i ‘ 

the sum, i.e. all judgement. Cf. John v. 22, 27. For ‘sum’ cf. YN in Ps. cxxxix. 17. 

the sinners, esp. the mighty ones in the Parables, though in general also, cf. xxxviii. I, 2, 3, xli. 2, xlv. 2, 5, 6, 


[ain 25°97, 1x. 2,13. 


and be destroyed > g. 

from off the face of the earth. Cf. xxxviii. 1 (note). 
28. Cf. liii-lvi. 
29. Summarizes, e.g. xlix. 

the word of ¢, dceh/*nx: ‘they shall say to’ a-¢ d/, &c. 


LXX. The writer awkwardly makes Enoch describe his own translation. Otherwise this chapter is in keeping 


with the Parables. 


1. Son of Man. Note the actual pre-existence of the Son of Man here. Cf. xlvili. 2 (note), and xlvi. 2 (note) 
and to the Lord gg/, ‘to the Lord’ mz, B. 
those who dwell, &c. Cf. xxxvii. 5 (note). 
2. he was raised. ‘his name was raised’ 7. ; * : 
chariots. Cf. 2 Kings ii. 11. For Enoch’s translation cf. Ixxxvil. 3, 4, Ixxxix. 52. 
his name mg¢. ‘the name’ gz,8. his name, i.e. his person. 
. numbered gg/,z. ‘ dragged’ 7,8-z. ee 
; between He North and the West. See xviii. 6 (note), xxiv. 1-3 (notes), Ix. 8 (note) and Ixvii. 4. 
the cords. Cf. Ixi. I seqq. : 
4. Paradise already contains his righteous forefathers. Cf. Ixi. 12. 


LXXI. Seems to belong to the Parables. There are two visions in this chapter: (1) verses 1-4. Enoch is translated 


in spirit to the heavens, has a vision of God, and is shown by Michael the secrets of the spiritual and physical worlds. 
(2) verses 5-17. Again Enoch is translated in spirit to the heaven of heavens and has a vision of God’s house, without 


a pe ea : i ‘ as here is 1 
~ Michael’s guidance. Both visions should come before Ixx, which describes the translation of ‘his name’, i.e. his fina 


| 


| translation. 


1-4. The first ons : : ete 
: ‘hidden’ E, as always. See xi. : } : 
zs See a God. Text has ‘ sore of the holy angels’. See Ixix. 4 (note), 5, cvi. 5. The expression ‘sons of 


435 


Elohim’ in Gen. vi. is the source of this phrase. 


Io 


II 


BOOK ‘OF ENOCH 7) 1411 


They were stepping on flames of fire: _ 
Their garments were white [and their raiment], 
And their faces shone like snow. 


And I saw two streams of fire, 
And the light of that fire shone like hyacinth, 
And I fell on my face before the Lord of Spirits. 


And the angel Michael [one of the archangels] seized me by my right hand, 
And lifted me up and led me forth into all the secrets, 
And he showed me all the secrets of righteousness. 


And he showed me all the secrets of the ends of the heaven, 
And all the chambers of all the stars, and all the luminaries, 
Whence they proceed before the face of the holy ones. 


And he translated my spirit into the heaven of heavens, 
And I saw there as it were a structure built of crystals, 
And between those crystals tongues of living fire. 


And my spirit saw the girdle which girt that house of fire, 
And on its four sides were streams full of living fire, 
And they girt that house. 


And round about were Seraphin, Cherubin, and Ophannin: 
And these are they who sleep not 
And guard the throne of His glory. 


And I saw angels who could not be counted, 
A thousand thousands, and ten thousand times ten thousand, 
Encircling that house. 


And Michael, and Raphael, and Gabriel, and Phanuel, 
And the holy angels who are above the heavens, 
Go in and out of that house. 


And they came forth from that house, 
And Michael and Gabriel, Raphael and Phanuel, 
And many holy angels without number. 


And with them the Head of Days, 
His head white and pure as wool, 
And His raiment indescribable. 


And I fell on my face, 
And my whole body became relaxed, 
And my spirit was transfigured ; 


[and their raiment] a duplicate rendering. 
2. streams of fire. Cf. xiv. 19; Dan. vii. 10, also wv. 1, 5, 6 here. 
3. and he showed. All MSS. but z prefix ‘and he showed me all (>8) the secrets of mercy’. As ‘mercy’ is an 


alternative rendering for ‘ righteousness’, this is a dittography. 


4. Physical secrets here as in xli. 3-8, xliii, xliv occur in contexts of an entirely ethical character. 
5-17. The second vision. 
5,0. Ch xiv. 9=27. 
5. he translated my spirit a. ‘a spirit translated him’ p. 
there. MSS. add a gloss ‘in the midst of that light’. 
6. the girdle a-g. ‘a girdle’ g,8. 
7. Cf. lxi. 10, 12, also xxxix. 13, xl. 2. 
and °° a, >8. 
é, a thousand, &c. Cf. xiv. 22, xl. 1. 
Michael, &c. See xl. 4-7. 
go in and out, not so in xiv. 23. 
9. and *°a-4, >4#, B. 
10. Head of Days. See xlvi. 1 (note); Dan. vii. 9. 
11. andI fell... relaxed. Cf. lx. 3. 
spirit was transfigured. Contrast xxxix. 14; and cf. Asc. Isa. vii. 25. 


236 


POO OF TENOCH “72 1172. 


And I cried with a loud voice, 
. . with the spirit of power, 
And blessed and glorified and extolled. 


ey 
oO 


12 And these blessings which went forth out of my mouth were well pleasing before that Head of 


13 Days. And that Head of Days came with Michael and Gabriel, Raphael and Ph | 
and ten thousands of angels without number. ge dil aaa 


[Lost passage wherein the Son of Man was described as accompanying the Head of Days, and Enoch 
asked one of the angels (as in xlvi. 3) concerning the Son of Man as to who he was.] 


14 And he (i.e. the angel) came to me and greeted me with His voice, and said unto me: 
‘ This is the Son of Man who is born unto righteousness, 
And righteousness abides over him, 
And the righteousness of the Head of Days forsakes him not.’ 
15 And he said unto me: 
‘He proclaims unto thee peace in the name of the world to come; 
For from hence has proceeded peace since the creation of the world, 
And so shall it be unto thee for ever and for ever and ever. 


16 And all shall walk in his ways since righteousness never forsaketh him: 
With him will be their dwelling-places, and with him their heritage, 
And they shall not be separated from him for ever and ever and ever. 


17. And so there shall be length of days with that Son of Man, 
And the righteous shall have peace and an upright way 
In the name of the Lord of Spirits for ever and ever.’ 


Section III. 
Cuaprers LXXIL-LXXXII. Tue Boox or THE HEAVENLY LUMINARIES. 
LXXII. The Sun. 


72,1 The book of the courses of the luminaries of the heaven, the relations of each, according to their 
classes, their dominion and their seasons, according to their names and places of origin, and according 
to their months, which Uriel, the holy angel, who was with me, who is their guide, showed me; and he 
showed me all their laws exactly as they are, and how it is with regard to all the years of the world 

2 and unto eternity, till the new creation is accomplished which dureth till eternity. And this is the 


first law of the luminaries: the luminary the Sun has its rising in the eastern portals of the heaven, 
3 and its setting in the western portals of the heaven. And I saw six portals in which the sun rises, and 


spirit of power. Cf. 1xi. 11. Some words seem lost before this phrase. ‘ ; 

14-16. Owing to the loss of a reference to the Son of Man, some scribe has altered third to second persons in 14, 16, 
but not in 17, or 15. 
14. Cf. xlvi. 3. 
he gmt. >wu. ‘that angel’ gf. 
This is ... is restored for text ‘Thou art... art’. 
unto gu, abcf, &c. ‘in’? mg, deh, &c. : 
righteousness. See xlvi. 3 (note) for this attribute of the Son of Man. 
him restored for ‘thee’. Soin v. 16 passzm. ; = 
15. proclaims unto thee peace. Cf. Mic. iii. 5 ; Zech. ix. 10; Isa. Ivils. 7. 

the world to come—the Messianic kingdom. Earliest use of the phrase. See Dalman, Worte Jesu, 120 seqq. 
16. all+‘shall be and’ B-a/4. 

dwelling-places. Cf. xxxix. 4, 7. 
17. length of days: i.e. an eternity ; contrast v. 9, X- 17, XXV. 6. : 

an upright way 7. ‘his upright way’ 8. gt support m. + ‘to the righteous’ all MSS. 

Note on 14-17. I donot hold, as Bousset, Rel. des Jud. 348, Dalman, Worte Jesu 200, that our text elevates 
Enoch to the dignity of the Messiah. Bousset quotes 2 En. xxi. 6, Ixvii. 2; Targ. Jon. on Gen. v. 24; Ps. Clem. Homz. 
xviii. 133 Recog. ii. 47- 

LXXII. 1. dominion. Cf. Ixxv. 3, Ixxxii. 8-20. 

names. Cf. Ixxvili. I, 2. 

origin i.e. rising. 

the new creation. 
cee en eee of the sun in its progress through the signs of the zodiac, and the resultant increase and 


d nights. a : : 
pease : ok A iyionian Creation Epos v.9; K. .A.T3 619, 630. Cf. Xxxill-xxxvl for portals of winds and stars. 


In Ixxii-Ixxxii, sun, moon, and stars pass through the same portals, but in xxxiii-xxxvi the stars’ portals are small, while 
in Ixxii. 6 one of the sun’s portals is called ‘ great’. 
237 


Cf. xlv. 4, xci. 15, 16; Isa. Ixv. 17, Ixvi. 22; 2 Pet. iii. 3, 13; Rev. xxi. 1; also the Yasts xiii. 


BOOK OF ENOCH 72. 3-22 


six portals in which the sun sets: and the moon rises and sets in these portals, and the leaders of 
the stars and those whom they lead: six in the east and six in the west, and all following each other 
4in accurately corresponding order: also many windows to the right and left of these portals. And 
first there goes forth the great luminary, named the Sun, and his circumference is like the circumfer- 
5 ence of the heaven, and he is quite filled with illuminating and heating fire. The chariot on which 
he ascends, the wind drives, and the sun goes down from the heaven and returns through the north 
in order to reach the east, and is so guided that he comes to the appropriate (lit. ‘ that’) portal and 
6 shines in the face of the heaven. In this way he rises in the first month in the great portal, which 
7 is the fourth [those six portals in the east]. And in that fourth portal from which the sun rises in 
the first month are twelve window-openings, from which proceed a flame when they are opened in 
8 their season. When the sun rises in the heaven, he comes forth through that fourth portal thirty 
9 Mornings in succession, and sets accurately in the fourth portal in the west of the heaven. And 
during this period the day becomes daily longer and the night nightly shorter to the thirtieth 
1omorning. On that day the day is longer than the night by a ninth part, and the day amounts exactly 
11 to ten parts and the night to eight parts. And the sun rises from that fourth portal, and sets in the 
fourth and returns to the fifth portal of the east thirty mornings, and rises from it and sets in the fifth 
12 portal. And then the day becomes longer by {twot parts and amounts to eleven parts, and the night 
13 becomes shorter and amounts to seven parts. And it returns to the east and enters into the sixth 
14 portal, and rises and sets in the sixth portal one-and-thirty mornings on account of its sign. On that 
day the day becomes longer than the night, aud the day becomes double the night, and the day 
15 becomes twelve parts, and the night is shortened and becomes six parts. And the sun mounts up 
to make the day shorter and the night longer, and the sun returns to the east and enters into the 
16 sixth portal, and rises from it and sets thirty mornings. And when thirty mornings are accomplished, 
17 the day decreases by exactly one part, and becomes eleven parts, and the night seven. And the sun 
goes forth from that sixth portal in the west, and goes to the east and rises in the fifth portal for thirty 
18 mornings, and sets in the west again in the fifth western portal. On that day the day decreases 
19 by ftwof parts, and amounts to ten parts and the night to eight parts. And the sun goes forth 
from that fifth portal and sets in the fifth portal of the west, and rises in the fourth portal for one- 
20 and-thirty mornings on account of its sign, and sets in the west. On that day the day is equalized 
with the night, [and becomes of equal length], and the night amounts to nine parts and the day to 
21 nine parts. And the sun rises from that portal and sets in the west, and returns to the east and rises 
22 thirty mornings in the third portal and sets in the west in the third portal. And on that day the 
night becomes longer than the day, and night becomes longer than night, and day shorter than 


leaders of the stars. See Ixxv. 1 (note). 
windows. Cf. v. 7, Ixxv. 7. 
right and left=south and north. 

"4. Cf. xii. 5-7, 
circumference, a disk or a sphere. Cf. lxxiii. 2, Ixxvili. 3, also xviii. 4, lxxiii. 4. 

5. The chariot. Cf. Ixxiii. 2, Ixxv. 3, 8; driven by the wind xviii. 4, Ixxviii. 2. 

returns through the north. Cf. xli. 5. 
is so guided, possibly by an angel. The sun is not, as the heavenly bodies are in i-xxxvi, semi-conscious. 

6. the first month, of the Hebrews, i.e. Abib (Exod. xiii. 4), the time of the spring equinox. It began the 
ecclesiastical year and corresponds to our April. 

6, 7. the great portal, so distinguished from the twelve window-openings of each portal (Ixxii. 3, Ixxv. 7), with their 
heat-giving flames. 

8. The author replaces the heathen signs of the zodiac by portals, cf. the ‘chamber? of Ps. xix. 5. Though well 
aware of a solar year of 365} days, he reckons it as consisting of 364 days, or 52 sabbaths of days. Thus he has eight 
months of 30 days, and four of 31 days each, the extra day in the latter being ‘on account of the sign’, i.e. that of the 
Saiincres or solstices. Cf. Ixxii. 13, 19. The division into eighteen parts of the day suits northern Asia at a latitude 
of 49°. 

Io. on a-z, ‘and on’ Z, B. 

a ninth part, i.e. of the whole day, ggu. >mt,B. All MSS. wrongly insert ‘twice as much’ after “ longer’. 
exactly a. >. 

II. in the fourth +‘ portal’ 9,8-dcdx,a. 

12, and), >écdlopry,a,b. 

ttwot. Read ‘one’. 
13. it returns a. ‘the sun returns’ £. 
portal!®, >a-z. 
its sign, i.e. the summer solstice here, cf. v. 19, Ixxv. 3, lxxviii. 7. 

14. On a-g. ‘and on’ g? 8, 

I5. mounts up, to start on his return journey to the first portal. 

18. ttwot. Read ‘one’. 

19. its sign + ‘in the fourth portal (>) in the east? a 

20. [and ... length], a duplicate rendering. 

22. and night becomes longer than night, a-m. ‘till the thirtieth morning’ £. 


238 


BOOK OF ENOCH 72. 22—73. 5 
day till the thirtieth Morning, and the night amounts exactly to ten parts and the day to eight 
23 parts. And the sun rises from that third portal and sets in the third portal in the west and returns 
to the east, and for thirty mornings rises in the second portal in the east, and in like manner sets 
24 in the second portal in the west of the heaven. And on that day the night amounts to eleven 
25 parts and the day to seven parts. And the sun rises on that day from that second portal and sets 
in the west in the second portal, and returns to the east into the first portal for one-and-thirty 
26 mornings, and sets in the first portal in the west of the heaven. And on that day the night becomes 
longer and amounts to the double of the day: and the night amounts exactly to twelve parts and 
27 the day to six. And the sun has (therewith) traversed the divisions of his orbit and turns again 
on those divisions of his orbit, and enters that portal thirty mornings and sets also in the west 
28 opposite to it. And on that night has the night decreased in length by a fninthf part, and the night 
29 has become eleven parts and the day seven parts. And the sun has returned and entered into the 
second portal in the east, and returns on those his divisions of his orbit for thirty mornings, rising 
30 and setting. And on that day the night decreases in length, and the night amounts to ten parts 
31 and the day to eight. And on that day the sun rises from that portal, and sets in the west, and returns 
to the east, and rises in the third portal for one-and-thirty mornings, and sets in the west of the heaven. 
32 On that day the night decreases and amounts to nine parts, and the day to nine parts, and the night 
33 is equal to the day and the year is exactly as to its days three hundred and sixty-four. And the length 
of the day and of the night, and the shortness of the day and of the night arise—through the course 
34 of the sun these distinctions are made (lit. ‘ they are separated ’). So it comes that its course becomes 
35 daily longer, and its course nightly shorter. And this is the law and the course of the sun, and his 
return as often as he returns sixty times and rises, i.e. the great luminary which is named the sun, 
36 tor ever and ever. And that which (thus) rises is the great luminary, and is so named according to 
37 its appearance, according as the Lord commanded. As he rises, so he sets and decreases not, and 


rests not, but runs day and night, and his light is sevenfold brighter than that of the moon; but 
as regards size they are both equal. 


LXXIII. Yhe Moon and its Phases. 


731 And after this law I saw another law dealing with the smaller luminary, which is named the Moon. 
2 And her circumference is like the circumference of the heaven, and her chariot in which she rides 

3 is driven by the wind, and light is given to her in (definite) measure. And her rising and setting 
change every month: and her days are like the days of the sun, and when her light is uniform 

4 (i.e. full) it amounts to the seventh part of the light of the sun. And thus she rises. And her first 
phase in the east comes forth on the thirtieth morning : and on that day she becomes visible, and 
constitutes for you the first phase of the moon on the thirtieth day together with the sun in the 

5 portal where the sun rises. And the one half of her goes forth by a seventh part, and her whole ~ 


morning, a-g, eflz. >g. ‘day’ adcd, &c. : : ‘ 
25. into the first portal 6—z, ‘in it on the first day (?)’ gg, ‘in the sixth portal’ wz, ‘on that day’ év. 
27. that portal 7,8, ‘all the portals’ a—m. 
28. on that night, 7, 7, ‘on that day’ m7, BS. : : ; 
atninthf part ggw. >. ‘one part’ ¢,8-a. ‘ninth’ should be ‘eighteenth’, asin 16. Or for ‘decreased in length 
we might emend to ‘ grown shorter than the day’. 
31. that portal a-¢. ‘that second portal’ 4, B. 
35. he returns a-7. ‘he returns, he returns’ m, B. ; ; 
sixty times, i.e. two months in each portal, one month on his northward and one month on his southward 
journey. The author disregards for the time being the extra day in the first, third, fourth, and sixth portals. 
luminary a. ‘eternal luminary’ £. See ' 
37. as he rises, so he sets g, ‘so he rises and (+ ‘so’ gf) he sets’ mg/, ‘and so he sets’ z, ‘and so he rises and 
sets’ B-anx. pe ; 
day and night + ‘in his chariot’ 77, B. 
sevenfold brighter. Cf. Ixxiii. 2, Ixxvili. 4. Also cf. Isa. xxx. 26. 
as regards size.... equal. So Lucretius believed, De Ker. Vat. v. 564-91. 


LXXIII. This chapter and LXXIV treat of the moon’s course. 
2. the heaven a-m, dbcdilo, ‘the sun’ m, aefhknpw. peal 
. her rising and setting, i.e. the place of her rising and setting. t) 

? hes iret phase lit. ae Keenan ’, i.e. the new moon in the popular sense, cn the first day of her visible 
reappearance. need 

irtieth morning, of the solar month. 

Me eee ihon's pins is hard to follow. Apparently the lunar month amounts to 30 days and 29 days 
alternately, and is divided into two parts. During the first part the moon waxes from new moon to full moon in 14 
days when the month is 29 days, and in 15 when the month is 30 days. During the second part it always wanes in 
15 days. Again the moon is divided into fourteen parts, i.e. each half surface into seven parts, and the waxing of the 


239 


74 


BOOK OF ENOCH 73. 5—74. 12 


circumference is empty, without light, with the exception of one-seventh part of it, (and) the four- 
6 teenth part of her light. And when she receives one-seventh part of the half of her light, her light 
7 amounts to one-seventh part and the half thereof. And she sets with the sun, and when the sun 
rises the moon rises with him and receives the half of one part of light, and in that night in the 
beginning of her morning [in the commencement of the lunar day] the moon sets with the sun, and 
8 is invisible that night with the fourteen parts and the half of one of them. And she rises on that 
day with exactly a seventh part, and comes forth and recedes from the rising of the sun, and in her 
remaining days she becomes bright in the (remaining) thirteen parts. 


LXXIV. The Lunar Year. 


1 And Isaw another course, a law for her, (and) how according to that law she performs her monthly 
2 revolution. And all these Uriel, the holy angel who is the leader of them all, showed to me, and their 
positions, and I wrote down their positions as he showed them to me, and I wrote down their months 
3 as they were, and the appearance of their lights till fifteen days were accomplished. In single seventh 
parts she accomplishes all her light in the east, and in single seventh parts accomplishes all her 
4 darkness in the west. And in certain months she alters her settings, and in certain months she pursues 
5 her own peculiar course. In two months the moon sets with the sun : in those two middle portals the 
6 third and the fourth. She goes forth for seven days, and turns about and returns again through the 
portal where the sun rises, and accomplishes all her light : and she recedes from the sun, and in eight 
7 days enters the sixth portal from which the sun goes forth. And when the sun goes forth from the 
fourth portal she goes forth seven days, until she goes forth from the fifth and turns back again in 
seven days into the fourth portal and accomplishes all her light : and she recedes and enters into the 
8 first portal in eight days. And she returns again in seven days into the fourth portal from which the 


9,10 sun goes forth. Thus I saw their position—how the moons rose and the sun set in those days. And 


if five years are added together the sun has an overplus of thirty days, and all the days which accrue 


11 to it for one of those five years, when they are full, amount to 364 days. And the overplus of the 


I 


sun and of the stars amounts to six days: in 5 years 6 days every year come to 30 days: and the 
moon falls behind the sun and stars to the number of 30 days. And the sun and the stars bring in all 


N 


moon is due to the successive lighting up of each fourteenth part. Verses 5, 6 suppose the period from new to full 
moon to be 14 days, verse 7 supposes it to be 15 days. 

5. goes forth, MSS. read rehag = ¢&¢xwv, which is used of the sun’s rising or appearing. It in turn may render 
83", which is used of the rising of the sun and stars. Flemming proposes to emend the text to ré’Aj = ‘visible’. 

one-seventh part gg/1, abc, &c. Other MSS. corrupt. 
(and) the fourteenth part ggw. ‘of the fourteenth part’ mz, 8. + of half *g, needlessly, as the fractions are fractions 
of half in this verse and the next. 

6. one-seventh part ®° emgu, d. ‘the thirteenth part’ ¢,/. ‘the fourteenth part’ @-d&lo. Apparently ++ 7 of 3=34 
of the whole moon are lighted the first day when there are only 14 days to the full moon. 

7. half of one part of light, i.e. one twenty-eighth. When the waxing takes 15 days, the moon only receives 
one twenty-eighth part, and so is practically invisible, the first morning: on the second day she attains to one-fourteenth, 
and becomes visible. 

fourteen gu, abc, &c. ‘thirteen’ mgt,2/,0. 
8. thirteen a, x. ‘fourteen’ B-7. 


LXXIV. This chapter deals with the moon’s waxing and waning, her monthly change of position with regard to the 
signs and the sun, and the difference between lunar and solar years. 

2. of them all, i.e. the moon’s phases. 

fifteen days, i.e. between conjunction and full moon. 
3. Cf. Ixxiii and Ixxviii. 
and in single seventh .. . darkness >a,an. 

4. peculiar course, independent of the sun. 

5, 6. During two months the moon sets with the sun as new moon and as full moon. When the sun is in Aries and 
Libra the new moon and the full moon are in the third and fourth portals. In verse 6the moon goes forth as it waxes 
from the third portal to the first in 7 days, turns about and returns to the portal where the sun rises, i. e. the third, in 
7 or 8 days, and there becomes full moon, and proceeds thence through the fourth and fifth to the sixth portal, where 
she arrives after 8 days. Thence she returns to the third portal in 7 days. 

6. and accomplishes. ‘and in that accomplishes’ 7,8. 

9. how the moons rose and the sun set a-g. ‘according to the order of their moons the sun rising and setting’ g, B. 

10, 11. The difference between the lunar and the solar year. The lunar year has 354 days (see Ixxvili. 15). The solar 
year has 12 months of 30 days, or 360, and also 4 intercalary days in the equinoxes and solstices, in all 364 days (Ixxiv. 
10, 12). In verses 10” and 11 these intercalary days are neglected, and so the solar year has only 360 days, or 6 days 
more than the lunar. : 

11. the moon 7’8: a has transposed the word to the next sentence, as subject to ‘bring in’. 

12. Accuracy of the solar and sidereal time-division. Jubilees vi. 32-6 protests against the use of the lunar year. 

and the sun. So git except that they prefix ‘from’ before ‘the sun eee, [St 
; and the stars w, ‘and from the stars’ giz, >¢*,@. Here all MSS. add “and (> 2) the moon’, following the lead 
of a. 


240 


BOOK OF ENOCH 74, 12—75. 9 


the years exactly, so that they do not advance or delay their 


13 but complete the years with perfect justice in 364 days. In 3 years there are 1,092 days, and in 
145 years 1,820 days, so that in 8 years there are 2,912 days. For the moon alone the days ‘amount 

in 3 years to I 062 days, and in 5 years she falls 50 days behind: [i.e. to the sum (of 1,770) there is 
15 to be added (1,000 and) 62 days.] And in 5 years there are 1,770 days, so that for the moon the days 
16 in 8 years amount to 2,832 days. [For in 8 years she falls behind to the amount of 80 days], all the 
17 days she falls behind in 8 years are 80. And the year is accurately completed in conformity with their 


world-stations and the stations of the sun, which rise from the portals through which it (the sun) 
rises and sets 30 days. 


And the leaders of the heads of the thousands, who are placed over the whole creation and over 
all the stars, have also to do with the four intercalary days, being inseparable from their office, 
according to the reckoning of the year, and these render service on the four days which are not 
2 reckoned in the reckoning of the year. And owing to them men go wrong therein, for those luminaries 

truly render service on the world-stations, one in the first portal, one in the third portal of the 

heaven, one in the fourth portal, and one in the sixth portal, and the exactness of the year is accom- 
3 plished through its separate three hundred and sixty-four stations. For the signs and the times 
and the years and the days the angel Uriel showed to me, whom the Lord of glory hath set for ever 
over all the luminaries of the heaven, in the heaven and in the world, that they should rule on the 
face of the heaven and be seen on the earth, and be leaders for the day and the night, i.e. the sun, 
moon, and stars, and all the ministering creatures which make their revolution in all the chariots 
4 of the heaven. In like manner twelve doors Uriel showed me, open in the circumference of the sun’s 
chariot in the heaven, through which the rays of the sun break forth: and from them is warmth 
5 diffused over the earth, when they are opened at their appointed seasons. [And for the winds and 
6 the spirit of the dewt when they are opened, standing open in the heavens at the ends.] As for the 
twelve portals in the heaven, at the ends of the earth, out of which go forth the sun, moon, and stars, 
7 and all the works of heaven in the east and in the west, There are many windows open to the left 
and right of them, and one window at its (appointed) season produces warmth, corresponding 

(as these do) to those doors from which the stars come forth according as He has commanded them, 
8 and wherein they set corresponding to their number. And I saw chariots in the heaven, running 
gin the world, above those portals in which revolve the stars that never set. And one is larger than 
all the rest, and it is that that makes its course through the entire world. 


but complete = adda reAovow, corrupted into addAdrrovow, whence the Ethiopic text. 

13-16. Merely seem to assert that the solar year of 364 days exceeds the lunar of 354 by todays. But why should 
eight years be referred to? The author seems to have in mind the eight-year cycle or octaetris, which, however, allowed 
for 3654 days in the solar year. See special Introduction to Ixxii-Ixxxii, p. 150 in my new Commentary. 

14. The totals for 3 and 5 years are added together to give the total for 8 years. (1062 +1770=2832.) 

The brackets indicate a marginal gloss. 
(1000 and) found only in the margin of c. 
16. [ ] a doublet. 
17. their world-stations a-mm, ‘their stations’ 7, B. 


LXXV. The intercalary days, the stars, and the sun. | ; 
1. The four intercalary days are under charge of the highest stars, the leaders of the heads of ten thousands. See 
Ixxxii. II, 12. 
and 1l°g, 8. >a-g. Ppa : 
their office 7. ‘its (>g) office’ a-m. ‘their position’ 278. 
the reckoning 1° a: 8 prefixes ‘all’. 7 
are not reckoned. The popular reckoning was 360 days to the year. Cf. Ixxxii. 5. 
2. Men reckon wrongly, by omitting these intercalary days, Ixxxii. 4-6. qeees. 
the exactness of the year g: ‘in exactness the world’ ¢: ‘the exactness of the world’ m#¢u, 8. In Ethiopic “am 
=‘ year’, and ‘Alam=‘ world ’. 
is accomplished 7, 8: ‘accomplishes’ g¢w (taking ‘ the exactness’ as object). 
3. These days are, however, real. Uriel showed them to Enoch. Cf. Ixxii, 1. 
igns, i.e. of the Zodiac, lxxii. 13, 19. : 
Eordof glory a-g: ‘Lord of Spirits >g: ‘Eternal Lord of glory’ 8-2. See Ixxxiv. 2 (note). Cf. ‘the great Lord, 
the King of glory,’ ixxxi. 3. hy 
Giacibts of the heaven. Cf. Ixxii. 5; ¢ reads ‘troops of the heaven’. 
4. The variation in the sun’s heat is explained by the twelve ope te ee ue sun. 
Uriel showed me, open (7)tw, afhikn: ‘open’ g: ‘doors and Uriel showed me’ g. _ 
ee a reason The first ones i Hctallicible, the second ‘ when they’ &c. seems to be a dittograph of the last 
clause in 4 and the first in ep er 
da-g. + ‘in the seasons : : 
6 OE Adjoining each one of the sun’s twelve portals are twelve windows open to the left and right of them. Cf. 
Ixxii 3, 7. These diffuse warmth over the earth, one being open at a time, and all differing in heating power. ; 
6. This verse begins in a with a dittograph ‘when they are opened’ from v. 4. § inserts ‘I saw’, thus altering 
twelve portals’ from a xominativus pendens into the acc. But Enoch had been viewing them since Ixxii. 
8. above + ‘and below’ dca, &c. 
g. one is larger. Perhaps the Great Bear. 


1105.2 74% : 


position by a single day unto eternity ; 


75 1 


BOOK OF ENOCH’ 76, 1t—77. 3 


LXXVI. The Twelve Winds and their Portals. 


761 And at the ends of the earth I saw twelve portals open to all the quarters (of the heaven), from 
2 which the winds go forth and blow over the earth. Three of them are open on the face (i.e. the east) 
of the heavens, and three in the west, and three on the right (i.e. the south) of the heaven, and 
3 three on the left (i.e. the north). And the three first are those of the east, and three are of fthe 
4 north, and three [after those on the left] of the southf, and three of the west. Through four of these 
come winds of blessing and prosperity, and from those eight come hurtful winds: when they are 
sent, they bring destruction on all the earth and on the water upon it, and on all who dwell thereon, 
and on everything which is in the water and on the land. 
5 And the first wind from those portals, called the east wind, comes forth through the first portal 
which is in the east, inclining towards the south: from it come forth desolation, drought, heat, 
6 and destruction. And through the second portal in the middle comes what is fitting, and from 
it there come rain and fruitfulness and prosperity and dew; and through the third portal which 
lies toward the north come cold and drought. 
7 And after these come forth the south winds through three portals: through the first portal of 
§ them inclining to the east comes forth a hot wind. And through the middle portal next to it there 
g come forth fragrant smells, and dew and rain, and prosperity and health. And through the third 
portal lying to the west come forth dew and rain, locusts and desolation. 
1o And after these the north winds: from the seventh portal in the east come dew and rain, locusts 
11 and desolation. And from the middle portal come in a direct direction health and rain and dew 
and prosperity ; and through the third portal in the west come cloud and hoar-frost, and snow and 
rain, and dew and locusts. 
12 And after these [four] are the west winds: through the first portal adjoining the north come forth 
13 dew and hoar-frost, and cold and snow and frost. And from the middle portal come forth dew and 
rain, and prosperity and blessing; and through the last portal which adjoins the south come forth 
14 drought and desolation, and burning and destruction. And the twelve portals of the four quarters 
of the heaven are therewith completed, and all their laws and all their plagues and all their bene- 
factions have I shown to thee, my son Methuselah. 


LXXVII. The Four Quarters of the World: the Seven Mountains, the Seven Rivers, &c. 


771 And the first quarter is called the east, because it is the first: and the second, the south, because 
the Most High will descend there, yea, there in quite a special sense will He who is blessed for ever 
2descend. And the west quarter is named the diminished, because there all the luminaries of the 

3 heaven wane and go down. And the fourth quarter, named the north, is divided into three parts: 


LXXVI. A detailed account of the twelve portals of the winds and the nature of the winds which issue therefrom. 
Cf. xxxili-xxxvi. 

I. the quarters. The text wrongly renders M1 as ‘wind’. See Ixxvii. 1 (note). 

2. right ... left, cf. xxii. 3. 

3. and 1° >gmt. The words ‘north’ and ‘ south’ are in the wrong order. 


4. Through the four portals come beneficial winds, i.e. the middle of the three in each quarter. For the hurtful 
winds cf. Rev. vii. 1 seqq. 


5-6. Winds from the east, i.e. ESE., E., ENE. 

6. what is fitting or ‘advantageous’ or ‘right’. Text=rét'é ; cf. rét‘ét in v. 11 rendered ‘in a direct direction’. 

7-9. Winds from the south, i.e. SES., S., SWS. 

7. through the first gw: gmt, B prefix ‘the first’. 

to-I11. NEN., N., NWN. winds. 

10. north winds: MSS. adds a gloss ‘ which is named the sea and which came forth’. 

in the east + ‘towards the south’ gt: + ‘which inclines towards the south’ m, B-0,a. 

11. in a direct direction. Read perhaps ‘what is fitting’. See v. 6 (note). 

health and rain and dew a. 8 puts ‘health’ last. 
in the west: MSS. add ‘ which inclines to the north’. 

12-13. WNW., W., WSW. winds. 

12. dew + ‘and rain’ B. 

14. quarters, MSS. read ‘ portals’ corruptly. 

all 2 >gzu. 
all 8° >9, Bhi. 
my son Methuselah. Cf. lxxxii. 1. 

LXXVII. 1-3. The four quarters, and the meaning of their names. They are each explained from the Hebrew. 
The East Dp is first or foremost ‘27. The South Di17 is where the Most High descends 01.71". Cf, xxv. 3. the 
West MARX (not existing in Arama.cj. The North by is divided into three parts: one for men, one for waters (ABY 
an overflowing), and clouds and darkness (jD¥ to conceal), while one contains Paradise (}D¥ to reserve). 

1. quarter. Here and in verses 2, 3 the text=‘ wind’ i.e. Mas in Ezek. xlii. 20. 


242 


BOOK OF ENO€H 77.) 378.. 9 


the first of them is for the dwelling of men: and the second contains seas of water, and the abysses 


and forests i : 
ee oe rivers, and darkness and clouds; and the third part contains the garden of 


4. I saw seven high mountains, higher than all the mountains which are on the earth: and thence 
5 comes forth hoar-frost, and days, seasons, and years pass away. I saw seven rivers on the earth 
larger than all the rivers: one of them coming from the west} pours its waters into the Great Sea 
6 And these two come from the north to the sea and pour their waters into the Erythraean Sea in the 
7 east. And the remaining four come forth on the side of the north to their own sea, (two of them to) 
the Erythraean Sea, and two into the Great Sea and discharge themselves there [and some say : 


8 into the desert]. Seven great islands I saw in the sea and in th i i 
; e mainland: t th 
and five in the Great Sea. "Beale aie ae 


LXXVIII. The Sun and Moon: the Waxing and Waning of the Moon. 


78 1,2 And the names of the sun are the following: the first Orjarés, and the second Témas. And the 
moon has four names: the first name is AsOnja, the second Ebla, the third Bendsé, and the fourth 
3 Erde: These are the two great luminaries: their circumference is like the circumference of the 
4 heaven, and the size of the circumference of both is alike. In the circumference of the sun there are 
_ Seven portions of light which are added to it more than to the moon, and in definite measures it is 
5 transferred till the seventh portion of the sun is exhausted. And they set and enter the portals 
of the west, and make their revolution by the north, and come forth through the eastern portals 
6 on the face of the heaven. And when the moon rises one-fourteenth part appears in the heaven : 
7 [the light becomes full in her]: on the fourteenth day she accomplishes her light. And fifteen parts 
of light are transferred to her till the fifteenth day (when) her light is accomplished, according to 
the sign of the year, and she becomes fifteen parts, and the moon grows by (the addition of) fourteenth 

8 parts. And in her waning (the moon) decreases on the first day to fourteen parts of her light, on 
the second to thirteen parts of light, on the third to twelve, on the fourth to eleven, on the fifth to 
ten, on the sixth to nine, on the seventh to eight, on the eighth to seven, on the ninth to six, on the 
tenth to five, on the eleventh to four, on the twelfth to three, on the thirteenth to two, on the four- 

g teenth to the half of a seventh, and all her remaining light disappears wholly on the fifteenth. And 


the garden of righteousness. See Ix. 8 (note), Ixx. 3 (note). 
4. Note recurrence of the number seven in this book, as in Jewish writers generally. Cf. xviii. 6, xxiv. 2, xxxii. 1, 
Piven exiies 7, xct. 16. xciii., Lo: 
seven high mountains, not those of xviii. 6, xxiv. 2, xxxil. 1, though originally they are derived from the 
same source. 
pass+‘and go’ g, £8. 
5. seven 8. >a. 
from the twestt, seemingly the Nile. If so‘drab (=‘ west’) should bea transliteration of NAVY ‘desert’ or ‘steppe’. 
the Great Sea, i.e. the Mediterranean. Cf. Num. xxxiv. 6, 7. 
6. The Euphrates and the Tigris. 
The Erythraean Sea, a general name for the Arabian, Persian, and Indian seas. 
7. (two of them to) must be supplied. 
[and some say ...]. A gloss. 
8. two in the mainland and five in the Great Sea dcdfiloxy,a,b: >‘in the mainland’ aehkn : ‘ seven, and two in 
the Red Sea’ a_mz: ‘two in the mainland and five in the Red Sea’ m. For the ‘ five great islands’ cf. Jub. vii. 29, and 
for the number ‘seven’ see A.A. 7.° 618. 


LXXVIII, LXXIX. The relations of the sun and moon are again described as well as the waxing and waning 
of the moon. 

LXXVIII. 1. For Halévy’s interpretations of the names see my Commentary 77 doc. He connects the two names 
of the sun with the two seasons, cold and hot, in Palestine, and the four names of the moon with its phases. 

and l°a-g, chil. >g, B-ehl. 
3. Cf. Ixxii. 4, 37, bexill. 2. 
the size of the circumference a: ‘the size’ 8: +‘like the circumference of the heaven’ a-z, a dittography. 

4. In Ixxii. 37 and xxiii. 3 we are told that the sun’s light is seven times that of the moon : in Ixxiiil. 2 that light is 
added to the moon in due measure. Here we are further told that one-seventh of the sun’s light is gradually 
transferred to the moon, till the moon is full. 

5. by the north. Cf. Ixxii. 5. 

6-17. The waxing and waning of the moon, the length of the months, &c. 

6. See lxxiii. 5, 6 (notes) for the case of fourteen days’ waxing. : : ; 

[the light becomes full in her] a-z. A duplicate of ‘accomplishes her light’. 2 is partly untranslatable. 
_ Breads in this verse ‘and when the moon rises, she appears in the heaven, and has a fourteenth part of her light, 
and on the fourteenth day she accomplishes all her light’. 

7. See Ixxiii. 7, 8 (notes) for the fifteen days’ waxing. ; 

8 As the moon wanes, her light decreases each day by one-fourteenth part: on the fifteenth the remainder, i.e. one 
twenty-eighth, vanishes. 

half of a seventh /, 8: ‘half and to a seventh’ a-z. 


2.4.3 


= 
es) 
iS) 


BOOK OF ENOCH 78. 9—80. 1 


1oin certain months the month has twenty-nine days and once twenty-eight. And Uriel showed me 
another law: when light is transferred to the moon, and on which side it is transferred to her by 
11 the sun, During all the period during which the moon is growing in her light, she is transferring 
it to herself when opposite to the sun during fourteen days [her light is accomplished in the heaven], 
12 and when she is illumined throughout, her light is accomplished full in the heaven. And on the first 
13 day she is called the new moon, for on that day the light rises upon her. She becomes full moon 
exactly on the day when the sun sets in the west, and from the east she rises at night, and the moon 
shines the whole night through till the sun rises over against her and the moon is seen over against 
14the sun. On the side whence the light of the moon comes forth, there again she wanes till all the 
light vanishes and all the days of the month are at an end, and her circumference 1s empty, void of 
15 light. And three months she makes of thirty days, and at her time she makes three months of twenty- 
nine days each, in which she accomplishes her waning in the first period of time, and in the first 
16 portal for one hundred and seventy-seven days. And in the time of her going out she appears for 
17 three months (of) thirty days each, and for three months she appears (of) twenty-nine each. At 
night she appears like a man for twenty days each time, and by day she appears like the heaven, 
and there is nothing else in her save her light. 


LXXIX-LXXX. 1. Recapitulation of several of the Laws. 


79: And now, my son, I have shown thee everything, and the law of all the stars of the heaven is 

2 completed. And he showed me all the laws of these for every day, and for every season of bearing 

rule, and for every year, and for its going forth, and for the order prescribed to it every month 

3 and every week: And the waning of the moon which takes place in the sixth portal: for in this 

4sixth portal her light is accomplished, and after that there is the beginning of the waning: (And 

the waning) which takes place in the first portal in its season, till one hundred and seventy-seven 

5 days are accomplished: reckoned according to weeks, twenty-five (weeks) and two days. She falls 

behind the sun and the order of the stars exactly five days in the course of one period, and when 

6 this place which thou seest has been traversed. Such is the picture and sketch of every luminary 
which Uriel the archangel, who is their leader, showed unto me. 

801 And in those days the angel Uriel answered and said to me: ‘ Behold, I have shown thee every- 
thing, Enoch, and I have revealed everything to thee that thou shouldst see this sun and this 
moon, and the leaders of the stars of the heaven and all those who turn them, their tasks and times 
and departures. 


g. twenty-nine days. Cf. Ixxiv. 10-17, Ixxvill. 15-17. 
once twenty-eight, a reference to the cycle of Callippus, in which the last month in seventy-six years had only 
28 days. See my Commentary 2 doc., and cf. Ixxiv, 13-16 for a reference to the octaetris. 
Il. The moon waxes over against the sun on the side turned to the sun, i.e. the western side. 
[her light .. . heaven] 1°: >‘in the heaven’ a. Bracketed as a dittograph. 
13. A true observation. ' 
She becomes. g, 8 prefix ‘and’. 
15. and a Go So (oh, 
at her time + ‘when she is accomplishing her waning’ ga/¢, and gw originally. 
the first period of time, i.e. the first half-year. The author recognizes only two seasons in the year; cf. iii, iv. 
As often as the moon is in the first portal during the first half-year, she is waning ; cf. Ixxix. 3, 4. 
16. the time of her going out, i.e. the second half of the year. 
17. like a man, i.e. a human face. Hence perhaps the name As6nja in v. 2 (Halévy). 


LXXIX. 1. my son + ‘ Methuselah’ 2,6. 
the law of all a-z: ‘all the laws of’ z,8. 
2. of bearing rule a-z: ‘for every power’ B. 
3. of the waning a: ‘of the month and of the waning’ 8. 
4. (And the waning). Restored. So also Flemming and Martin. | 
5- She falls behind a-¢: ~ prefixes ‘and’: 4, 8 prefix ‘and how’. 
and the order. So emended for ‘and (> mg) according to the order of’. Our text here identifies the solar and 
sidereal systems, as in Ixxiv. 12. 
one period, i.e. half-year. See Ixxiv. 10-17. 


_ LXXxX. An interpolation. As soon as we pass from Ixxix we enter into a world of new conceptions; the whole 
interest is ethical and nothing else. There is no fixity at all in natural phenomena: their laws and uniformities are 
always dependent on the moral action of men. Cf. 4 Ezra v. 1-13. 
I. the angel gmt: > qu, B. 

I have shown mg, 8: ‘1 will show’ g¢z. 

leaders of the stars. Cf. Ixxii. 3, Ixxv. 2, 3. 

those who turn them, probably the winds. Ct. Iyxii. 5, Ixxiii. 2. 

and times + ‘and they turn them’ gv. 


244 


811 


2 


3 


BOOKO OF; ENOCH 80. 2—81. 3 


LXXX, 2-8. Perversion of Nature and the heavenly Bodies owing to the Sin of Men. 
And in the days of the sinners the years shall be shortened, 
And their seed shall be tardy on their lands and fields, 
And all things on the earth shall alter, 


And shall not appear in their time: 

And the rain shall be kept back 

And the heaven shall withhold (it). 

And in those times the fruits of the earth shall be backward, 
And shall not grow in their time, 

And the fruits of the trees shall be withheld in their time. 


And the moon shall alter her order, 

And not appear at her time. 

[And in those days the sun shall be seen and he shall journey in the evening ton the extremity 
of the great chariot in tthe west] 

And shall shine more brightly than accords with the order of light. 


And many chiefs of the stars shall transgress the order (prescribed). 
And these shall alter their orbits and tasks, 


And not appear at the seasons prescribed to them. 


And the whole order of the stars shall be concealed from the sinners, 
And the thoughts of those on the earth shall err concerning them, 
[And they shall be altered from all their ways] 
Yea, they shall err and take them to be gods. 


And evil shall be multiplied upon them, 
And punishment shall come upon them 
So as to destroy all.’ 


LXXXI. The Heavenly Tablets and the Mission of Enoch. 
And he said unto me: 
‘ Observe, Enoch, these heavenly tablets, 
And read what is written thereon, 
And mark every individual fact.’ 


And I observed the heavenly tablets, and read everything which was written (thereon) and under- 
stood everything, and read the book of all the deeds of mankind, and of all the children of flesh 
that shall be upon the earth to the remotest generations. And forthwith I blessed the great Lord 
the King of glory for ever, in that He has miade all the works of the world, 


? 


2-8. Note the tristichs. 
od, SERS ani ew acy, 
shall alter 8 (intransitive): a-wz give transitive form, and ¢ supplies ‘ its ways’. 
withhold m, 8. ‘stand still’ gg¢u (by change of a vowel point). 
4. Cf. Joel ii. 10; Amos vill. 9; 4 Ezra v. 4. rs : 
5. The first two lines are corrupt and out of the context. If we remove them, verses 4-5 form a tristich relating to 
the moon. 
the sun. Text has ‘the heaven’ (vg, 8: ‘in the heaven’ gzz), i.e. DNDY for VOY, 
and he shall journey in the evening. Text has ‘and hunger shall come’, i.e. 3 hunger’ corrupt for ny 
‘evening’. For ANT ‘shall be seen’ we might read M11 ‘shall rise’ (cf. 4 Ezra v. 4), and for ypa ‘on the extremity’ 
read pryn, ‘ causing distress’ and make ‘shall come (or “journey ’)’ refer to the ‘chariot’. Then we have : ‘And in 
those days the sun shall rise in the evening, || And his great chariot shall journey to the west, causing distress.’ These 
emendations are possible in Hebrew, but not in Aramaic. : E 
6. chiefs of the stars. Cf. v.1 (note). The MSS. read: ‘chiefs of the stars of the order shall transgress. 
transgress the order. Cf. xviii. 15, xxi. 6. ‘ 
7. shall be concealed. Contrast Ixxv. 2, and cf. lxxxii. 4-6. : ‘ " 
those on the earth, here in the same sense as in the interpolations in the Parables. See xxxvil. 5 (note). 
[And they ... ways]. Intrusion, possibly a doublet of 6”. 
take them to be gods. Cf. xix.1. Acts vil. 42. 
8. alla: ‘them all’ 8. 


LXXXI. Also an interpolation. is a sort of mosaic, and came probably from the editor of the complete Enoch. 


- Those seven holy ones’ in Ixxxi. 5 are taken from Ixxxvil. 3: ‘the heavenly tablets’ in Ixxxi. 1, 2 from xcill, 2, cili. 2: 


‘the books of judgement ’ from Ixxxix. 61, 64: while Ixxxi. 5, 6 refer to lxxxii. 1, 2 and xci. I. 
1. these heavenly tablets. See xlvii. 3 (note). §-m prefixes ‘the writing of ‘ 
2. the book of mz: ‘the book’ gw: ‘the book and all that was written therein’ g, B. 
3. Cf. xxii. 14 for a like doxology. 
the great Lord a: ‘the Lord’ B. ; ; 
the King of glory for ever a: ‘the Eternal King of glory B-be. 


245 


tO 


BOOK OF ENOCH 81. 3—82. 


And I extolled the Lord because of His patience, 
And blessed Him because of the children of men. 


4 And after that I said: 
‘Blessed is the man who dies in righteousness and goodness, 
Concerning whom there is no book of unrighteousness written, 
And against whom no day of judgement shall be found.’ 


5 And those seven holy ones brought me and placed me on the earth before the door of my house, 
and said to me: ‘ Declare everything to thy son Methuselah, and show to all thy children that no 
6 flesh is righteous in the sight of the Lord, for He is their Creator. One year we will leave thee with 
thy son, till thou givest thy (last) commands, that thou mayst teach thy children and record (it) 
for them, and testify to all thy children ; and in the second year they shall take thee from their midst. 


7 Let thy heart be strong, 
For the good shall announce righteousness to the good ; 


The righteous with the righteous shall rejoice, 
And shall offer congratulation to one another. 


8 But the sinners shall die with the sinners, 
And the apostate go down with the apostate. 


9 And those who practise righteousness shall die on account of the deeds of men, 
And be taken away on account of the doings of the godless.’ 
to And in those days they ceased to speak to me, and I came to my people, blessing the Lord of the 


world. 


LXXXII. Charge given to Enoch: the four Intercalary Days: the Stars which lead the 
Seasons and the Months. 


821 And now, my son Methuselah, all these things Iam recounting to thee.and writing down for thee, 
and I have revealed to thee everything, and given thee books concerning all these: so preserve, — 
my son Methuselah, the books from thy father’s hand, and (see) that thou deliver them to the 
generations of the world. aes 


2 Ihave given wisdom to thee and to thy children, 
[And thy children that shall be to thee], 
That they may give it to their children for generations, 
This wisdom (namely) that passeth their thought. 


children of men a, fi/oy,,a,4: ‘children of the world’ B-//z, &c. 
4. Contrast the blessing of Ixxii-lxxix and Ixxxii. 4, which is for the man who knows the right reckoning of the years. 
day of judgement emu. ‘unrighteousness’ g, 77,8. Can this mean that there is no judgement for the 
righteous? 
shall be found azz: ‘has been found’ 7, 27,8. 
5. those seven holy ones, probably the seven Watchers, cf. xx: 8 reads ‘three’ for ‘seven’. See Ixxxvil. 2, xc. 21, 22. 
no flesh is righteous. Cf. Job ix. 2; Ps. xiv. 1. 
Creator. Cf. xciv. Io. 
5, 6. These verses are inserted to serve as an introduction to xci-civ. 
6. thy son a: ‘thy sons’ £. 
till. The MSS. add ‘again’, a dittograph of 4y but read with a different pointing. 
givest thy (last) commands, i.e. the idiomatic meaning of M¥. So mi (g), B-cde: ‘comfortest’ g: ‘growest 
strong’ cde. 
8. go down, i.e. into Gehenna. 
9. The righteous die, yet they are taken away to the abodes of the blessed. The phrase is borrowed from Isa. lvii. 1, 
‘ The righteous is taken away out of the way of (or ‘ because of’) the evil.’ Cf. 2 Kings xxii. 20; Wisdom iv. 7-14. The 
Hebrew word ‘take away’ occurs in e.g. Num. xx. 26; Ps. civ. 29. 
1o. Lord of the world, or ‘ Eternal Lord’ a-g : ‘ Lord of the ages’ g, 8, Cf. i. 3, xii. 3, lviii. 4, Ixxxi. 3, Ixxxii. 7, Ixxxiv. 2. 


LXXXII. Conclusion of the Book of the Heavenly Luminaries. 

1. In xxxiii, 4 Uriel writes down everything for Enoch; but in this book, cf. Ixxii. 1, Ixxiv. 2, Ixxv. 3, lxxix. 2-6, Ixxxii. 1 
Uriel only shows the hidden things to Enoch, whereas Enoch writes them down. 5; : 
_ deliver them to the generations of the world, i.e. to all, and not only to the far distant generations as in 
I-Xxxvi. Seei.2. Cf. Tert. Du Cultu Fem. i, 3 ‘Cum Enoch filio suo Matusalae nihil aliud mandaverit quam ut notitiam 
eorum posteris suis traderet.’ 

2. wisdom, i.e. the revelations. Cf. xxxvii. 4, xcii. 1, xclii, 10-14. 

to thee and to thy children mgu, 8: ‘to thy son’¢. gis corrupt. Cf. Ps. Ixxviii. 5, 6. As Lamech is thus 
already born, the Samaritan or Massoretic reckoning is followed. 
[And thy... |. Interpolation. 
246 


BOOK OF ENOCH 82. 3-17 


3 And those who understand it shall not sleep, 
But shall listen with the ear that they may learn this wisdom, 
And it shall please those that eat thereof better than good food, 


4 Blessed are all the righteous, blessed are all those who walk in the way of righteousness and sin 


not as the sinners, in the reckoning of all their days in which the sun traverses the heaven entering 
into and departing from the portals for thirty days with the heads of thousands of the order of the 
stars, together with the four which are intercalated which divide the four portions of the year, which 
5 lead them and enter with them four days. Owing to them men shall be at fault and not reckon 
them in the whole reckoning of the year: yea, men shall be at fault, and not recognize them accur- 
6 ately. For they belong to the reckoning of the year and are truly recorded (thereon) for ever, one 
in the first portal and one in the third, and one in the fourth and one in the sixth, and the year 
is completed in three hundred and sixty-four days. 
7 And the account thereof is accurate and the recorded reckoning thereof exact ; for the luminaries, 
and months and festivals, and years and days, has Uriel shown and revealed to me, to whom the 
8 Lord of the whole creation of the world hath subjected the host of heaven. And he has power 
over night and day in the heaven to cause the light to give light to men—sun, moon, and stars, 
9 and all the powers of the heaven which revolve in their circular chariots. And these are the orders 
of the stars, which set in their places, and in their seasons and festivals and months. 

And these are the names of those who lead them, who watch. that they enter at their times, 
in their orders, in their seasons, in their months, in their periods of dominion, and in their positions. 
11 Their four leaders who divide the four parts of the year enter first; and after them the twelve leaders 

of the orders who divide the months ; and for the three hundred and sixty (days) there are heads over 

thousands who divide the days; and for the four intercalary days there are the leaders which sunder 
12 the four parts of the year. And these heads over thousands are intercalated between leader and 
13 leader, each behind a station, but their leaders make the division. And these are the names of the 
leaders who divide the four parts of the year which are ordained: Milki’él, Hel’emmélék, and Mél’éjal, 
14 and Narél. And the names of those who lead them: Adnar’él, and Ijastisa’él, and ’Elémé’él—these 
_three follow the leaders of the orders, and there is one that follows the three leaders of the orders 
which follow those leaders of stations that divide the four parts of the year. 
15 In the beginning of the year Melkejal rises first and rules, who is named fTam’aini and sun,f and 
16 all the days of his dominion whilst he bears rule are ninety-one days. And these are the signs of 
the days which are to be seen on earth in the days of his dominion: sweat, and heat, and calms ; 
and all the trees bear fruit, and leaves are produced on all the trees, and the harvest of wheat, and the 
rose-flowers, and all the flowers which come forth in the field, but the trees of the'winter season 
17 become withered. And these are the names of the leaders which are under them: Berka’él, Zélebs’él, 


Io 


3. better than good food. Cf. Ps. xix. 10, cxix. 103. 
4. blessed are all those ¢,8-y: >gu,y: ‘blessed (+ ‘moreover’ g): are all (+ ‘the righteous’ ) mg. 
The four intercalary days introduced by four leaders. Cf, v. 11, Ixxv. I, 2. 
divide gz, 8—70,0, cf. Ixxxii. 11: ‘are divided’ gyzz, 20,6. 
Hy (Oe iboats 
whole reckoning of the year. So with Beer I emend ‘in the reckoning of the whole world’. 
6. On the four intercalary days and their portals see Ixxv. : 
the year is completed in three hundred, &c. 8: ‘the year of three hundred . . . is completed’ a-guile. 
7. to whom ... hath subjected. Emended from a-g, 8 ‘whom He hath commanded for me’. 
Lord of the whole creation of the world. Here only; cf. Ixxxiv. 2. _ : 
g-20. An account of the stars as promised in Ixxii, 1, and declared to be given in Ixxix. 1. 
10. who watch that they enter. MSS. read ‘who watch and they enter’—? a Hebrew idiom preserved. 
times + ‘who lead them in their places’ (>‘ in their places’ z) a. 
11. The leaders of the four intercalary days, the twelve months, and the 365 days. 
for >¢. : 
Ds city (days) there are heads ggz(m): ‘... sixty-four (days) with the heads’ 4, B. 
12. Not clear. 
ion. ‘his station’ g, a. 
ft Mulkiel is an inversion ie Helemmelek. These four are over the four seasons of the year, and each has three 
under him, one for every month. 
14. Not clear. The latter part of the verse seems to defy explanation. f aa ' - 
15-17. The period from spring to summer = 91 days 1s under the dominion of Melkejal or Milkiel. Heis name 
‘the southern sun’, as Goldschmidt and Beer point out ‘Tam/’Aaini’ and ‘sun’ should be read together, i. e. ‘JON WOW. 
15. of the year 7B: > a-m. 
16. calms z: ‘anxiety’ a-7. : 7 2 
the rose-flowers, not in O.T., except in English version of Isa. xxxv. 1; Cant. i. I. 
which come forth a-vz: ‘bloom’ B: >. 
17. The subordinate leaders are those of the months, three to the quarter. 


247 


BOOK OF ENOCH 82. i7—88. 11 


and another who is added a head of a thousand, called Hilijaséph: and the days of the dominion 
of this (leader) are at an end. * 

18 The next leader after him is Hél’emmélék, whom one names the shining sun, and all the days 

19 of his light are ninety-one days. And these are the signs of (his) days on the earth: glowing heat 
and dryness, and the trees ripen their fruits and produce all their fruits ripe and ready, and the sheep 
pair and become pregnant, and all the fruits of the earth are gathered in, and everything that is 

zo in the fields, and the winepress: these things take place in the days of his dominion. These are 
the names, and the orders, and the leaders of those heads of thousands : Gida’fjal, Ke’él, and Heel, 
and the name of the head of a thousand which is added to them, Asfa’él : and the days of his dominion 
are at an end. 


Section IV. 
CuHapTers LXXXIII—XC. Tue Dream-Visions. 


LXXXIII—LXXXIV. First Dream-Vision on the Deluge. 


831 And now, my son Methuselah, I will show thee all my visions which I have seen, recounting 
z them before thee. Two visions I saw before I took a wife, and the one was quite unlike the other : 
the first when I was learning to write: the second before I took thy mother, (when) I saw a terrible 

3 vision. And regarding them I prayed to the Lord. I had laid me down in the house of my grand- 
father Mahalalel, (when) I saw in a vision how the heaven collapsed and was borne off and fell to 

4 the earth. And when it fell to the earth I saw how the earth was swallowed up in a great abyss, 
and mountains were suspended on mountains, and hills sank down on hills, and high trees were rent 

5 from their stems, and hurled down and sunk in the abyss. And thereupon a word fell into my mouth, 
6 and I lifted up (my voice) to cry aloud, and said: ‘ The earth is destroyed.’ And my grandfather 
Mahalalel waked me as I lay near him, and said unto me: ‘ Why dost thou cry so, my son, and why 

7 dost thou make such lamentation?’ And I recounted to him the whole vision which I had seen, 
and he said unto me: ‘ A terrible thing hast thou seen, my son, and of grave moment is thy dream- 
vision as to the secrets of all the sin of the earth: it must sink into the abyss and be destroyed with 
8a great destruction. And now, my son, arise and make petition to the Lord of glory, since thou 
art a believer, that a remnant may remain on the earth, and that He may not destroy the whole 
gearth. My son, from heaven all this will come upon the earth, and upon the earth there will be great 
10 destruction. After that I arose and prayed and implored and besought, and wrote down my prayer 
11 for the generations of the world, and I will show everything to thee, my son Methuselah. And when 
I had gone forth below and seen the heaven, and the sun rising in the east, and the moon setting 
in the west, and a few stars, and the whole earth, and everything as{He had known fit in the beginning, 


Hilajaséph. Note play on D1) ‘is added ’. 
18-20. Summer to autumn. 
19. the signs of (his) days 8. ‘the days of his sign’ gmt (gu). 
20. This verse is confused. The three names are those of the leaders of the three months. The fourth, Asfaél, is an 
inversion of Hiliijaséph (verse 17), and belongs to the first triad. There is no account of the remaining six months. 
The redactor may have omitted them. 


LXXXIII—LXXXIV. The first Dream-Vision deals with the Deluge or first world-judgement. 
LXXXIII. 1. my visions a-¢. ‘visions’ 4, B. 
2. Enoch took a wife at 65 (Gen. v. 21). Her name was Edna, 1 En. lxxxv. 3, cf. Jubilees iv. 19, where these Dream- 


Visions are referred to. Note that Ixxxiii-xc are only dreams, whereas in the other sections Enoch has Open intercourse 
with the angels, and is translated bodily. Yet on ascetic grounds one would expect the bodily translation before 
marriage, and the dream-visions after. 
3. Mahalalel. ‘Malal’él’ in text. 
5. lifted up (my voice) mgu, 8-2. ‘arose’ g. began 7,7: 
7. Secrets of all the sin (¢z) 8. ‘sin of all the sin’ gm. ‘sin of all’ g. 
8. Lord of glory. xxv. 3, 7, xxvii. 3, 5, XXXVI. 4, xl. 3, Ixiii. 2, Ixxv. 3. 
and that He...earth 7,8. > a-<¢ through hmt. (?). 
g. from heaven, i. e. ordained of God. 
fo. The prayer is given in lxxxiv. 2-6. 
and besought a-g. > 4g, B. 
my prayer m/,8. ‘I prayed and’ s. > gu. 
11. the whole earth gmg, cdfiloy,a,b.. > t, abehknx, 
as tHe had knownt it. Read ‘as I had known it,’ or ‘as He had made (or ‘ established ’) it’. 


248 


BOOK OF ENOCH 838. 11—84. 6 


then I blessed the Lord of judgement and extolled Him because He had made the sun to go forth 
from the windows of the east, tand he ascended and rose on the face of the heaven, and set out 
84 and kept traversing the path shown unto him. 

1 And I lifted up my hands in righteousness and blessed the Holy and Great One, and spake with 
the breath of my mouth, and with the tongue of flesh, which God has made for the children of the 
flesh of men, that they should speak therewith, and He gave them breath and a tongue and a mouth 
that they should speak therewith : 

2 * Blessed be Thou, O Lord, King, 

Great and mighty in Thy greatness, 
Lord of the whole creation of the heaven, 
King of kings and God of the whole world. 


And Thy power and kingship and greatness abide for ever and ever, 
And throughout all generations Thy dominion ; 

And all the heavens are Thy throne for ever, 

And the whole earth Thy footstool for ever and ever. 


3. For Thou hast made and Thou rulest all things, 
And nothing is too hard for Thee, 
Wisdom departs not from the place of Thy throne, 
Nor turns away from Thy presence. 
And Thou knowest and seest and hearest everything, 
And there is nothing hidden from Thee [for Thou seest everything]. 
4 And now the angels of Thy heavens are guilty of trespass, 
And upon the flesh of men abideth Thy wrath until the great day of judgement. 
§ And now, O God and Lord and Great King, 
I implore and beseech Thee to fulfil my prayer, 
To leave me a posterity on earth, 
And not destroy all the flesh of man, 
And make the earth without inhabitant, 
So that there should be an eternal destruction. 
6 And now, my Lord, destroy from the earth the flesh which has aroused Thy wrath, 
But the flesh of righteousness and uprightness establish as a plant of the eternal seed, 
And hide not Thy face from the prayer of Thy servant, O Lord.’ 


Lord of judgement. Here only. 

windows. Never used of the sun in i-xxxvi nor in lxxii-Ixxxii, where ‘ portal’ is the word. For ‘ windows’ see 
Ixxii. 3 (note). 

+ and he ascended. Read ‘so that he ascended’, i. e. nay for Sys, 


LXXXIV. Enoch’s Prayer for his Posterity. 
1. The Holy and Great One. See i. 3 (note). 
tongue of flesh. See xiv. 2. 
children of the flesh of men gmt, abcfhiknx. ‘children of men’ (+ ‘of flesh’ ¢) gu, de, &c. 
DaCieix Aas. 
Lord of the whole creation of the heaven. Here only. Cf. lxxxii. 7 ; also lvili. 4 (note). 
King of kings. ix. 4. 
God of the whole world. Here only. Cf. i. 3 (note). 
All the heavens are Thy throne. Isa. Ixvi. 1. ane TMi 
3. nothing is too hard for Thee. Jer. xxxii. 17, 27, where the LXX render ‘is hidden from thee’. The MSS. 
here add a dittograph ‘ and nothing’ (or ‘ no’). : ~ aie 
Wisdom departs not from... Thy throne. Cf. Wisdom ix. 4, also Prov. viii. 30 in the LXX version juny 
map avr, and Sirach i. I. 
departs not g. Other MSS. ‘departs not from Thee.’ : 
from the place of Thy throne, nor turns away. Text=‘nor turns away (ggm corrupt) from her life (>) 
(4+‘from’ mg) Thy throne and’. So transpose ‘nor turns away’, and read ‘from the place’ (’émménbarata) for 
‘from her life’ ("€mmanbarta). : 
[for Thou... ] A dittograph from the line before. 
4. upon the flesh of men. Cf. verses 1, 5; Job. xii. Io. , fa 
great day of judgement. Most MSS. read ‘day of the great judgement’. See my text. See xlv. 2 (note). 
Here=the Deluge, but in xix. I the final judgement, and so always in xci-civ. 
5. Great King. xci. 13. a toe es 
6. a plant of the eternal seed. See x. 16 (note). Cf. Ixii. 8; xcill. 2, 5, 10. 


249 


BOOK OF ENOCH 85. 1—86. 6 


LXXXV-XC, The Second Dream-Vision of Enoch: the History of the World to the Founding 
of the Messianic Kingdom. 


85 1,2 And after this I saw another dream, and I will show the whole dream to thee, my son. And Enoch 

lifted up (his voice) and spake to his son Methuselah: ‘To thee, my son, will I speak: hear my 

3 words—incline thine ear to the dream-vision of thy father. Before I took thy mother Edna, I saw 

‘in a vision on my bed, and behold a bull came forth from the earth, and that bull was white; and 

after it came forth a heifer, and along with this (latter) came forth two bulls, one of them black and 

4 the other red. And that black bull gored the red one and pursued him over the earth, and thereupon 

5 I could no longer see that red bull. But that black bull grew and that heifer went with him, and 

6 I saw that many oxen proceeded from him which resembled and followed him. And that cow, 

that first one, went from the presence of that first bull in order to seek that red one, but found him 

7 not, and lamented with a great lamentation over him and sought him. And I looked till that first 

g bull came to her and quieted her, and from that time onward she cried no more. And after that 
she bore another white bull, and after him she bore many bulls and black cows. 

g And I saw in my sleep that white bull likewise grow and become a great white bull, and from him 

1o proceeded many white bulls, and they resembled him. And they began to beget many white bulls, 

which resembled them, one following the other, (even) many. 


LXXXVI. The Fall of the Angels and the Demoralization of Mankind. 


86: And again I saw with mine eyes as I slept, and I saw the heaven above, and behold a star fell 

2 from heaven, and it arose and eat and pastured amongst those oxen. And after that I saw the large 

and the black oxen, and behold they all changed their stalls and pastures and their cattle, and began 

3 to live with each other. And again I saw in the vision, and looked towards the heaven, and behold 

I saw many stars descend and cast themselves down from heaven to that first star, and they became 

4 bulls amongst those cattle and pastured with them [amongst them]. And I looked at them and saw, 

and behold they all let out their privy members, like horses, and began to cover the cows of the oxen, 

5 and they all became pregnant and bare elephants, camels, and asses. And all the oxen feared them 

and were affrighted at them, and began to bite with their teeth and to devour, and to gore with their 

6horns. And they began, moreover, to devour those oxen; and behold all the children of the earth 
began to tremble and quake before them and to flee from them. 


LXXXV—XC. The second Dream-vision, giving a complete history of the world from Adam down to the final 
judgement, and the setting up of the Messianic kingdom. As in Ezekiel, men are symbolized by animals, e.g. the 
patriarchs by bulls, the faithful of later times by sheep. Cf. Ezek. xxxiv. 3, 6, 8. The Gentiles are symbolized by 
wild beasts and birds of prey, cf. Ezek. xxxix. 17 ; the fallen Watchers by stars; unfallen angels by men. The symbolism 
is, however, sometimes dropped, and the same symbol may vary in meaning. In the main the narrative is based on the 
O.T., but some mythical elements from later Jewish exegesis are incorporated. 


TEXXOXMVier2 Cf Prov. vst 
3. Edna. Cf. Ixxxiii. 2. 
Isaw, &c. Cf. Dan. iv. to. 
on my bed g, 8. ‘of my bed’ gwz¢. x corrupt. 
white is the colour symbolizing righteousness throughout this vision. Cf. Ixxxv. 8, Ixxxviil. 2, &c., and Isa. i. 18, 
Ps, li. 7, Rev. vii. 14. 
a heifer=Eve. 
two bulls. Cain, black with his sin; Abel, red as a martyr. 
5. that heifer—=Cain’s wife ; according to Jubilees iv. 1, his sister, by name Avan. 
him *° 9, 8. ‘them?’ gyz. 
6. Eve seeks Abel. 
lamentation, i.e. Son, a play on Abel, i.e. bon. 
over him g. ‘with regard to him’ g. ‘thereupon’ zz, B. 
8. another white bull, i.e. Seth. Som, 8. ‘a pair of white oxen’ gqu, i.e. Seth and a sister. See Jub. iv. 8, 11. 
9. Seth and his descendants are righteous. 
many gmgt. > B. 
Pike I. a Star, i.e. Azazel, cf. Ixxxviii. 1; x. 4. In vi all the angels descend together, cf. Talmud (Weber, /zd. 
heol., 253). 
2. And after that 8. ‘and these’ mg. ‘and inthe midst’¢ ‘and’w. > g. 
Are the ‘large’ oxen Sethites ? 
to live with each other. ‘to lament one to (‘ with’ 8) another’ a-g, 8B. ‘to live to one another’ g. 
3. Fall of the rest of the angels. 
became bulls amongst those cattle and pastured with them a. ‘ were amongst those cattle and bulls, 
pasturing with them’ B. 
4. elephants, camels, and asses, represent the three classes of giants. See vii. 2 (note). 
6. children of the earth. The symbolism is dropped for 2 moment. 
from them gz. > other MSS. 


250 


BOOK OF ENOCH 87. 1—-89. 6 


LXXXVII. The Advent of the Seven Archangels. 


87: And again I saw how they began to gore each other and to devour each other, and the earth 
2 began to cry aloud. And I raised mine eyes again to heaven, and I saw in the vision, and behold 
there came forth from heaven beings who were like white men: and four went forth from that place 

3 and three with them. And those three that had last come forth grasped me by my hand and took 

me up, away from the generations of the earth, and raised me up to a lofty place, and showed me 

4 a tower raised high above the earth, and all the hills were lower. And one said unto me: ‘ Remain 


here till thou seest everything that befalls those elephants, camels, and asses, and the stars and the 
oxen, and all of them.’ | 


LXXXVIII. The Punishment of the Fallen Angels by the Archangels. 


88: And‘I saw one of those four who had come forth first, and he seized that first star which had 
fallen from the heaven, and bound it hand and foot and cast it into an abyss: now that abyss was 
2 narrow and deep, and horrible and dark. And one of them drew a sword, and gave it to those 
elephants and camels and asses: then they began to smite each other, and the whole earth quaked 
3 because of them. And as I was beholding in the vision, lo, one of those four who had come forth 
stoned (them) from heaven, and gathered and took all the great stars whose privy members were 

like those of horses, and bound them all hand and foot, and cast them in an abyss of the earth. 


LXXXIX, 1-9. The Deluge and the Deliverance of Noah. 


89 : And one of those four went to that white bull and instructed him in a secret, without his being 
terrified: he was born a bull and became a man, and built for himself a great vessel and dwelt thereon; 

2 and three bulls dwelt with him in that vessel and they were covered in. And again I raised mine 
eyes towards heaven and saw a lofty roof, with seven water torrents thereon, and those torrents 

3 flowed with much water into an enclosure. And I saw again, and behold fountains were opened 
on the surface of that great enclosure, and that water began to swell and rise upon the surface, 
4 and I saw that enclosure till all its surface was covered with water. And the water, the darkness, 
and mist increased upon it ; and as I looked at the height of that water, that water had risen above 
the height of that enclosure, and was streaming over that enclosure, and it stood upon the earth. 
5 And all the cattle of that enclosure were gathered together until I saw how they sank and were 
6 swallowed up and perished in that water. But that vessel floated on the water, while all the oxen 
and elephants and camels and asses sank to the bottom with all the animals, so that I could no longer 


.. LXXXVII. 1. The conflict of the bulls and giants. 
“2. The unfallen angels are symbolized by men, as men by animals. 
“and I saw in the vision > gz. 
four a. ‘one’ f. 
four... and three with them. See Ixxxviii. 1 for the ‘four’. The ‘three angels’ are found again in xc. 31. 
For the seven archangels, cf. Ixxxi. 5, xci. 21, 22, xx. 
with them w. ‘with him’ a-7, B. 
3, 4. This tower seems to be Paradise, and thus we have in Ixxxili-xc a conception of its locality and inhabitants 
quite different from any that has preceded. See Ix. 8 (note). 
3. all the hills were lower ¢, 8. ‘it was built all the hills’ (sic) a-t. 
4. one said a-g, cefhik. ‘they said’ g, B-cefhik. 
oxen, and all of them a-z. ‘and all the oxen’ x, 8. 


LXXXVIII—LXXXIX. 1. Closely connected with x. 1-14, but the variations are too many to presuppose it in quite 
its present form. Azazel is the only leader here. 
LXXXVIII. 1. Cf. x. 4-8, where Raphael binds Azazel. 
2. In x. 9, 10 Gabriel performs this task. 
and camels 7,8. > a-/. : ; 
3. In x. 12-14 Michael binds and imprisons the Watchers. Semjaza Is not mentioned here. 
come forth ... stoned (them) from heaven. Read ‘ descended’ for ‘stoned’, or with 7 read ‘hurled a sword’. 
gathered and took /, 8 in sing., # reads ‘gathered’ in sing., 7 reads ‘took’ in sing. 
an abyss of the earth. In x. 12 ‘under the hills’. 


LXXXIX. 1-9. The Deluge, and Noah’s deliverance. 
1. Cf. x. 1-3 where Uriel visits Noah for the same end. To build the ark, Noah becomes a man, 
that white bull 7. ‘those white bulls’ a-m, £. 
without his being terrified gz, ‘terrified as he was’ mz, 6. 
three bulls—his three sons. 
covered in, cf. Gen. vii. 16; 1 En. Ixvii. 2. 
2. seven. Cf. Ixxvii. 4 (note). 
3, 4. The Deluge. 
> saw 2° 2. ‘caused it not to be seen’ Z, B. 
6. with all the animals, i. e. the real animals. 
251 


BOOK OF ENOCH 89. 7-24 


7 see them, and they were not able to escape, (but) perished and sank into the depths. And again 
I saw in the vision till those water torrents were removed from that high roof, and the chasms 

8 of the earth were levelled up and other abysses were opened. Then the water began to run down 
into these, till the earth became visible; but that vessel settled on the earth, and the darkness 

9 retired and light appeared. But that white bull which had become a man came out of that vessel, 
and the three bulls with him, and one of those three was white like that bull, and one of them was 
red as blood, and one black: and that white bull departed from them. 


LXXXIX. 10-27. From the Death of Noah to the Exodus. - 


10 And they began to bring forth beasts of the field and birds, so that there arose different genera : 
lions, tigers, wolves, dogs, hyenas, wild boars, foxes, squirrels, swine, falcons, vultures, kites, 
11 eagles, and ravens; and among them was born a white bull. And they began to bite one another ; 
but that white bull which was born amongst them begat a wild ass and a white bull with it, and the 
12 wild asses multiplied. But that bull which was born from him begat a black wild boar and a white 
13 sheep ; and the former begat many boars, but that sheep begat twelve sheep. And when those twelve 
sheep had grown, they gave up one of them to the asses, and those asses again gave up that sheep 
14 to the wolves, and that sheep grew up among the wolves. And the Lord brought the eleven sheep 
to live with it and to pasture with it among the wolves: and they multiplied and became many 
15 flocks of sheep. And the wolves began to fear them, and they oppressed them until they destroyed 
their little ones, and they cast their young into a river of much water: but those sheep began to 
16 cry aloud on account of their little ones, and to complain unto their Lord. And a sheep which had 
been saved from the wolves fled and escaped to the wild asses; and I saw the sheep how they 
Jamented and cried, and besought their Lord with all their might, till that Lord of the sheep descended 
17 at the voice of the sheep from a lofty abode, and came to them and pastured them. And He called 
that sheep which had escaped the wolves, and spake with it concerning the wolves that it should 
18 admonish them not to touch the sheep. And the sheep went to the wolves according to the word 
of the Lord, and another sheep met it and went with it, and the two went and entered together 
into the assembly of those wolves, and spake with them and admonished them not to touch the 
19 sheep from henceforth. And thereupon I saw the wolves, and how they oppressed the sheep exceed- 
20 ingly with all their power; and the sheep cried aloud. And the Lord came to the sheep and they 
began to smite those wolves: and the wolves began to make lamentation; but the sheep became 
21 quiet and forthwith ceased to cry out. And I saw the sheep till they departed from amongst the 
wolves ; but the eyes of the wolves were blinded, and those wolves departed in pursuit of the sheep 
22 with all their power. And the Lord of the sheep went with them, as their leader, and all His sheep 
23 followed Him: and His face was dazzling and glorious and terrible to behold. But the wolves 
24 began to pursue those sheep till they reached a sea of water. And that sea was divided, and the water 
stood on this side and on that before their face, and their Lord led them and placed Himself between 


7. the chasms of the earth. The writer conceives the flood as caused by a cleaving of the depths of the earth, 
and stayed by their closing up. Cf. Jub. vi. 26; Prayer of Manasses 3. 
g. and one black 8. >a. 
that white bull departed, i.e. Noah died. 
10. The symbolism has a new meaning forced upon it by the author. His cattle produce all kinds of four-footed 
beasts, and birds of prey. Nearly all of these appear later as the enemies of Israel. Cf. Ezek. xxxix. 7 
different genera. Here ’ahz4b means races of animals as well as of men. 
a white bull. Abraham. 
11. A wild ass. Ishmael. In verses 15, 16 the Arabs or Midianites are called the ‘ wild asses ’, not inaptly. Cf. 
Gen. xvi. 12. Isaac is the ‘ white bull’. 
the wild asses a, add, &c.: ‘the wild ass’ cefh. 
12, A black wild boar. Esau. Later Jewish hatred thus associates Edom with the animal most detested. Cte 
verses 42, 43, 49,66. In 72 it is used of the Samaritans. 
A white sheep. Jacob. Israel is the sheep of God’s pasture, Ps. Ixxiv. 1 , xxix. t3, €/ 9's" fers xxdiin gs. 
13. one of them, i. e. Joseph. 
the asses. Midianites (v. 11). 
the wolves, the Egyptians. 
16. a sheep which had been saved, i. e. Moses. 
Lord of the sheep. The usual title in this and the following chapters. 
18. another sheep, Aaron. 
met it a-¢. ‘met that sheep’ 4, B-d. 
went and gig. *> zu, B. 
20-27. The plagues of Egypt and the Exodus. 
20. they began a-m: ‘ He began’ m, B. 
22. glorious and terrible to behold gm: ‘terrible to behold’ gu: ‘ His appearance was terrible and glorious’ é 
24. led them #. Other MSS. ‘leading them’ (we must excise ne pain eee case). ities 


252 


BOOK’ OF ENOCH 839. 25-40 


25 them and the wolves. And as those wolves did not yet see the sheep, they proceeded i 
of that sea, and the wolves followed the sheep, and [those mrolvelt rasiaites ee inf fe 
26 And when they saw the Lord of the sheep, they turned to flee before His face, but that sea gathered 
itself together, and became as it had been created, and the water swelled and rose till it covered 
27 those wolves. And I saw till all the wolves who pursued those sheep perished and were drowned. 


LXXXIX. 28-40. Israel in the Desert, the Giving of the Law, the Entrance into Palestine. 


28 But the sheep escaped from that water and went forth into a wilderness, where there was no water 
and no grass; and they began to open their eyes and to see; and I saw the Lord of the sheep 
29 pasturing them and giving them water and grass, and that sheep going and leading them. And that 
30 sheep ascended to the summit of that lofty rock, and the Lord of the sheep sent it to them. And 
after that I saw the Lord of the sheep who stood before them, and His appearance was great and 
31 terrible and majestic, and all those sheep saw Him and were afraid before His face. And they all 
feared and trembled because of Him, and they cried to that sheep with them [which was amongst 
32 them]: ‘ We are not able to stand before our Lord or to behold Him.’ And that sheep which led 
them again ascended to the summit of that rock, but the sheep began to be blinded and to wander 
33 from the way which he had showed them, but that sheep wot not thereof. And the Lord of the 
sheep was wrathful exceedingly against them, and that sheep discovered it, and went down from — 
the summit of the rock, and came to the sheep, and found the greatest part of them blinded and fallen 
34 away. And when they saw it they feared and trembled at its presence, and desired to return to their 
35 folds. And that sheep took other sheep with it, and came to those sheep which-had fallen away, 
and began to slay them; and the sheep feared its presence, and thus that sheep brought back those 
36 sheep that had fallen away, and they returned to their folds. And I saw in this vision till that sheep 
became a man and built a house for the Lord of the sheep, and placed all the sheep in that house. 
37 And I saw till this sheep which had met that sheep which led them fell asleep: and I saw till 
all the great sheep perished and little ones arose in their place, and they came to a pasture, and 
38 approached a stream of water. Then that sheep, their leader which had become a man, withdrew 
39 from them and fell asleep, and all the sheep sought it and cried over it with a great crying. And I saw 
till they left off crying for that sheep and crossed that stream of water, and there arose the two sheep 
as leaders in the place of those which had led them and fallen asleep (lit. * had fallen asleep and led 
4o them’). And I saw till the sheep came to a goodly place, and a pleasant and glorious land, and I saw 
till those sheep were satisfied ; and that house stood amongst them in the pleasant land. 


28-40. Journeyings through the wilderness, the lawgiving on Sinai, and the occupation of Palestine. _ 
28. began to open their eyes, i.e. to recover their spiritual vision and return to God, Cf. Ixxxix. 32, 33, 41, 
44, 54, xc. 6, 9, 10, 35. 
and to see m/¢u, 8. ‘and they saw’ gg. 
29. Moses ascends Sinai, and returns to Israel. Exod. xix. 
30. greatanda. > 8-v. 
31. that sheep with them = Aaron. 
with them gmg. ‘with him’ ¢, B. : ar ants ‘ 
[which was amongst them] gv. A dittograph. ‘the other sheep which was among (‘ with’ g) them’ 7g/, B. 
32. Cf. Exod. xxiv. 12 sqq., XXxil. 
again ascended, or ‘returned and ascended’. 
33. fallen away + ‘from His path’ p. 
34. it, i.e. Mases. 
return to their folds = give up their errors. 
35. Exod. xxxii. 26-9. 
and 8° + ‘after that’ ¢, B. 
36. Moses becomes a man to build the tabernacle. Cf. verses I, 9. 
in this vision a-wv. ‘there a vision’ . : 
placed ... in that house, i.e. made the tabernacle the centre of their worship. 
37. Death of Aaron and of all the generation that had gone out of Egypt. 
that sheep 4, 8. So g, but corrupt. m7 defective. > 9. 
led them a. ‘led the sheep’ f. ; 
a stream, Jordan witha pasture to the east of it. 
ies. Cf. Deut. xxxiv. Re ek: ft , 
i Bs es: Joshua and Caleb, I emend kuéllomt = ‘all’ to ké’éhémt = ‘the two’. 
40. glorious land. Palestine. Cf. Dan. xi. 16, 41. 


255 


BOOK OF ENOCH 89. 41-50 : 


LXXXIX. 41-50. From the Time of the Fudges till the Building of the Temple. 


1 And sometimes their eyes were opened, and sometimes blinded, till another sheep arose and led 
them and brought them all back, and their eyes were opened. 


42 And the dogs and the foxes and the wild boars 
began to devour those sheep till the Lord of the 
sheep raised up [another sheep] a ram from their 

43 midst, which led them. And that ram began to 
butt on either side those dogs, foxes, and wild 

44 boars till he had destroyed them fallf. And that 
sheep whose eyes were opened saw that ram, 
which was amongst the sheep, till it {forsook its 
glory and began to butt those sheep, and 
trampled upon them, and behaved itself un- 

45 seemly. And the Lord of the sheep sent the 
lamb to another lamb and raised it to being 
a ram and leader of the sheep instead of that 

46 ram which had fforsaken its gloryt. And it went 
to it and spake to it alone, and raised it to being 
a ram, and made it the prince and leader of the 
sheep; but during all these things those dogs 

47 oppressed the sheep. And the first ram pursued 
that second ram, and that second ram arose and 
fled before it; and I saw till those dogs pulled 

8 down the first ram. And that second ram arose 

49 and led the [little] sheep. And those sheep grew 
and multiplied ; but all the dogs, and foxes, and 
wild boars feared and fled before it, and that 
ram butted and killed the wild beasts, and those 
wild beasts had no longer any power among the 

48 sheep and robbed them no more of ought. And 
that ram begat many sheep and fell asleep ; and 
a little sheep became ram in its stead, and 
became prince and leader of those sheep. 





Greek fragment from Vatican MS., published by Mai, 
Patrum Nova Bibliotheca, t. ii, deciphered by Gildemeister, 
in ZDMG, 1855, pp. 62 I, 622. 


A n / Lee 
"Ex rod Tob “Evay BiBadiov xpijors. 
= , Ae 
Kat of xtves tjp£avto xatecOlew Ta mpdBata Kal of 42 
/ > / / oe wo 
bes kal of dXdmeKkes KatHoOlov adtd, mex pt Ov ityerpev 
na na / 
6 KUptos TGV TpoBdrwv Kpiov eva éx Tv TpoBdTwr. 
a ‘ , > 
Kat 6 kptds otros ip£aro Keparicew Kat émodidxew ev 43 
ny ‘ \ a lA \ 
Tols K€pacw Kat éverivaccey eis Tovs dAdmeEKas Kal 
> > ») ? N A Nee ON A Ar ~ 
Mer autovs els tovs tas Kal amebdAecev Vas ToAAOVS 
ee IN , 
kal per adrovs ... To Tovs Kivas. Kal ra mpdBara 44 
\ . > 
dv ot dpOarpol jvolynoay eOedcovto Tov Kpiov TOV ev 
- @ n \ > n \ 
Tots mpoBdro.is, Ews ov adiKxev tiv doy adTod kal 
jpEato topeverOar tavodia. Kal 6 xtpuos trav mpo- 45 
, fal \ YA li 
Batwv anéoreirdev tov apva robtoy én dpva érepov 
a fod ” a f 
Tod othoat aitov eis Kpioyv ev dpyn TGV TpoBdtwv 
n n an a \ 
avtt tod Kpiod Tod adévros thy dddv adrod. Kal 46 
Y n n \ 
émopevOn mpds atrov Kat éAdAnoey atr@ oy Kara 
Y \ 
povas Kal ityeipev adrov eis Kptov kat eis Upxovra Kal 
n , \ c 
els yovpevoy TOY TpoBdtwyv Kal of Kbves emt wacr 
c lad 4 
tovrois €0ABov ta mpdBata. [Eis 8& rovrous 47 
na ‘ ‘ , 
yéypamrat bru] 6 kpids 6 mpOros Tov Kpidv Tov debTEpoY 
\ > roe a> 
eredimxey Kal epvyey amo Tpocdmov avrod' ir 
a f wo 
eOedpovv, [pnoiv], tov Kpidov tov aptov ews ob 
oy # n na \ ¢ x < ra) /, 8 
emecev euTrposbey TGV Kvvav. Kat 6 kpids 6 dev- 4 
3 , > , a y K \ 
TEpos avamndjoas adpnynoato toy TpoBdtwv. au 49 
Ta TpdBata nvEnOnoay kal émrANnOKvOnoav’ Kal mdvTEs 
¢ 7 NY oS: re ow edt Se.) 3! a ae] 
ol Kuves Kal ol ddomeEKes Evyov az’ adrod Kal édpo- 
Bobvro avrov. 


50 And that house became great and broad, and it was built for those sheep: (and) a tower lofty 
and great was built on the house for the Lord of the sheep, and that house was low, but the tower 


41-50. The times of the Judges and Kings till the Temple is built. 


Of 42-9 a fragment of the Greek version survives. 
from some catena of excerpts from Enoch. 
42. The dogs are the Philistines (46, 47). 
Edomites (12, 43, 49, 66). 
till the Lord of the sheep raised up, &c. Li. 
the sheep, arose’. 


43. that ram. Saul, who did not, however, destroy them all. 


= Ethiopic demonstrative ‘ those’. 


44. That sheep whose eyes were opened, i.e. Samuel, who alone was seer w 
The Greek has ‘sheep’ in the plural. 


vision. 


Chiat Samiulin 100: 
till. 


MSS. have os corrupt for gos. See Gk. 


Note the é&ns in v. YF and also the dnoty showing quotation 
The foxes are the Ammonites (55), and the wild boars are the 


Cf. Gk. Other MSS. give ‘till another sheep, the Lord of 


The Greek has zoAXot’s. Note the Greek article 


hen there had been no ‘open’ 


its gloryt, ‘his way’ Gk. For \575 restore »» 717 ‘the way of the Lord’. 


45, 46. David anointed king. 
is a little sheep (v. 484). 
45. lamb Gk. ‘sheep’ Eth. MSS. 
that ram Gk. ‘that ram, sheep’ d. 
46. during Eth. 


Gk. omits, as it ended with wv. 49. 


50. That house = Jerusalem. So Test. Levi x. 4 (quoting this passage). 


table’ refers to the offerings and sacrifices, 


it was built ...on the house gmt, zlno,a,b (mt, in have ‘that’ before ‘house 
(and) a high tower on the house’ 8-c/n0,a,6: ‘it was built for those sh 


m,tlno,a,6 add a dittograph after ‘tower ?— 


Both Samuel and David (until king) are lambs, 


‘lofty on that house and a tower’. 


as Solomon previous to coronation 


t ‘that sheep’ other MSS. 

‘in addition to’ Gk., i. e. another sense of éni (Dative not Gen.). 
48. led the sheep. So Gk., but Eth. MSS. give ‘led the little shee 
48>. And that ram begat ... leader of those sheep, 


p’, pointlessly. 


should follow v. 49, which suits best the reign of David. 


The ‘tower’ is the Temple. ‘A full 


*): ‘it was built for those sheep 


eep (and) a lofty tower was built’ g: 


254 


, BOOK OF ENOCH 89, 50-63 


aed Sarna and lofty, and the Lord of the sheep stood on that tower and they offered a full table 


[LXXXIX. 51-67. The Two Kingdoms of Israel and Fudah to the Destruction of ¥erusalem., 


$1 And again I saw those sheep that they again erred and went many ways, and forsook i 
house, and the Lord of the sheep called some from amongst the mee aft sent them to ae Ties 
52 but the sheep began to slay them. And one of them was saved and was not slain, and it sped away 
and cried aloud over the sheep ; and they sought to slay it, but the Lord of the sheep saved it from 
53 the sheep, and brought it up to me, and caused it to dwell there. And many other sheep He sent 
54 to those sheep to testify unto them and lament over them. And after that I saw that when they 
forsook the house of the Lord and His tower they fell away entirely, and their eyes were blinded ; 
and I saw the Lord of the sheep how He wrought much slaughter amongst them in their herds until 
55 those sheep invited that slaughter and betrayed His place. And He gave them over into the hands 
of the lions and tigers, and wolves and hyenas, and into the hand of the foxes, and to all the wild 
56 beasts, and those wild beasts began to tear in pieces those sheep. And I saw that He forsook that 
their house and their tower and gave them all into the hand of the lions, to tear and devour them, 
57 into the hand of all the wild beasts. And I began to cry aloud with all my power, and to appeal 
to the Lord of the sheep, and to represent to Him in regard to the sheep that they were devoured 
58 by all the wild beasts. But He remained unmoved, though He saw it, and rejoiced that they were 
devoured and swallowed and robbed, and left them to be devoured in the hand of all the beasts. 
59 And He called seventy shepherds, and cast those sheep to them that they might pasture them, and 
_ He spake to the shepherds and their companions: ‘ Let each individual of you pasture the sheep 
60 henceforward, and everything that I shall command you that do ye. And I will deliver them over unto 
you duly numbered, and tell you which of them are to be destroyed—and them destroy ye.’ And 
61 He gave over unto them those sheep. And He called another and spake unto him: ‘ Observe and 
mark everything that the shepherds will do to those sheep; for they will destroy more of them than 
62 I have commanded them. And every excess and the destruction which will be wrought through 
the shepherds, record (namely) how many they destroy according to my command, and how many 
according to their own caprice: record against every individual shepherd all the destruction he 
effects. And read out before me by number how many they destroy, and how many they deliver 
over for destruction, that I may have this as a testimony against them, and know every deed of 
the shepherds, that I may comprehend and see what they do, whether or not they abide by my 


6 


1S) 


51-67. Gradual declension of Israel till the Temple is destroyed. 
51. forsook ...their house. True only of the Ten Tribes. 
that their house, ‘that’ in Eth. = rov in Gk. 
called ...and sent, i.e. the prophets. 
slay. Cf. 1 Kings xviii. 4. 
52. Elijah’s escape and translation. Cf. xciii. 8. 
from the sheep g7. Other MSS. ‘from the hands of the sheep’. 
54. the Lord + ‘of the sheep’ 8. 
invited that slaughter and betrayed His place, called in the heathen to help them and so betrayed Jerusalem. 
Cf. 2 Kings xvi. 7. 
' 55. The fall of the two kingdoms, and their oppressors’ names. : 
lions and tigers. Assyrians and Babylonians. In 56, 65 the ‘lions’ are the Babylonians. The ‘wolves’ are 
Egyptians, and perhaps the ‘ hyenas’ are the Ethiopians. j 
56. God forsakes His city and people. Ep. Barn. xvi. 5 refers to this verse. 
57. Lord of the sheep. ‘Lord of the lions’ gig. 
the wild beasts > g. ee : 
59. seventy f. ‘seven’a, The ‘seventy shepherds’ raise the most vexed question in Enoch. They are certainly 
angels, for (1) they exist contemporaneously and receive their commission together, Ixxxix. 59. (2) They are to protect 
the sheep, and only allow so many to be destroyed by the Gentiles. So they cannot be heathen rulers. (3) Men 
would have been symbolized by animals. (4) During the earlier period God was Israel’s shepherd, now He withdraws 
and commits their pasturing to seventy of his angels. (5) The angel recorder of Ixxxix. 61 is called ‘another’. 
(6) In the judgement they are classed with the fallen angels, xc. 21-25. (7) God speaks directly to them. After 
the exile, Israel was not immediately shepherded by God but by His delegates. How was it that righteous Jews 
as well as apostates perished? Because of the faithlessness with which the seventy angels discharged their trust, 
and this faithlessness was to be punished in due time. The theory of the seventy shepherds is an extension of the 
conception of the seventy years of Jeremiah and the seventy periods of Daniel. The events between the fall of 
Jerusalem and the Messianic kingdom are divided into four periods (1) to the Return under Cyrus, (2) to the conquests 
of Alexander, (3) to the Seleucid conquests of Palestine, (4) to the Messiah’s reign. 


60. The number to be destroyed was a definite one. j , : 
61. another, in xc. 14, 22 an archangel and Israel’s guardian angel, i.e. Michael. This task devolves on 


Enoch in xii. 3, xv. I, xcii. 1; in 4 Ezra xiv. 22-26 on Ezra, in 2 En. xxii. 11 on Vretil. See K.A. T. 400 sq. 
63. destroy + ‘of their own caprice’ dcefhnpr. 
comprehend, emended by very slight change. 


255 


H 


BOOK OF ENOCH 89. 64-90. 1 


64 command which I have commanded them. But they shall not know it, and thou shalt not declare 
it to them, nor admonish them, but only record against each individual all the destruction which 

65 the shepherds effect each in his time and lay it all before me.’ And I saw till those shepherds pastured 
in their season, and they began to slay and to destroy more than they were bidden, and they delivered 

66 those sheep into the hand of the lions. And the lions and tigers eat and devoured the greater part 
of those sheep, and the wild boars eat along with them; and they burnt that tower and demolished 

67 that house. And I became exceedingly sorrowful over that tower because that house of the sheep 
was demolished, and afterwards I was unable to see if those sheep entered that house. 


‘ 


LXXXIX. 68-71. First Period of the Angelic Rulers—from the Destruction of Ferusalem to the 
Return from the Captivity. 


68 And the shepherds and their associates delivered over those sheep to all the wild beasts, to devour 
them, and each one of them received in his time a definite number: it was written by the other 

69 in a book how many each one of them destroyed of them. And each one slew and destroyed many 

70 more than was prescribed ; and I began to weep and lament on account of those sheep. And thus 
in the vision I saw that one who wrote, how he wrote down every one that was destroyed by those 
shepherds, day by day, and carried up and laid down and showed actually the whole book to the 
Lord of the sheep—(even) everything that they had done, and all that each one of them had made 

71 away with, and all that they had given over to destruction. And the book was read before the Lord 
of the sheep, and He took the book from his hand and read it and sealed it and laid it down. 


LXXXIX. 72-77. Second Period—tfrom the Time of Cyrus to that of Alexander the Great. 


72 And forthwith I saw how the shepherds pastured for twelve hours, and behold three of those 
sheep turned back and came and entered and began to build up all that had fallen down of that 

73 house; but the wild boars tried to hinder them, but they were not able. And they began again 
to build as before, and they reared up that tower, and it was named the high tower; and they 
began again to place a table before the tower, but all the bread on it was polluted and not pure. 

74 And as touching all this the eyes of those sheep were blinded so that they saw not, and (the eyes of) 
their shepherds likewise; and they delivered them in large numbers to their shepherds for destruc- 

75 tion, and they trampled the sheep with their feet and devoured them. And the Lord of the sheep 
remained unmoved till all the sheep were dispersed over the field and mingled with them (i.e. the 

76 beasts), and they (i.e. the shepherds) did not save them out of the hand of the beasts. And this 
one who wrote the book carried it up, and showed it and read it before the Lord of the sheep, and 
implored Him on their account, and besought Him on their account as he showed Him all the doings 

77 of the shepherds, and gave testimony before Him against all the shepherds. And he took the actual 
book and laid it down beside Him and departed. 


XC. 1-5. Third Period—from Alexander the Great to the Graeco-Syrian Domination. 


90: And I saw till that in this manner thirty-five shepherds undertook the pasturing (of the sheep), 


64. No interference allowed with the shepherds, but only a record of their evil deeds. 

65, 66. The lions are the Babylonians, who destroy the ‘ tower’ and the ‘house’. Thus the shepherds begin about 
590, or if the Assyrians are meant, about 720. For the ‘ wild boars’, or Edomites, cf. Obad. 10-12 so izekexxveeta 
SOK. FSU Ss isa. Ixitint—14)s Pslicxxxviil 7. 

68. was written wz. ‘should write’ ¢. ‘wrote’ other MSS. 

69. lament + ‘very much’ p. 

70. The first period ends. It lasts twelve hours (v. 72), i.e. twelve shepherds’ reigns. The periods are divided 
thus: 12+23+23+12. és ih 

71. from his hand gmt. ‘in His hand’ p. qwi Oy 

72. three of those sheep, Zerubbabel, Joshua, and either Ezra or Nehemiah. The difference in their date 
is disregarded. Biichler holds that these = three tribes, Levi, Judah, and Benjamin. Cf. T. Joseph xix. 3. 

wild boars. Here = Samaritans, not Edomites, as v. 66. 
73. named + ‘as before’ g. 
The bread... was polluted. Cf. Mal. i. 7 ‘polluted bread,’ i.e. unclean offerings becau 
and heathenized people and priesthood. Cf. Ass. Masis. iv. 8. fi SE Se OER 
75. The Dispersion. 
76. before the Lord g. ‘in the mansions of (‘ before’ 8) the Lord’ mgtu, f. 
the shepherds gg. ‘their shepherds’ /, B. 
gave testimony m7, 8. ‘it was heard’ gg. 
77- The second period ends with the fall of the Persian power, which lasts twenty-three hours, 


XC. 1. Thirty-five. All the MSS. are corrupt. g¢, B-y read ‘thirty-seven’ (corrupted further i 
xc. 5 at the close of the third period the three periods are ‘summed up as (oa pene ‘ lithe od: 


256 


BOOK OF ENOCH 90. 1-12 


and they severally completed their periods as did the first; and others received them into their 
2 hands, to pasture them for their period, each shepherd in his own period. And after that I saw 
in my vision all the birds of heaven coming, the eagles, the vultures, the kites, the ravens; but the 
eagles led all the birds; and they began to devour those sheep, and to pick out their eyes and to 
3 devour their flesh. And the sheep cried out because their flesh was being devoured by the birds 
4 and as for me I looked and lamented in my sleep over that shepherd who pastured the sheep. And 
I saw until those sheep were devoured by the dogs and eagles and kites, and they left neither flesh 
nor skin nor sinew remaining on them till only their bones stood there: and their bones too fell 
5 to the earth and the sheep became few. And I saw until that twenty-three had undertaken the 
pasturing and completed in their several periods fifty-eight times. 


XC. 6-12. Fourth Period—from the Graeco-Syrian Domination to the Maccabean Revolt. 


6 But behold lambs were borne by those white sheep, and they began to open their eyes and to see, 
7 and to cry to the sheep. Yea, they cried to them, but they did not hearken to what they said to 
8 them, but were exceedingly deaf, and their eyes were very exceedingly blinded. And I saw in the 
vision how the ravens flew upon those lambs and took one of those lambs, and dashed the sheep 
gin pieces and devoured them. And I saw till horns grew upon those lambs, and the ravens cast 
down their horns; and I saw till there sprouted a great horn of one of those sheep, and their eyes 
to were opened. And it flooked att them [and their eyes opened], and it cried to the sheep, and the 
11 rams saw it and all ran to it. And notwithstanding all this those eagles and vultures and ravens 
and kites still kept tearing the sheep and swooping down upon them and devouring them : still the 
1z sheep remained silent, but the rams lamented and cried out. And those ravens fought and battled 
with it and sought to lay low its horn, but they had no power over it. 


as ...the first. As the twelve had fulfilled their times, so did the rest of the thirty-five. 

others received them. Here we have the transition to the Greek period, i. e. from Alexander to the establishment 
(expected) of the Messianic kingdom. This period has two divisions: (1) twenty-three shepherds of the Graeco- 
Egyptian rule of Palestine, 330-200 ; (2) twelve shepherds of Graeco-Syrian rule from 200 till about 140 or 130. 

2. The new world power—of the Greeks, is represented by a new order—birds of prey. The ‘eagles’ are the 
Greeks or Macedonians. The ‘ravens’ are the Syrians under the Seleucidae (vv. 8, 9, 12). The ‘vultures’ and 
‘kites ’ must be the Egyptians under the Ptolemies. 

2-4. The Graeco-Egyptian domination. 

3. was being devoured a—wv. ‘was devoured’ z, B. 

Tlooked ggu. ‘I saw’ m. ‘I cried out’ Z, B. 

4. the dogs, i. e. Philistines (Ixxxix. 42, 46, 47). 

neither flesh nor skin. Mic. iil. 2, 3. 

5. twenty-three + ‘shepherds’ /, A. pet 

6-17. The fourth and last period of heathen supremacy, the Graeco-Syrian domination over Israel, from 200 to 140 
or 130 B.C. See Commentary 27 doc. 

6. behold a. ‘little’ B. : 

began to open their eyes: rise of the Chasids, who existed previous to the Maccabean outbreak. See 1 Macc. 
il. 42, iii. 13,and 1 En.xc.9. They possessed all the enthusiasm and religious doctrine of the nation. While champions 
of the law against the Hellenizing Sadducees they held advanced views on the Messianic kingdom and the Resurrec- 
tion. The writer of these Dream-visions was evidently a Chasid. He teaches the Resurrection, the final judgement, 
and the kingdom of the Messiah, and above all he criticizes severely the moral and ceremonial irregularities in the 
services of the second temple (Ixxxix. 73). For this writer the Chasid aims—the re-establishment of the Theocracy and 
the preparation for the Messianic kingdom—are bound up with the success of the Maccabean leader. This could not 
be the case after Jonathan’s assumption of the high-priesthood in 153 B.c., which not merely alienated the Chasids 
from the Maccabean family, but made them its deadly enemies. Thus we date Ixxxiii-xc before 153 B.C. 

6-7. The Chasids or ‘lambs’ appeal in vain to the nation, owing to foreign oppression. . 

7. Yea, they cried to them @, i.e. the lambs cried to the sheep: ‘but they (i.e. the sheep) did not cry to them’ g: 
‘but they oppressed them’ 7: ‘ but they did not hear them’ ¢: ‘but the sheep did not cry to them’ 8-70. 

8. one of those lambs. Onias III, put to death by the Syrians in 171 B.C See 2 Macc. iv. 33-35. 

g. of one g. ‘one’ other MSS. : ie 

The horned lambs must be the Maccabees, and the great horn must be Judas Maccabaeus. ‘This section is thus 
earlier than Judas’ death in 160 B.c. See my Commentary for further notes. — : 
eyes were opened. Unlike the Chasids, the Maccabees do not appeal in vain. 
opened + ‘and their eyes saw’ gyt. ue oF. 
10. tlooked att. For réja ‘looked at’ read r‘éja ‘ pastured with’. 
it cried m, B-2m. ‘they cried’ a-m. _ 
rams, a different word here from that in Ixxxix. 42-44. 
II, 12. Syria uses every effort against Judas but in vain. 
12. with it: ‘with them’ g, ef. 
its horn: ‘their horn’ g. 


Ss 
1105.2 a5] 


BOOK OF ENOCH 90) ‘13=19 


XC. 13-19. The last Assault of the Gentiles on the Fews (where vv. 13-15 and 16-18 
are doublets). 


13 And I saw till the fshepherds andf eagles and All the eagles and vultures and ravens and 16 
those vultures and kites came, and {they cried | kites were gathered together, and there came 
to the ravens} that they should break the horn with them all the sheep of the field, yea, they 
of that ram, and they battled and fought with , all came together, and helped each other to 
it, and it battled with them and cried that its | break that horn of the ram. 
help might come. 





19 And I saw till a great sword was given to the sheep, and the sheep proceeded against all the 
beasts of the field to slay them, and all the beasts and the birds of the heaven fled before their face. 


14 And I saw till that man, who wrote down the | And I saw that man, who wrote the book 
names of the shepherds [and] carried up into according to the command of the Lord, till he 
the presence of the Lord of the sheep [came and opened that book concerning the destruction 
helped it and showed it everything: he had which those twelve last shepherds had wrought, 
come down for the help of that ram]. and showed that they had destroyed much more 

than their predecessors, before the Lord of the 

sheep. 

15 And I saw till the Lord of the sheep came’ _—And I saw till the Lord of the sheep came unto 18 
unto them in wrath, and all who saw Him fled, them and took in His hand the staff of His wrath, 
and they all fell finto His shadowf from before and smote the earth, and the earth clave asunder, 
His face. and all the beasts and all the birds of the heaven 

fell from among those sheep, and were swallowed 

up in the earth and it covered them. 


13-19. As early as 1893 I read v. 19 before v.16, and bracketed 15 as a doublet of 18. Martin suggests that 13-15, 
and 16-18 are doublets. I have gone further as the text shows. Ver. 19 follows 13 (=16),and many emendations are 
still required. 

13. The symbolism becomes looser here, and the ‘ vultures’ and ‘kites’ are no longer restricted to the Graeco- 
Egyptians as in v. 2. See v. 16, and compare the varying reference of boars in lxxxix. 66and 72. So perhaps here the 
vultures and kites are Ammon and Moab. 

tshepherds andt (g omits ‘and’) i.e. Ory corrupt for pany ‘ravens’, probably due to a dittography in 13. 
See wv. 16. 

tthey cried i.e. 3P¥1" (or ypyys) for IPL) (or pyy) ‘ were gathered together’. See v.16 again. The LXX thus 
mistranslates py}? in Judges vi. 34, 35, Xvilil. 22, Jos. viii. 16, 1 Sam. xiv. 20. So I read ‘and I saw till the ravens 
and eagles and vultures and kites were gathered together,’ &c. 

16) AMlt?s “andl? 2. 

ravens and kites » mv. 

came!® eg. ‘brought’ m/z, B. 

all the sheep—in the nom. g, in the accus. mz, 8. 

19. The sword is given to Israel to oppose the hosts of Gog and to avenge itself on its heathen oppressors; in 
xcl. 12 the sword has a higher ethical significance, the judgement of oppression and sin. 

14. The text is corrupt. 

carried up has no object, but requires ‘the book’ as in v. 17. 

opened in v. 17 can hardly be right as the books are opened later in v. 20. In any case the book would be 
carried up first. Cf. Ixxxix. 70, 76. So I read here in v.14 ‘and I saw till that man, who wrote down the names of the 
shepherds, carried up (the book) into the presence of the Lord of the sheep’. 

[came and helped... ram.| An intrusion. There is no intervention needed to save Israel which triumphs over 
Gog in v. 19, This clause, whether added in the Hebrew or the Greek, has a clear reference to the help which Michael 


gave to Judas Maccabaeus. See 2 Macc. xi. 6, 8. Michael is Israel’s patron, as well as the heavenly scribe in these 
chapters. 


helped it + ‘and saved it’ g. 
for the help g¢. Other MSS. ‘a help.’ 

17. till he opened ... destruction: ‘for it was opened by the command of the Lord concerning the destruction’ . 
before the Lord of the sheep mg, 8. ‘formerly. 18. And the Lord of the sheep’ g¢z. 


15, 18. God himself destroys Israel’s last foes like Korah and his followers, Num, xvi. 31 sqq. This is the first act 
of the final judgement ; the remaining acts are quite forensic. 
1§. the Lord a-g. ‘that Lord’ g, p. 


tinto His shadow + i.e. yoy corrupt for wy ‘from among the sheep’. 7 read ‘into the shadow ’. 


18. And I saw till the Lord of the sheep (‘ of the sheep’ > m) came unto them 7, 8. > g through hmt. ‘and 


the Lord of the sheep I saw till He came to those sheep (till the Lord of the sheep came unto them’ /) 7, and the Lord of 
the sheep came unto them’ z. eer 


staff and smote the earth recall Num. xx. 11, while the earth clave asunder recalls Num. xvi. 31-33. 
it covered them. The Ethiopic=ékdduwev én’ atrots—a Hebraism. gis corrupt. > z. 


258 


BOOK OF ENOCH 90. 20-31 


XC. 20-27. Fudgement of the Fallen Angels, the Shepherds, and the Apostates, 


20 And I saw till a throne was erected in the pleasant land, and the Lerd of the sheep sat Himself 
thereon, and the other took the sealed books and opened those books before the Lord of the sheep. 
21 And the Lord called those men the seven first white ones, and commanded that they should bring 
before Him, beginning with the first star which led the way, all the stars whose privy members 
22 were like those of horses, and they brought them all before Him. And He said to that man who 
wrote before Him, being one of those seven white ones, and said unto him: ‘ Take those seventy 
shepherds to whom I delivered the sheep, and who taking them on their own authority slew more 
23 than I commanded them.’ And behold they were all bound, I saw, and they all stood before Him. 
24 And the judgement was held first over the stars, and they were judged and found guilty, and went 
to the place of condemnation, and they were cast into an abyss, full of fire and flaming, and full 
25 of pillars of fire. And those seventy shepherds were judged and found guilty, and they were cast 
26 into that fiery abyss. And I saw at that time how a like abyss was opened in the midst of the earth, 
full of fire, and they brought those blinded sheep, and they were all judged and found guilty and 
27 cast into this fiery abyss, and they burned ; now this abyss was to the right of that house. And 
I saw those sheep burningtand their bones burninef. 


XC. 28-42. The New Jerusalem, the Conversion of the surviving Gentiles, the Resurrection 
of the Righteous, the Messiah. Enoch awakes and weeps. 


28 And I stood up to see till they folded up that old house; and carried off all the pillars, and all 
the beams and ornaments of the house were at the same time folded up with it, and they carried 

29 it off and laid it in a place in the south of the land. And I saw till the Lord of the sheep brought 
a new house greater and loftier than that first, and set it up in the place of the first which had been 
folded up: all its pillars were new, and its ornaments were new and larger than those of the first, 
the old one which He had taken away, and all the sheep were within it. 

30 And I saw all the sheep which had been left, and all the beasts on the earth, and all the birds 
of the heaven, falling down and doing homage to those sheep and making petition to and obeying 

31 them in every thing. And thereafter those three who were clothed in white and had seized me by 
my hand [who had taken me up before], and the hand of that ram also seizing hold of me, they 


20. the pleasant land, i.e. Palestine, cf. Ixxxix. 40 and Dan. xi. 16, 41, 45. God’s throne is set up in Jerusalem 
(vv.28, 29). The books are opened asin Dan. vii.10. See xlvii. 3 (note). The Messiah does not appear till after the 
judgement in |xxxili-xc. 

the other. Text has ‘all’ kuéll6 for kal’G, and so reads ‘and He took all the sealed books’. 

21. mena. >f. 

the seven giw, 8. ‘andseven’m. >g. 5 

seven first white ones. For these seven archangels cf. the Zoroastrian Amshaspands, and Tobit xii. 15; 
Rev. i. 4; iv. 53; vill. 2. See Cheyne, Ovigin of the Psalter pp. 281, 282, &c.; Jewish Encycl. 1. 590. 

bring gm, B. ‘come’ g#u. 

before Him. > gu, d. 

star. See Ixxxvi-Ixxxviil. 

all the stars, &c. So I emended in 1893, with Dillmann. : 

horses + ‘and the first star which went out (g; other MSS. ‘ fell’) first’—a dittograph. 

22-25. The shepherds are judged along with the fallen Watchers. 

22, said unto him mtu, B-hox,d. ‘said unto them’ g¢,hox,0. 

23. g has only ‘ And behold they were all bound before Him’. i ; a 

24. an abyss full of fire. Their final prison, as in x. 6, xvill. 11, xxi. 7-10, liv. 6. Contrast xvill. 12. 

flaming and full of: ‘flaming with’ ¢. ; bie <5 
26. The Apostates are cast into Gehenna, south of Jerusalem (‘to the right’, &c.). 
27. The Apostates suffer in view of the blessed Jerusalem. Cf. Isa. Ixvi. 24, 1 En, xlviii. g (note). 
and their bones. Read ‘yea their very selves’—a Hebrew idiom ; nyy=‘ self’. 5 

28, 29. The old Jerusalem removed and the new set up. Cf. O.T. prophecy : Ezek. xl-xlviii; Isa, liv. 11, 12; Ix; 
Hagg. li. 7-9; Zech. il. 6-13. A New Jerusalem descending from heaven is a familiar idea in Jewish Apocalypses. 
Cf. 4 Ezra vii. 263 xiii. 30; ee a zi caine ZO 

26. up, 7 : “submerge u, P-2py. j AER 

iS eens sheep mete withia it a acatklo,a,o. ‘and (>) the Lord of the sheep was within it MN, 
befhnpux. The omission of ‘and’ in gy suggests that we should read ‘ from which He had sent forth all the sheep’, 
by reading ’abag‘a for ’abag’é and prefixing ’€ to ma’ékala. nie P re 
-"30, Conversion of the surviving Gentiles and their spontaneous submission to lcraelaGimlsaesxiver2 qmlxvire 12, 
19-21, &c. Contrast the later Jewish view, Weber /iid. Theol. 384-387, 395. 

and obeying them m7, 8. >gqyu. 

in every thing, lit. ‘in every word’. 
31. those three, &c. see Ixxxvil. 2, 3. 

that ram, seemingly Elijah, Ixxxix. 52. 


259 5a 


BOOK OF ENOCH 90. 32—92. 1 


32 took me up and set me down in the midst of those sheep}before the judgement took place}. And those 
33 sheep were all white, and their wool was abundant and clean. And all that had been destroyed 
and dispersed, and all the beasts of the field, and all the birds of the heaven, assembled in that house, 
and the Lord of the sheep rejoiced with great joy because they were all good and had returned to 
34 His house. And I saw till they laid down that sword, which had been given to the sheep, and they 
brought it back into the house, and it was sealed before the presence of the Lord, and all the sheep 
35 were invited into that house, but it held them not. And the eyes of them all were opened, and they 
36 saw the good, and there was not one among them that did not see. And I saw that that house was 
large and broad and very full. 
37. And I saw that a white bull was born, with large horns, and all the beasts of the field and all the 
38 birds of the air feared him and made petition to him all the time. And I saw till all their generations 
were transformed, and they all became white bulls; and the first among them became a lamb, and 
that lamb became a great animal and had great black horns on its head; and the Lord of the sheep 
39 rejoiced over it and over all the oxen. And I slept in their midst: and I awoke and saw everything. 
40 This is the vision which I saw while I slept, and I awoke and blessed the Lord of righteousness and 
41 gave Him glory. Then I wept with a great weeping and my tears stayed not till I could no longer 
endure it: when I saw, they flowed on account of what I had seen; for everything shall come and 
be fulfilled, and all the deeds of men in their order were shown to me. On that night I remembered 
the first dream, and because of it I wept and was troubled—because I had seen that vision. 


N 


4 


Section V.~ XCI—CIV (i.e. XCII, XCI. 1-10, 18-19, XCIII. 1-10, XCI. 12-17, KCIV—CIV). 


A Book or EXHORTATION AND PROMISED BLESSING FOR THE RIGHTEOUS 
AND OF MALEDICTION AND WOE FOR THE SINNERS. 


XCII, XCI. 1-10, 18-19. Enoch’s Book of Admonition for his Children. 


92:1 The book written by Enoch—[Enoch indeed wrote this complete doctrine of wisdom, (which is) 
praised of all men and a judge of all the earth] for all my children who shall dwell on the earth. And 
for the future generations who shall observe uprightness and peace. 


before the judgement took place. These words are awkward here. 

32. white=righteous ; abundant and clean wool=righteousness in large measure. Cf. Isa. i. 263 iv. 3; Ix. 21. 

33- The righteous dead will rise to share in the kingdom. Cf. li. 1. Also the dispersion are gathered into it. 
Cf. Mic. iv. 6, 7. 

rejoiced. Cf. Isa. Ixii. 3-5 ; Ixv. 19. 
34. Israel’s sword sealed and preserved as a memorial. 
into the house g. ‘into His house’ mqg/, B. 
were invited ¢. Other MSS. ‘were enclosed’. 
it held them not. Cf. Isa. xlix. 19-21; Zech. ii. 4; x. 1o. 

37. a white bull. The Messiah emerges from the bosom of the community. He is not angelic, but human, yet 
superior to the righteous symbolized by sheep. As human he corresponds to the Messiah of the prophets, not that of 
the Parables (apocalyptic). He has, however, no function and comes after the judgement. The Messiah-hope was 
practically dead while such a leader as Judas lived. Later some revived the O.T. Messiah, the Son of David as in Pss. 
Solomon (70-40 B.C.), others followed the idea of the supernatural Son of Man given us in the Parables (94-70 B.C.). 

38. All the members of the kingdom are transformed, and the Messiah becomes a lamb. Their life is now appar- 
ently unending, and there is a return to the primitive righteousness of Eden, i.e. Adam was a white bull. 

alamb. The text corruptly runs ‘the first became among them (a-u, atkn: ‘among them became’ bcdlox,a,b) 
a word and that word became a great animal’. I no longer consider that the corruption arose in the Greek, i.e. pjua 
for pny a transliteration of DN, but follow Goldschmidt (Das Buch flenoch, p. 91) in tracing it to the Hebrew, i.e. mp 


‘word’ for 12D ‘lamb’. This correction is supported by Test. Joseph xix. 3-9, where the three harts first become three 
lambs, and then with the other nine harts become twelve sheep. Again there in vv. 5-9 the bull-calf (=Judas 
Maccabaeus) becomes a lamb, and yet as a lamb overcomes and destroys the beasts and reptiles who attack him. 


The lamb, or rather the horned lamb, is the nation’s head, indeed its Messianic head. Here the Testaments seem to 
be dependent on 1 Enoch. 


gteata. ‘great and’ B. 
black seems wrong here. 

A0n Ch scan iA, 

XCI-XCIV. I have rearranged these chapters in what was apparently their original order (see above) and treated 
the Apocalypse of Weeks, i.e. xciii. 1-10, xci. 12-17, as an earlier fragment incorporated by the author of xci-civ or 
the editor of the whole book. Beer, however, taking xci. 1-11, 18-19 as the introduction to the Apocalypse of Weeks, 
rearranges the order as xci. I-11, 18-19, XCill, XCi. 12-17, XCii, xCiv. 

XCII. The beginning of the new book composed of xci-civ. The original order was xcii, xci. 1-10, 18-19, xciii. 1-10, xci. 
12-17, xciv, as printed here. ; 

I. The book ... indeed wrote (g). Other MSS. ‘written by Enoch the scribe’. For ‘scribe’ cf. xii. Br Al 

[Enoch indeed ... all the earth]. An interpolation. 


this complete doctrine of wisdom (which is) praised, a-¢. ¢ reads ‘of the’ for ‘this’. 
after ‘wisdom ’. 


a judge of all the earth. For wisdom as God’s assessor see Ixxxiy. 3 (note). 
260 


B-y read ‘is praised’ 


BOOK OF ENOCH 92. 2 —91. 5 


2 Let not your spirit be troubled on account of the times ; 
For the Holy and Great One has appointed days for all things. 


3 And the righteous one shall arise from sleep, 
[Shall arise] and walk in the paths of righteousness, 
And all his path and conversation shall be in eternal goodness and grace. 


4 He will be gracious to the righteous and give him eternal uprightness, 


And He will give him power so that he shall be (endowed) with goodness and righteousness, 
And he shall walk in eternal light. 


5 And sin shall perish in darkness for ever, 
And shall no more be seen from that day for evermore. 


XCI. 1-10, 18-19. Enoch’s Admonition to his Children. 


91: ‘And now, my son Methuselah, call to me all thy brothers 
And gather together to me all the sons of thy mother ; 
For the word calls me, 
And the spirit is poured out upon me, 
That I may show you everything 
That shall befall you for ever.’ 


2 And thereupon Methuselah went and summoned to him all his brothers and assembled his relatives. 
3 And he spake unto all the children of righteousness and said : 


‘Hear, ye sons of Enoch, all the words of your father, 
And hearken aright to the voice of my mouth; 
For I exhort you and say unto you, beloved : 


4 Love uprightness and walk therein. 
And draw not nigh to uprightness with a double heart, 
And associate not with those of a double heart, 


But walk in righteousness, my sons. 
And it shall guide you on good paths, 
And righteousness shall be your companion. 


§ For I know that violence must increase on the earth, 
And a great chastisement be executed on the earth, 
And all unrighteousness come to an end: 


Yea, it shall be cut off from its roots, 
And its whole structure be destroyed. 


2. The times though evil are ordained of God. : 
the Holy and Great One gy, e/,a: ‘the Holy Great One’ mz, B-e4a. See i. 3 (note). 
3. the righteous one. Used collectively as in xci. Io. : f 
the righteous one... sleep, [shall arise]. g reads ‘and wisdom shall arise’. 
4. the righteous ¢u, 8: gg = ‘righteousness’. : 
power. Uprightness and power will no longer be dissevered. 
he shail mz, 8. ‘they shall’ ggz. 
in eternal light. See xxxviii. 4 (note). 
ia (Citspeci Oy Xo). 


XCI. 1. Enoch calls his sons together. Cf. Ixxxi. 5, 6. 
all thy brothers... all the sons of thy mother ~ g. 
all the sons. Their names are given in 2 En. i. 10, lvii. 2. 
3. unto all the children of righteousness gg, y,. ‘to all (> uw, + ‘his children’ ¢) concerning his(> B-eA7y4a40) 
righteousness’ mtu, B-ehny,a,0. 
beloved a-u. ‘my beloved’ 8. 
. love uprightness, &c. Cf. xciv. I. ec. e Fy 
‘ draw ae sigh to uprightness with a double heart. | ChiSin ace Ciaksy xtie2s acalace 
associate not, &c. > gu through hmt. Cf. xciv. 2, 3, Civ. 6. 
in righteousness, my sons. ‘in uprightness and righteousness g. 
good paths. Perhaps a reference to the Two Ways. Cf. v. 19. 
. The Deluge. ; 
; violence must increase. Emended easily from text which = ‘the state of violence shall increase. 
cut off from its roots, cf. vv. 8, I1. 7 
201 


Io 


II 


18 


19 


93 1,2 


BOOK OF. ENOCH 91. 6—98. 2 


And unrighteousness shall again be consummated on the earth, 
And all the deeds of unrighteousness and of violence 
And transgression shall prevail in a twofold degree. 


And when sin and unrighteousness and blasphemy 
And violence in all kinds of deeds increase, 
And apostasy and transgression and uncleanness increase, 


A great chastisement shall come from heaven upon all these, 
And the holy Lord will come forth with wrath and chastisement 
To execute judgement on earth. 


In those days violence shall be cut off from its roots, 
And the roots of unrighteousness together with deceit, 
And they shall be destroyed from under heaven. 


And all the idols of the heathen shall be abandoned, 
And the temples burned with fire, 
And they shall remove them from the whole earth, 


And they (i.e. the heathen) shall be cast into the judgement of fire, 
And shall perish in wrath and in grievous judgement for ever. 


And the righteous shall arise from their sleep, 
And wisdom shall arise and be given unto them. 


[And after that the roots of unrighteousness shall be cut off, and the sinners shall be destroyed 


by the sword ... shall be cut off from the blasphemers in every place, and those who plan 
violence and those who commit blasphemy shall perish by the sword. | 


And now I tell you, my sons, and show you 

The paths of righteousness and the paths of violence. 

Yea, I will show them to you again 

That ye may know what will come to pass. 

And now, hearken unto me, my sons, 

And walk in the paths of righteousness, 

And walk not in the paths of violence ; 
For all who walk in the paths of unrighteousness shall perish for ever.’ 


XCIII, XCI. 12-17. The Apocalypse of Weeks. 
And after that Enoch both tgavet and began to recount from the books. And Enoch said: 


7, 8. This fresh development of wickedness will call forth the final judgement. 
7. in alla-g. ‘and all’ g,8. 

and transgression > 27. 

from heaven > g. 

And > gmt. 

Lord + ‘upon earth’ g. 
8. And the roots mzu,8. >gy. Cf. vv. 5, 11. 

And (> 1, dc/hp) they shall be destroyed mtu, 8. > gy. 

g. The absolute rejection of the heathen seems to be taught here, the prevailing, though not the universal, belief of 
later Judaism. Contrast v. 14. 

1o. the righteous. The singular used collectively, as in xcii. 3. In xci-civ only the righteous attain to the 
Resurrection. See li. 1 (note). 

their sleep emg,x. ‘his sleep’ tu, B-x. 
wisdom. See xlii. 1, 2 (note). 

11. This verse is an interpolation by the final editor, added to introduce vv. 12-17, which originally followed xciii. 
I-Io. Judgement has already been consummated in xci. 7-9, and the resurrection attained xci. Io. Verse 11 reverts 
to the period of the sword-—which precedes the Resurrection (KCRG Excl 12 sNeiverams) 

12-17. I read these verses after xciii. 14. 

18. will show m,8. ‘have shown’ ggt. >. 

19. hearken unto me gfw. ‘hearken’ 8. > g. 

And 2 > 7. 
paths of righteousness ... paths of violence. For ‘paths’ cf. xciv. 1, 2,4. This is one of the earliest. non- 
canonical references to the Two Ways. See Test. Ash. i. 3,5; 2 En. xxx. 15 (note). 


XCIII. 1-10. An account of the great events of the world during the first seven weeks of its history, which are 
already past. The three last weeks of xci. 12-17 belong to the future. This Apocalypse of weeks refers to the 
Dream-visions, Ixxxiii-xc, but not being by the same author is irreconcilable with them. The ten weeks are not 
definite and equal periods, but of varying length, each marked, especially towards its close, by some great event, e.g. 

262 ; 


Oo 


od) } 


BOOK OF ENOCH 93. 2-8 


‘ Concerning the children of righteousness and concerning the elect of the world, 
And concerning the plant of uprightness, I will speak these things, 
Yea, I Enoch will declare (them) unto you, my sons: 


According to that which appeared to me in the heavenly vision, 
And which I have known through the word of the holy angels, 
And have learnt from the heavenly tablets.’ 


And Enoch began to recount from the books and said: 
‘I was born the seventh in the first week, 
While judgement and righteousness still endured. 


And after me there shall arise in the second week great wickedness, 
And deceit shall have sprung up ; 


And in it there shall be the first end. 


And in it a man shall be saved; 
And after it is ended unrighteousness shall grow up, 
And a law shall be made for the sinners. 4 


And after that in the third week at its close 
A man shall be elected as the plant of righteous judgement, 
And his posterity shall become the plant of righteousness for evermore. 


And after that in the fourth week, at its close, 
Visions of the holy and righteous shall be seen, 
And a law for all generations and an enclosure shall be made for them. 


And after that in the fifth week, at its close, 
The house of glory and dominion shall be built for ever. 


And after that in the sixth week all who live in it shall be blinded," 
And the hearts of all of them shall godlessly forsake wisdom. 


And in it a man shall ascend ; 
And at its close the house of dominion shall be burnt with fire, 
And the whole race of the chosen root shall be dispersed. 


the first by Enoch’s birth, the third by Abraham’s call, the seventh by the publication of Enoch’s writings. In the 
eighth the Messianic kingdom is established and lasts to the close of the tenth week. The final judgement in xci, 15 
is held at the close of the Messianic kingdom. 
I. tgavet a-mt. ‘was’ 7,8. I cannot explain this corruption. 
and began. >a-g. 
the books. Cf. xxxiii. 3, 4, xl. 8, Ixxiv. 2, Ixxxi. I, 2. 
2. These disclosures are for the children of righteousness. Cf. xcil. I. 
the elect of the world. Here only in Enoch. 
the plant of uprightness. See x. 16 (note). _ 
uprightness a-g. ‘righteousness’ ( + ‘and uprightness’ f) g, B. 
will declare gy, 8. ‘have declared’ su. 
heavenly tablets. See xlvii. 3 (note). 
3. Enoch > mi. 
seventh in the first week. Cf. ‘seventh from Adam’, Jude 14; also Gen. v. 24 where he is the seventh of the 
patriarchs. This does not imply that each week = exactly seven generations, as the sixth and seventh must = fourteen 
or more. me 
still endured. i.e. goodness still prevailed. Or we may render ‘were still held back’, i.e. the Deluge was not yet. 
4. great wickedness. This growth of wickedness should belong to Jared’s days as in vi. 6 and cvi. 13. The 
Deluge and the covenant with Noah (a law for the sinners) occur in this week. ; ’ ; 
a law shall be made g, z. Also gu read ‘law’ in the nom., cf. v. 6. 74, 8-m read “ He will make a law’. 
5. Abraham and his seed are chosen to reveal God’s righteous judgements. Cr x, 16 (note) and xciil. 2, 10. 
his posterity shall become. Text reads ‘after him (or ‘it’) it shall come’ (or ‘ become’). 
6. Visions. Divine manifestations in favour of Israel in Egypt. hie f 
Visions of the holy and righteous mg, 8. uw omits ‘and righteous’. g reads ‘ visions . . . righteousness . 7= 
‘holy and righteous visions’. 
a law, given on Slee binding ee os time. Cf. xcix. 2. 
re, i.e. Palestine. 5 Oma ee oly 
He aie tagne oil stand for ever, though one form of it may give place to another. In xci-civ proper, there appears 
to be no Temple after the final judgement. The risen righteous enjoy a purely spiritual existence like the angels. 
: . and possibly Pss. Sol. nN 
Be dened cco Elijah (Ixxxix. 52), the Temple’s fall and the Captivity. 
chosen root 7,8. ‘root of might’ gf. 


2.63 


BOOK OF ENOCH 98. 9—91. 15 


9 And after that in the seventh week shall an apostate generation arise, 
And many shall be its deeds, 
And all its deeds shall be apostate. 


to And at its close shall be elected 
The elect righteous of the eternal plant of righteousness, 
To receive sevenfold instruction concerning all His creation. : 
11 [For who is there of all the children of men that is able to hear the voice of the Holy One without 
being troubled? And who can think His thoughts? and who is there that can behold all the works 
12 of heaven? And how should there be one who could behold the heaven, and who is there that could 
understand the things of heaven and see a soul or a spirit and could tell thereof, or ascend and see 
13 all their ends and think them or do like them? And who is there of all men that could know what 
is the breadth and the length of the earth, and to whom has been shown the measure of all of them ? 
14 Or is there any one who could discern the length of the heaven and how great is its height, and upon 
what it is founded, and how great is the number of the stars, and where all the luminaries rest ?] 


XCI. 12-17. The Last Three Weeks. 


Ql iz And after that there shall be Another, the eighth week, that of righteousness, 
And a sword shall be given to it that a righteous judgement may be executed on the oppressors, 
And sinners shall be delivered into the hands of the righteous. 


13 And at its close they shall acquire houses through their righteousness, 
And a house shall be built for the Great King in glory for evermore, 
144 And all mankind shall look to the path of uprightness. 


144 And after that, in the ninth week, the righteous judgement shall be revealed to the whole world, 
6 And all the works of the godless shall vanish from all the earth, 
¢ And the world shall be written down for destruction. 


15 And after this, in the tenth week in the seventh part, 
There shall be the great eternal judgement, 
In which He will execute vengeance amongst the angels. 


g. From the captivity to the author’s time an apostate period. Cf. Ixxxix. 73-75. 
apostate 1° > em. 
to. The writer’s own disclosures are to be made known at the end of the seventh week. For the extravagant claims 
he makes cf. Sir. xxiv. 28-32. 
shall be elected a, ac/hikn : ‘shall be recompensed’ ddlopxy,a,0. 
The elect righteous ¢, abefhikx. Cf. i. 1 Greek Version. ¢ supports this g dloy,a,o read ‘the elect of righteous- 
ness’, mz ‘the righteous’. wz ‘the elect’. These alone will receive the revelations. — Cf. c. 6; Civ tes 13: 


XCIII. 11-14. These verses are quite out of place in their present context, and suit rather the Book of the Heavenly 
Luminaries Ixxii-Ixxix, Ixxxii; but are foreign to the whole tone of this book, xci-civ. 
11. the voice of the Holy One, i.e. the thunder. Cf. Job xxxvii. 4, Gar leoe Seah e, 
think His thoughts. Cf. Job v. 9, ix. 10, xxxviii. 333 Psoxl. 5, emus Eccles. xin 5. 
12. a soul emg, bxy: ‘His breath’ ¢, B-dxy. 
a Spirit mu, bxy (gy corrupt) : ‘ His spirit’ B-dxy. 
Enoch’s journey through heaven and Hades is referred to. 
their ends, i.e. of the things of heaven. But the text may be corrupt for ‘their causes’. 
13. Not given in Enoch. Cf. Job xxxviii. 4, 5. 
14. Not given in Enoch. Jer. xxxi. 37; Job xi. 8, 
founded. Cf. xviii. 2, 3. 


XCI. 12-17. These verses giving an account of the last three weeks of the world’s history are here restored to their 
place after xciii. I-10, the account of the first seven weeks, 

12. The eighth week sees the setting up of the Messianic kingdom, and the first act of the final judgement—the 
period of the sword (xc. 19), when the wicked are given into the hand of the righteous. Cf. xcv. 7, xcvi. I, xcviii. D2. 
XCix. 4, 6, also xxxvili. 5. 

13. After strife will follow rest and quiet possession of the earth. Cf. Isa. Ix. 21, 22, Ixv. 20-23. 

: Seopa ... for the Great King. The temple, and also Jerusalem. g reads ‘the house of the Great King shal} 
e built’. 

14. This verse may refer to the conversion of the Gentiles, as 1, 2-5, xc. 30, 33, 35, cf. 14%. Or it may refer to the 
open punishment by God of the wicked. Cf. 14° : 

the works of the godless shall vanish. Cf. x. LO 202s 

_ the world... for destruction m, 8: ‘ He shall write down (i.e. decree) the destruction of the world’ ¢: ‘ He shall 
ee down the world for destruction’ ¢: > z: g =a corruption of g (?). This is to take place in the end of the tenth 
week, 

15. There shall be... angels a-¢, The structure of the stanza supports this text. 7¢,8-zz insert a gloss and read 
‘ There shall be the eternal judgement. And it shall be executed on the watchers of the eternal heaven, The great 
(judgement) in which He will execute vengeance among the angels.’ 


264 


16 


i} 


94: 


BOOK OF ENOCH 91. 16—94. 7 


And the first heaven shall depart and pass away, 
And a new heaven shall appear, 


And all the powers of the heavens shall give sevenfold light. 


And after that there will be many weeks without number for ever, 
And all shall be in goodness and righteousness, 
And sin shall no more be mentioned for ever. 


XCIV. 1-5. Admonitions to the Righteous. 


And now I say unto you, my sons, love righteousness and walk therein ; 
For the paths of righteousness are worthy of acceptation, 


But the paths of unrighteousness shall suddenly be destroyed and vanish. 


And to certain men of a generation shall the paths of violence and of death be revealed, 
And they shall hold themselves afar from them, 
And shall not follow them. 


And now I say unto you the righteous : 
Walk not in the paths of wickedness, nor in the paths of death, 
And draw not nigh to them, lest ye be destroyed. 


But seek and choose for yourselves righteousness and an elect life, 
And walk in the paths of peace, 


And ye shall live and prosper. 


And hold fast my words in the thoughts of your hearts, 
And suffer them not to be effaced from your hearts ; 


For I know that sinners will tempt men to evilly-entreat wisdom, 
So that no place may be found for her, 
And no manner of temptation may minish. 


XCIV. 6-11. Woes for the Sinners. 


Woe to those who build unrighteousness and oppression 
And lay deceit as a foundation ; 

For they shall be suddenly overthrown, 

And they shall have no peace. 


Woe to those who build their houses with sin ; 


For from all their foundations shall they be overthrown, 
And by the sword shall they fall. 
[And those who acquire gold and silver in judgement suddenly shall perish.] 


16. anew heaven (cf. Isa. Ixv. 17, Ixvi. 22; Ps. cil. 26), but no new earth. Cf. civ. 2 (note). For a new creation, 


cf. xlv. 4, lxxii. I (note). 


sevenfold. Isa. xxx. 26, lx. 19, 20. 
light. sg¢, B-ahk add ‘for ever’. 

17. End of Apocalypse of Weeks. 
And all g. > other MSS. 


XCIV. Introduces the practical part of this section. 

1. love righteousness. Cf. xci. 3. ; ; ; 
worthy of acceptation /, 8 (cf. 1 Tim. 1. 15): ‘worthy and acceptable’ gig : worthy ’ z. 
paths of unrighteousness... destroyed. Cf. Ps. i.6. On the ‘Two Ways’ see xci. 19 (note). 

2. The revelations through Moses and the Prophets. 
paths...ofdeath. Cf. Prov. xiv. 12; Jer. xxi. 8. 

3. paths gmt, bx: ‘path’ B-dx. 
wickedness + ‘and of violence’ 8. 
draw not nigh. Cf. xci. 4, civ. 6. : : 

4. But seek. reads ‘as those who seek evil’ and connects with preceding verse. 

And ye shall gmg. ‘that ye may’ /, B. Fr : ‘ 

5. toevilly-entreat. Text = ‘to make... evil’ =*kakoro.ew. 
no place. Cf. xlii. 1. su = 

6-10. Woes, cf. Isa. v. 8-25 ; Matt. xxili. 13-33, &c. 

6. build. Cf. xci. 5 (‘structure’). ‘ ; x fe 
have no peace. Cf. xcviil. ee XCIX. 13, Ci. 3, oe us Decne 4 (note). 

i i i in: from Jer. xxil. 13. 5 > MCIXe 133 : , 

‘ ane. ie aie ten “The es of ¢ oie comes in the next verse, and this clause spoils the stanza here. 

265 


Io 


II 


95: 


BOOK OF ENOCH 94. 8—95. 7 


Woe to you, ye rich, for ye have trusted in your riches, 
And from your riches shall ye depart, ; 
Because ye have not remembered the Most High in the days of your riches. 


Ye have committed blasphemy and unrighteousness, 
And have become ready for the day of slaughter, 
And the day of darkness and the day of the great judgement. 


Thus I speak and declare unto you: 

He who hath created you will overthrow you, 
And for your fall there shall be no compassion, 
And your Creator will rejoice at your destruction, 


And your righteous ones in those days shall be 
A reproach to the sinners and the godless. 


XCV. Enoch’s Grief: fresh Woes against the Sinners. 


Oh that mine eyes were [a cloud of] waters 
That I might weep over you, 

And pour down my tears as a cloud fof waters : 
That so I might rest from my trouble of heart ! 


+Who has permitted you to practise reproaches and wickedness 
And so judgement shall overtake you, sinners. } 


Fear not the sinners, ye righteous ; 
For again will the Lord deliver them into your hands, 
That ye may execute judgement upon them according to your desires. 


Woe to you who fulminate anathemas which cannot be reversed : 
Healing shall therefore be far from you because of your sins. 


Woe to you who requite your neighbour with evil ; 
For ye shall be requited according to your works. 


Woe to you, lying witnesses, 
And to those who weigh out injustice, 
For suddenly shall ye perish. 


Woe to you, sinners, for ye persecute the righteous ; 
For ye shall be delivered up and persecuted because of injustice, 
And heavy shall its yoke be upon you. 


9. day of slaughter, &c. See xlv. 2 (note). Cf. James v. 1-5. 
And the day ofdarkness. > g, a. 
1o. your Creator will rejoice, &c. Contrast Ezek. xviii. 23, 32, xxxiii. 11, and cf. Pss, ii. 3. 4; xxxvii. 12 13% 
1 En. Ixxxix. 58 and xcvii. 2. sate Tag 
11. This stanza is imperfect. 


XCV. 1. Oh that, &c. From Jer. ix. 1. Quoted by 2 Bar. xxxv. 2. 
[a cloud of] i.e. txy a doublet for sy ‘my eyes’ or a corruption of py ‘a spring’. 
cloud tof waterst. Read ‘cloud (pours) rain’, i.e. p>} ‘rainstorm’ for py ‘ waters’. 
__ 2. }Who has permitted you g, 8 (=p32n) 19). But a-g read, and possibly rightly, ‘Oh that ye were’ (=p59n) ‘D). 
Then, either omitting with g ‘to practise’, or emending it to ‘become’, and adopting the subjunctive in the next 
line with 8, and not the indicative in a, we have: 
Oh that ye were become a reproach and an evil, 
; ; And that so judgement might overtake you, sinners. 
3. again, as in the first Maccabean victories. Though now even the Maccabean princes are Sadducees, the righteous 
will again prevail. : ff 
into your hands. Cf. xci. 12. 
4. Cf. viii. 3. Magical practices and incantations are referred to, but the expression is strange. 
which cannot be reversed m. For ‘cannot’ gg reads ‘can’: ‘which you cannot reverse’ (in (GY 
5. Tequite... with evil. Cf. Prov. xx. 22, xxiv. 29; Rom. xii. 17. 
requited according to your works. Cf.c. 7; Judges i. 7. 
- ye Shall be delivered up g. ‘Ye shall deliver up’ other MSS. 
and persecuted a—g/, 8-a. ‘and shall persecute’ 97, a. 
its yoke gg. ‘their yoke’ ¢, 8. 
2.66 


N 


96: 


97: 


BOOK OF ENOCH 96. :—97. 2 


XCVI. Grounds of Hopefulness for the Righteous: Woes for the Wicked. 


Be hopeful, ye righteous ; for suddenly shall the sinners peri 
; i perish before you 
And ye shall have lordship over them according to your desires. ae 


[And in the day of the tribulation of the sinners, 

Your children shall mount and rise as eagles, 

And higher than the vultures will be your nest, 

And ye shall ascend and enter the crevices of the earth, 

And the clefts of the rock for ever as coneys before the unrighteous, 
And the sirens shall sigh because of you—and weep.| 


Wherefore fear not, ye that have suffered ; 

For healing shall be your portion, 

And a bright light shall enlighten you, 

And the voice of rest ye shall hear from heaven. 


Woe unto you, ye sinners, for your riches make you appear like the righteous, 
But your hearts convict you of being sinners, 


And this fact shall be a testimony against you for a memorial of (your) evil deeds. 


Woe to you who devour the finest of the wheat, 
And drink wine in large bowls, 


And tread under foot the lowly with your might. 


Woe to you who drink water from every fountain, 
For suddenly shall ye be consumed and wither away, 
Because ye have forsaken the fountain of life. 


Woe to you who work unrighteousness 
And deceit and blasphemy : 

It shall be a memorial against you for evil. 
Woe to you, ye mighty, 

Who with might oppress the righteous ; 
For the day of your destruction is coming. 


In those days many and good days shall come to the righteous—in the day of your judgement. 
XCVII. The Evils in Store for Sinners and the Possessors of Unrighteous Wealth. 


Believe, ye righteous, that the sinners will become a shame 

And perish in the day of unrighteousness. 

Be it known unto you (ye sinners) that the Most High is mindful of your destruction, 
And the angels of heaven rejoice over your destruction. 


XCVI. The righteous are to hope for the coming Messianic kingdom. 
I~ lordship. - Cf. xci. 12-(note), xcv. 3, 7, XCviil. 12. . 
2. Interpolation. The wicked will hide themselves, not the righteous, in the coming time; xcvil. 3, c. 4, cil. I, 
civ. 5. But the first three lines may be original. 
tribulation of the sinners. Is it suffered or caused by the sinners? 
mount and rise. From Isa. xl. 31. 
higher than the vultures. Cf. Jer. xlix. 16. ; : 
enter the crevices, &c. Isa. ii. 10, 19, 21, from the presence of the Lord, not as here ‘before the unrighteous 
—a clumsy insertion. 
the sirens: ‘as the sirens’ g/, 8. These may be satyrs or sirens—by the same word the Eth. version renders 
cerpnves in Isa, xiii. 21, Jer. xxvii. (1.) 39. 
3. a bright light. See xxxviii. 4 (note). ‘ phd 
4. Prosperity was a mark of righteousness, in the O.T. doctrine of retribution. 
5. The finest of the wheat. Ps. Ixxxi. 16, cxlvil. 14. ye ; 
wine in large bowls, i.e. not in ordinary wine-cups. Cf. the flagons of the magnates in Samaria, Amos vi. 6. 
The text is corrupt = ‘the strength of the root of the fountain’ = MY "2" M2 which I emend to js ‘p23 = the phrase 
in Amos. ‘ 
6. The self-indulgent life will fail, for want of the fountain of true life. Cf. Jer. il. 13; Ps. xxxvi. 9. 
drink water from every fountain. Text corruptly reads ny-23 for y-ban. 
shall ye be consumed mg. ‘shall ye be requited and consumed’ g, 8. > u (defective). 
forsaken. Cf. Jer. il. 13. 


AO PA KCIN See XC1Vi Ox. Oe ee. : ’ 
8. many and good days: a temporary Messianic kingdom, in which the righteous then alive will share. 


XCVII. Woes of the wicked. F ; 
1. the day of unrighteousness, i.e. the judgement day. See xlv. 2 (note). 
2. angels... rejoice, &c. Cf. xciv. 10 and contrast Luke xv. Io. angels of heaven a-7. ‘angels’ B-7. 


267 


9° 


Io 


98 : 


BOOK OF ENOCH 97. 3—98. 2 


What will ye do, ye sinners, 
And whither will ye flee on that day of judgement, 
When ye hear the voice of the prayer of the righteous ? 


Yea, ye shall fare like unto them, 
Against whom this word shall be a testimony : 
“Ye have been companions of sinners.,”’ 


And in those days the prayer of the righteous shall reach unto the Lord, 

And for you the days of your judgement shall come. 

And all the words of your unrighteousness shall be read out before the Great Holy One, 
And your faces shall be covered with shame, 

And He will reject every work which is grounded on unrighteousness. 


Woe to you, ye sinners, who live on the mid ocean and on the dry land, 
Whose remembrance is evil against you. 


Woe to you who acquire silver and gold in unrighteousness and say : 
‘““ We have become rich with riches and have possessions ; 
And have acquired everything we have desired. 


And now let us do what we purposed : 

For we have gathered silver, 

And many are the husbandmen in our houses.” 
And our granaries are (brim) full as with water, 
Yea and like water your lies shall flow away ; 
For your riches shall not abide 

But speedily ascend from you ; 


For ye have acquired it all in unrighteousness, 
And ye shall be given over to a great curse. 


XCVIII. Self-indulgence of Sinners: Sin originated by Man: all Sin recorded in Heaven - 
Woes for the Sinners. 


And now I swear unto you, to the wise and to the foolish, 
For ye shall have manifold experiences on the earth. 


For ye men shall put on more adornments than a woman, 

And coloured garments more than a virgin: 

In royalty and in grandeur and in power, 

And in silver and in gold and in purple, 

And in splendour and in food they shall be poured out as water. 


3. prayer of the righteous. Cf. v. 5, and xlvii, 2, xcvii. 3, xcix. 3, 16, civ. 3, and Rev. vi. 10. 
4. shall fare ggu. mt, 8 read ‘shall not fare’. 
Against whom g. ‘for against you’ 4. ‘ye against whom’ sg, 8. 
this word. Cf. xcvi. 4. Note the Pharisaic idea of separateness from the unrighteous. 
5. righteous a-g, B-afhikpu. ‘holy’ g, afhikpu. 
6. all the words of gz, B-a. ‘all’ g. 
shall be read out, from the books. See xlvii. 3 (note). Cf. Matt. xii. 36. 
Great Holy One, g,2mg, 7. ‘Great and Holy One’ ¢w, B-m,a. See i. 3 (note), xcii. 2 (note). 
covered with shame. Cf. xlvi. 6, lxii. 10, Ixili. 11. 
He will reject every work gg¢. ‘every work shall be rejected’ zz, 8. 
7- Temembrance. Cf. c. 10, II, civ. 8. 
8. Cf. xciv. 7, 8 (note); also Sir. xi. 19; Luke xii. 19. 
with riches mgt, 8. > gu. 
g. And many g,g, ,d. ‘many’ gf, B-,0. 
as with water ,g. Other MSS. prefix ‘and’. Note the rejoinder in 10%. 
1o. A rejoinder to the boasting of the sinners. 
your riches z. ‘riches with you’ a-z, B. 
riches shall... ascend, &c. Prov. xxiii. 5. 
all gmt, B-n. > 12£GU. 


XCVIII. A new division begins, xcviii-cii. 3, a denunciation of the sinners’ errors in life and doctrine. Their 


coming judgement. 


1. Tswear. Here first, but frequently after, in verses 4, 6, xcix. 6, &c. 
wise and ... foolish. xcviii-cii. 3 to the foolish ; cii. 4-civ to the wise. 
to the foolish 7, 8: ‘not to the foolish’ y, ggt. 
2. Their personality will be lost in their possessions, as water is lost in the earth. Cf. Ps. xxii. 14 for the phrase. 
268 


BOOK OF ENOCH 98. 3-16 


3 Therefore they shall be wanting in doctrine and wisdom 
And they shall perish thereby together with their possessions : 
And with all their glory and their splendour, 
And in shame and in slaughter and in great destitution, 
: Their spirits shall be cast into the furnace of fire. 


4 Ihave sworn unto you, ye sinners, as a mountain has not become a slave 
And a hill does not become the handmaid of a woman, 
Even so sin has not been sent upon the earth, 

But man of himself has created it, 
And under a great curse shall they fall who commit it. 


5 And barrenness has not been given to the woman, 
But on account of the deeds of her own hands she dies without children. 


6 Ihave sworn unto you, ye sinners, by the Holy Great One, 
That all your evil deeds are revealed in the heavens, 


' And that none of your deeds of oppression are covered and hidden, 


7 And do not think in your spirit nor say in your heart that ye do not know and that ye do not see 
8 that every sin is every day recorded in heaven in the presence of the Most High. From henceforth 


ye know that all your oppression wherewith ye oppress is written down every day till the day of 
your judgement. 


9 Woe to you, ye fools, for through your folly shall ye perish: and ye transgress against the wise, 
1o and so good hap shall not be your portion. And now, know ye that ye are prepared for the day 
of destruction : wherefore do not hope to live, ye sinners, but ye shall depart and die; for ye know 


no ransom; for ye are prepared for the day of the great judgement, for the day of tribulation and 

great shame for your spirits. 
11 Woe to you, ye obstinate of heart, who work wickedness and eat blood : 

Whence have ye good things to eat and to drink and to be filled ? From all the good things which 

the Lord the Most High has placed in abundance on the earth; therefore ye shall have no peace. 
12 Woe to you who love the deeds of unrighteousness: wherefore do ye hope for good hap unto 

yourselves? know that ye shall be delivered into the hands of the righteous, and they shall cut 
13 off your necks and slay you, and have no mercy upon you. Woe to you who rejoice in the tribulation 
14 of the righteous; for no grave shall be dug for you. Woe to you who set at nought the words of 
15 the righteous; for ye shall have no hope of life. Woe to you who write down lying and godless 

words; for they write down their lies that men may hear them and act godlessly towards (their) 
16 neighbour. Therefore they shall have no peace but die a sudden death. 


. Their spirits: cf. verse 10, cili. 8. As incorporeal spirits the wicked are cast into the final place of punishment. 
into the furnace of fire 219, 8. > mgtu. 
4. Sin is of man’s own devising. See Ixix. 11 (note). Contrast c. 4. It is not original or unavoidable, but 
voluntary, and therefore punished. Cf. 2 Baruch xviii. 2, liv. 15. 
mountain, 77 is masc. in Heb. while 7y3)=‘ hill’ is feminine. 
5. The instance is an illustration of the general law. Cf. Hos. ix. 14. 
barrenness /u, B-2': ‘simulation’, or ‘excuse’ 912779, 7°. 
6-8. God does concern Himself with men’s deeds. Cf. Job xxii. 13; Ps, Ixxiii, 11. 
6. Holy Great One, gg/u. ‘Holy and Great One’,gm, 8. 
7. recorded. Cf. xcvil. 6, xcvill. 8, c. 10, civ. 7, 8. 
8. From henceforth, after the publication of Enoch’s book. 
g. transgress against gig: ‘know not’ m7: ‘tend not’ ¢@: ‘hearken not to’ Z, B. 
10. prepared. xciv. 9. 
no ransom. Ps. xlix. 7, 8, 9. 
for yeig, 8B: ‘and ye’g: ‘ye’ mgt. 
day of the great judgement. See xlv. 2 (note). 
for your spirits, see verse 3. 
II. obstinate of heart: c. 8. ¥ : 
who work: 2nd sing. in /, 8: 3rd sing. in g,gmg. But only has ‘eat’ in 2nd sing. 
eat blood. Cf. vii. 5; Jubilees vii. 28-32, xxi. 6; Acts xv. 29. 
the Lord a-m. ‘our Lord’ m, B. 
no peace. See v. 4 (note), also v. 16 below. 
12. into the hands of the righteous. See xci. 12 (note). 
13. No burial. Cf. Jer. viii. 2, xxii. 19. 
shall be dug for you, ‘ ot yours shall be seen’ gy. 
: of life, &c. Cf. xcvill. Io. ; : 
SS Ch hee Note the literary strife here revealed between Hellenist and Pharisee. a wat 
act godlessly towards ggtu. 8 inserts a negative and this necessitates a change of rendering, ‘not forget’. 
neighbour a. ‘folly’ 8. . : 
16. asudden death. Cf. xciv. 1, 6,7, xcv. GAXGVI. 10: 


269 


BOOK: OF ENOCH? 99s t-16 


XCIX. Woes pronounced on the Godless, the Lawbreakers: evil Plight of Sinners in the Last Days : 
further Woes. 


991 Woe to you who work godlessness, 
And glory in lying and extol them; 
Ye shall perish, and no happy life shall be yours, 


2 Woe to them who pervert the words of uprightness, 
And transgress the eternal law, 
And transform themselves into what they were not [into sinners] : 
They shall be trodden under foot upon the earth. 


3 In those days make ready, ye righteous, to raise your prayers as a memorial, 
And place them as a testimony before the angels, ’ 
That they may place the sin of the sinners for a memorial before the Most High. 


4 In those days the nations shall be stirred up, ; 
And the families of the nations shall arise on the day of destruction. 


5 And in those days the destitute shall go forth and carry off their children, 
And they shall abandon them, so that their children shall perish through them: 
Yea, they shall abandon their children (that are still) sucklings, and not return to them, 
And shall have no pity on their beloved ones. 


6,7 And again I swear to you, ye sinners, that sin is prepared for a day of unceasing bloodshed. And 
they who worship stones, and grave images of gold and silver and wood (and stone) and clay, and 
those who worship impure spirits and demons, and all kinds of idols not according to knowledge, 
shall get no manner of help from them. 


8 And they shall become godless by reason of the folly of their hearts, 
And their eyes shall be blinded through the fear of their hearts 
And through visions in their dreams. 


9 Through these they shall become godless and fearful ; 
For they shall have wrought all their work in a lie, 
And shall have worshipped a stone: 

Therefore in an instant shall they perish. 


to But in those days blessed are all they who accept the words of wisdom, and understand them, 
And observe the paths of the Most High, and walk in the path of His righteousness, 
And become not godless with the godless ; 
For they shall be saved. 


XCIX. 1. Here the admirers of Hellenistic literature are denounced. Cf. xciv. 5, xcviii. 15. 
to youa-,g. ‘tothem’,g,8. MSS. constantly confuses 2nd and 3rd person. 
2. to them ¢,gm. ‘to you’ gfi, B. 
the eternal law, i.e. of Moses. Cf. v. 4, xcix. 14. 
transform themselves, adopt Gentile customs, become apostates, and possibly undergo the operation mentioned 
in Ass. Mos. viii. 3. 
[into sinners]. A gloss. 
3. your prayers. See xcvii. 3 (note). 
place them ... before the angels. For angelic mediation cf. ix. 2-11, and in O.T. Job v.1; Zech.i. 12; in N.T. 
only Rev. viii. 3, 4. See too my notes in T. Levi iii. 5; T. Dan vi. 2. 
place them a. ‘ye have placed them’ £. 
_ the Most High, in all sections of the book ; ix. 3, x. 1, xlvi. 7, Ix. 1, 22, Ixii. 7, Ixxvii. 1, xciv. 8, xcvii. 2, xcviii. Fpsiiite 
CHK 35 LO; Cilio: 
4. Wars, tumults, and the period of the sword. Cf. xc. 19, &c. 
shall be 7,8. ‘are’ a-,g¢. 
shall arise 4, 8. ‘shall raise up’ a-m. 
5. abandon them a. ‘abandon their children’ p. 
6—C. 6. Denunciation of idolatry. 
day of unceasing bloodshed. See xci. 12 (note), xlv. 2 (note). Quoted by Tertullian De /dol.iv. See my 
Comm. on 1 En. zz Joc. 
7. (and stone) inserted from Tertullian. 
impure 8. ‘evil’ a. 
demons. Cf. xvi. I, xix. 1, also Rev. ix. 20. - 
not according to knowledge, gg¢(, gu), Tert.: ‘in idols’ temples’ B. 
8. Idolaters go from bad to worse. Cf. Wisdom xiv. 12, 27; Rom. i. 21. 
10. Salvation is for those who accept the true wisdom. 
of His righteousness a-u. ‘of righteousness’ 2, 8. 


2470 


II 


I2 


+3 


14 


15 


16 


100: 





POO OT PNOCH 99% 112100, 4 


Woe to you who spread evil to your neighbours ; 
For you shall be slain in Sheol. 


Woe to you who make deceitful and false measures, 
And (to them) who cause bitterness on the earth ; 
For they shall thereby be utterly consumed. 


Woe to you who build your houses through the grievous toil of others, 
And all their building materials are the bricks and stones of sin; 
I tell you ye shall have no peace. 


Woe to them who reject the measure and eternal heritage of their fathers 
And whose souls follow after idols ; 
For they shall have no rest. 


Woe to them who work unrighteousness and help oppression, 
And slay their neighbours until the day of the great judgement. 


For He shall cast down your glory, 

And bring affliction on your hearts, 

And shall arouse His fierce indignation 

And destroy you all with the sword ; 

And all the holy and righteous shall remember your sins. 


C. The Sinners destroy each other: Fudgement of the Fallen Angels: the Safety of the Righteous : 
further Woes for the Sinners. 


And in those days in one place the fathers together with their sons shall be smitten 
And brothers one with another shall fall in death 
Till the streams flow with their blood. 


For a man shall not withhold his hand from slaying his sons and his sons’ sons, 
And the sinner shall not withhold his hand from his honoured brother : 
From dawn till sunset they shall slay one another. 


And the horse shall walk up to the breast in the blood of sinners, 
And the chariot shall be submerged to its height. 


In those days the angels shall descend into the secret places 

And gather together into one place all those who brought down sin, 
And the Most High will arise on that day of judgement 

To execute great judgement amongst sinners. 


11. slain in Sheol. Cf. cviii. 3—the extreme penalty of sin. Condemnation to Sheol is less severe than the slaying 
of the soul. Cf. xxii. 13. Sheol is here the eternal place of punishment. See Ixxiii. Io (note). 
12. measures a-mmz,7z'. ‘foundations’ 7, 6-2. 
cause bitterness #/, 8. ‘know’ gg. tempt’ 1g. ; i 
13. build... toil of others. Cf. Jer. xxii. 13; also 1 En, xciv. 7, xcvii. 8 
14. the measure and eternal heritage, the Mosaic law. Cf. v. 2. ; 
whose souls follow after ,g7. ‘and follow after the souls of’ gug?. ‘who cause their souls to follow after’ ). 
have no rest. Cf. the sufferings of the righteous, ciii. 13 ; also “no peace YXCIV. Os 
15. to them ,gw, 8. ‘to you’ gmgt. : ry 
day of the great judgement. See xciv. 9, xcvill. Lo, also xlv. 2 (note). 
16. His fierce indignation. ,¢8 read ‘the spirit of His indignation’ = }5N ny corrupt for IBN jn: gage read 
‘His indignation and His spirit’. ‘His spirit’ is nom. in géZ. + ‘into your hands’ g. 
holy and righteous 2,977. ~ 7, B. : Y 
remember your sins, and so hasten your destruction. See xcvii. 5 (note). 
C. 1. brothers one with another shall fall p. a inserts ‘and’ after ‘another’. 
streams flow with their blood. Cf. Isa. xxxiv. 3, 7; Ps. Iviii. 10. 
2. his sons’ sons 8. ‘his son’s son’ gmt. gg corrupt. + ‘in compassion’ 78. 
i r 7,8. ‘as for the sinner, he’ g, gq. ~ 
fe ee ek prother, Aristobulus ced beloved brother Antigonus (Josephus, Avz/. xiii. 11. 1, 2). On the 
internecine strife that was to initiate the kingdom cf. lvi. 7, xcix. 5,6; Zech, xiv. 13; Ezek. xxxvinl. 21; Tage it<22 
Mic. vii. 6; Matt. x. 21, 34, 35) xxiv. 10, &c. 
: . Rev. xiv. 20. : 
Sie 6 ‘to the day of its (> 1f) height’ (a dittograph Of day .)n as it shall be filled to its height’ ¢. 
4. The fallen angels who brought down sin will be gathered from ‘the secret places’. 
the angels shall descend, &c. Cf. Matt. xiii. 39, 41, 49. 
brought down sin a~/. ‘helped sin’ Z, B. 
of judgement a-tu. >7u,B. : 
amongst ,gmgu. ‘and amongst g. “on allsthe, 7, ie 
2, 


Io 


II 


12 


13 


BOOK OF ENOCH 100. 5-13 


And over all the righteous and holy He will appoint guardians from amongst the holy angels 
To guard them as the apple of an eye, 

Until He makes an end of all wickedness and all sin, 

And though the righteous sleep a long sleep, they have nought to fear. 


And (then) the children of the earth shall see the wise in security, 
And shall understand all the words of this book, 

And recognize that their riches shall not be able to save them 

In the overthrow of their sins. 


Woe to you, Sinners, on the day of strong anguish, 
Ye who afflict the righteous and burn them with fire: 
Ye shall be requited according to your works. 


Woe to you, ye obstinate of heart, 

Who watch in order to devise wickedness : 
Therefore shall fear come upon you 

And there shall be none to help you. 


Woe to you, ye sinners, on account of the words of your mouth, 
And on account of the deeds of your hands which your godlessness has wrought, 
In blazing flames burning worse than fire shall ye burn. 


And now, know ye that from the angels He will inquire as to your deeds in heaven, from the sun 
and from the moon and from the stars in reference to your sins because upon the earth ye execute 
judgement on the righteous. And He will summon to testify against you every cloud and mist 
and dew and rain ; for they shall all be withheld because of you from descending upon you, and they 
shall be mindful of your sins. And now give presents to the rain that it be not withheld from descend- 
ing upon you, nor yet the dew, when it has received gold and silver from you that it may descend. 
When the hoar-frost and snow with their chilliness, and all the snow-storms with all their plagues 
fall upon you, in those days ye shall not be able to stand before them. 


5. The righteous souls in the place of the departed are guarded. Cf. the promptuaria of 4 Ezra vii. 85, 95; also 
4 Ezra iv. 32, 40, vii. 32; 2 Bar. xxx. 2. 
all”. > gz. 
the apple of aneye. Cf. Deut. xxxii. 10; Ps. xvii. 8. 
He makes an end of all g, gg’. ‘all has been made an end of’ g}/u,8. 
the righteous sleep a long sleep. The writer of xci-civ did not expect the resurrection at the beginning of 
the temporary Messianic kingdom, which was to come at the commencement of the eighth week. The ‘long sleep’ 
seems to last till the end of the tenth week, and the resurrection of the righteous in xci-civ follows the final judgement. 
6. I have transposed ‘ the children of the earth’ from the second line to the first, and with , gg taken ‘the wise’ in 
the acc. and not in the nom. as gmt, 8. ‘The wicked see the bliss of the wise.’ Cf. 4 Ezra vii. 85; Wisdom iv. 17, &c. 
children of the earth, cf. cii. 3: the counterpart of ‘ the children of heaven’ or the righteous, ci. 1. : 
in security. Text = mordv or reroi6dta—a wrong rendering of NVA used pregnantly = dwelling in security. Cf, 
Gen. xxxiv. 25. 
7. on the day of strong anguish. The MSS. wrongly transpose this into the next clause. 
Ye who. MSS. read séba = ‘when’, corrupt for ’élla. 
burn them with fire. Cf. 2 Macc. vii. 
according to your works. Cf. xcv. 5 
8. obstinate of heart a. ‘perverse of heart’ 8. Cf. xeviii. 11. 
watch. Cf. Isa. xxix. 20. 
g. Sinners + ‘for’ ,2, 6. 
which your godlessness has wrought giz: ‘because of the work of your godlessness’ ¢: ‘which are the work 
of your godlessness’ g: ‘ which as a work ye have godlessly committed ’ B. 
in blazing flames... burn. Here a-,g > ‘shall ye burn’, and , g, 8 > ‘burning’. The two texts seem to be 
complementary. 
_to, All the heavenly powers which witness the sins of the wicked testify against them. Cf. xcviii. 6-8, also xcvii Gl 
civ. 1. Cf, the witness of stones and beams in their houses against the wicked, Hab. ii. 11. ee 
in heaven. ‘from heaven’ ¢ + ‘and’ a-vz. 
ae jucsemene on = eine kplow pera (so gwgt)—a Hebraism. 
1 the natural powers which minister to the earth’s fruitfulness will testify against si : i 
on account of their sins. Cf. Ixxx (interpolation in Ixxii-Ixxxii) : cf. Jer. iii. 3. it ETE 2 TS ee 
they shall be mindful am. ‘shall they not be mindful’ mz, 8 (z, 8 ‘ watchful’). 
12. Ironically spoken. 
that it may descend g,9¢, délopxy,a,b. ‘that it should not descend’ gq. u, B—bt. 
13. Even the punishment by the elements will be irresistible. ee ee 


292 


1011 Observe the heaven, ye children of heaven, and ev 


102 





BOOK OF ENOCH 101. 1—102. 4 


CI. Exhortation to the Fear of God: all Nature fears Him but not the Sinners. 


ned ery work of the Most High, and fear ye Him 
z and work no evil in His presence. If He closes the windows of heaven, and withholds the rain and 
3 the dew from descending on the earth on your account, what will ye do then? And if He sends 
His anger upon you because of your deeds, ye cannot petition Him; for ye spake proud and insolent 
4 words against His righteousness : therefore ye shall have no peace. And see ye not the sailors of 
the ships, how their ships are tossed to and fro by the waves, and are shaken by the winds, and are 
5 1n sore trouble? And therefore do they fear because all their goodly possessions go upon the sea 
with them, and they have evil forebodings of heart that the sea will swallow them and they will 
6 perish therein. Are not the entire sea and all its waters, and all its movements, the work of the Most 
7 High, and has He not set limits to its doings, and confined it throughout by the sand? And at His 
reproof it is afraid and dries up, and all its fish die and all that is in it; but ye sinners that are 
8 on the earth fear Him not. Has He not made the heaven and the earth, and all that is therein ? 
Who has given understanding and wisdom to everything that moves on the earth and in the sea? 
9 Do not the sailors of the ships fear the sea? Yet sinners fear not the Most High. 


CII. Terrors of the Day of Fudgement: the adverse Fortunes of the Righteous on the Earth. 


1 In those days when He hath brought a grievous fire upon you, 
Whither will ye flee, and where will ye find deliverance ? 
And when He launches forth His word against you 
Will you not be affrighted and fear? 


2 And all the luminaries shall be affrighted with great fear, 
And all the earth shall be affrighted and tremble and be alarmed. 


3 And all the fangels shall execute their commandsf 
And shall seek to hide themselves from the presence of the Great Glory, 
And the children of earth shall tremble and quake ; 
And ye sinners shall be cursed for ever, 
And ye shall have no peace. 


4 Fear ye not, ye souls of the righteous, 
And be hopeful ye that have died in righteousness. 


CI. 1. The same subject continued, but verse 1 contains an aside to the righteous. : 4 ee 
children of heaven, equivalent to ‘sons of Gad’ i. e. righteous Israelites. See Test. Lev. iv. 2 (note); Wisd. ii. 
13, 18. For ‘children of heaven’ cf. Pirke Aboth iii. 22. 
2. Address to the wicked resumed, c. II, 12. 
If gt, B-enx: ‘for’, ,gu, ex: ‘when’ mg, x. 
windows of heaven. Gen. vil. II. 
3. if get, B: ‘when’ mg. 
because of (+ ‘all’ ,¢) your deeds gm: ‘and upon (+ ‘all’ 8) your deeds’ ¢, 8: ‘ your deeds’ gy. 
proud and insolent words: v. 4 (note) ; xxvii. 2. Cf. xcviil. 7, 8, cil. 6. , : Z 
4-7. Sailors fear the sea: how much more should men fear God, of whom the sea is sore afraid. Cf. Ps. cvil. 23-27. 
4. sailors. Text=‘kings’, 1.¢. 32! corrupt for "N21. f a : , f a 
6, 7- The sea is in the hand of God. Cf. Jer. v. 22; Job xxvi. 10, XXxvill. 8-11; Ps, Ixxxix. 9, civ. 9; Prov. viii. 29. 
has He not set limits to its doings ¢ (but it reads ’aqama for “aqama) : y preserves the verb: B-y alter it to 
hatama=‘ has sealed’: gst read ‘its doings and waters’ (i.e. wamaja, perhaps corrupt for ‘aqama). 
at His reproof...dries up. Isa. 1. 2. : , 
is afraid and dries up a-,g, x: ‘dries up and is afraid’ B-x. 
g. A pregnant summing up. 
sailors. See v. 4 (note). 


CII. 1-3. Whither they will flee on the terrible day of the Lord, when heaven and earth will be aghast and the very 
angels seek to hide themselves ? ; 
I. a grievous fire, i.e. hell. Cf. xcix. II. 
His word, i.e. of judgement. 25 
3. tangels ih 5 fe igndel, Corrupt: for ‘angels’ read kings. Cf. Rev. vi. 15. 
execute their commands. I cannot emend. : 
3. the Great Glory a. ‘the Great in Glory’ 8B. Cf. xiv. Io. 
children of earth. Nene a ' 
have no peace. Cf. xciv. 6 (note). : 
4-CIV. 9. Deion and condemnation of Sadducean views of the future life. . 
4, 5. The righteous are to be of good cheer, though their life and death be in grief. ead 
he 'e that have died m, ofhikinya: ‘they who have died’ gg¢u: ‘the day of your death abdeox,b: *the souls of 
is have died’ ,¢: g adds ‘ ye who have died in righteousness’ after ‘grieve not’ in the next line. 


1105-2 2473 T 


BOOK OF ENOCH 102. 5—108. 3 


5 And grieve not if your soul into Sheol has descended in grief, 
And that in your life your body fared not according to your goodness, 
But wait for the day of the judgement of sinners 
And for the day of cursing and chastisement. 


6 And yet when ye die the sinners speak over you : 
‘““ As we die, so die the righteous, 
And what benefit do they reap for their deeds ? 


7 Behold, even as we, so do they die in grief and darkness, 
And what have they more than we ? 
From henceforth we are equal. 


8 And what will they receive and what will they see for ever ? 
Behold, they too have died, 
And henceforth for ever shall they see no light.” 


g I tell you, ye sinners, ye are content to eat and drink, and rob and sin, and strip men naked, and 
Io acquire wealth and see good days. Have ye seen the righteous how their end falls out, that no manner 
11 of violence is found in them till their death? ‘‘ Nevertheless they perished and became as though 

they had not been, and their spirits descended into Sheol in tribulation.” 


CIII. Different Destinies of the Righteous and the Sinners: fresh Objections of the Sinners. 


103 : Now, therefore, I swear to you, the righteous, by the glory of the Great and Honoured and 
2 Mighty One in dominion, and by His greatness I swear to you. 
I know a mystery 
And have read the heavenly tablets, 
And have seen the holy books, 
And have found written therein and inscribed regarding them : 


3. That all goodness and joy and glory are prepared for them, 
And written down for the spirits of those who have died in righteousness, 
And that manifold good shall be given to you in recompense for your labours, 
And that your lot is abundantly beyond the lot of the living. 


5. Strong in the belief in a blessed future for the righteous, the writer can concede the apparent equality of righteous 

and wicked in life and death. 
if g,g. Other MSS. ‘that’ or ‘ because’. 
soul + ‘into great tribulation and wailing and sorrow and’ ¢, 8. 
Sheol. See !xili. 1o (note). 
wait for. Here I emend énka ba (=‘ moreover on’) into senhfi la=‘ wait for’. Cf. cviii. 2. 
judgement of sinners. Text=‘ ye became sinners’. The next line requires this emendation here. 
day of... chastisement. Hos. v. 9. 

6-8. The Sadducean argument--the O.T. view of the retribution of the righteous in this life was interpreted as implying 
that men could be judged by their fortunes in this life, and that where there is no difference in this life there will be 
none in the next. Cf. Wisdom ii. 1-5, iii. 2-4; Eccles. ii. 14-16, iii. 19-21, &c. 

7- in grief and darkness. The O.T. view of Sheol, lxiii. 10 (note). 

8. what will they receive m7, 8: ‘how will they rise’ ¢,g¢. 

Behold a-,g. ‘For behold’ yg, 8. 

g-1o. Answer of the writer. The distinction of righteous and wicked is not an outward, but a religious and ethical 
one. The wicked man’s life is moulded by material and temporal aims only. 

g. see good days. So LXX of Ps. xxxiv. 12. 

Io. falls out a. ‘is peace’ B, 

death a-,g. ‘day of their death’ ,g, 8. 
11. The wicked rejoin that Death awaits both alike. 
spirits a-,g. ‘souls’ ,g, B. 

CIII. 1-4. The writer turns to the righteous, and assures them from the heavenly tablets and the holy books that 
every good thing is in store for them. 

1. A more solemn oath than in xcviii. 1, 4, 6, &c. 

_ by the glory ... dominion g and almost 1g: ‘by His great glory (‘by the glory of the Great One’ gt) and by 
His honoured kingdom ’ mg¢: ‘ by His great glory and honour and by His honoured kingdom’ B-y. 

2. amystery a-¢. ‘this mystery’ 4, 8. 

read egu. ‘read in’ mt, B. 
the holy books ggz. ‘books of the holy ones’ gm, 8. Cf. cviii. 7, xlvii. 3. See also cviii. 3. 

3. Where are these blessings to be enjoyed, in Sheol, or in the spiritual theocracy set up after the final judgement ? 
There seems to be only a resurrection of the spirit. > 

for them ,2, 8. > a-1g. 
the spirits of those who mz, 8: ‘ your spirits which’ gg. 
manifold good ,gmg. ‘things manifold and good’ gé. ‘ with manifold good’ . 


274 


Io 


II 


12 


ee 


BOOK OF ENOCH 103. 4-12 


And the spirits of you who have died in righteousness shall live and rejoice, 
And their spirits shall not perish, nor their memorial from before the face of the Great One 
Unto all the generations of the world : wherefore no longer fear their contumely, 


Woe to you, ye sinners, when ye have died, 

If ye die in the wealth of your sins, 

And those who are like you say regarding you: 

‘‘ Blessed are the sinners : they have seen all their days. 


And now they have died in prosperity and in wealth, 

And have not seen tribulation or murder in their life ; 

And they have died in honour, 

And judgement has not been executed on them during their life.” 


Know ye, that their souls will be made to descend into Sheol 
And they shall be wretched in their great tribulation. 


And into darkness and chains and a burning flame where there is grievous judgement shall your 
spirits enter ; 

And the great judgement shall be for all the generations of the world. 

Woe to you, for ye shall have no peace. 


Say not in regard to the righteous and good who are in life: 

“In our troubled days we have toiled laboriously and experienced every trouble, 
And met with much evil and been consumed, 

And have become few and our spirit small. 


And we have been destroyed and have not found any to help us even with a word: 
We have been tortured [and destroyed], and not hoped to see life from day to day. 


We hoped to be the head and have become the tail : 

We have toiled laboriously and had no satisfaction in our toil ; 
And we have become the food of the sinners and the unrighteous, 
And they have laid their yoke heavily upon us. 


They have had dominion over us that hated ust and smote us; 
And to those that hated ust we have bowed our necks 
But they pitied us not. 


4. spirits of you ¢,g9, 8: ‘spirits of them’ sz. 
who have died (2nd sing. in ,g, 7? 8). ‘who have died’ (3rd sing.) a—g. 
rejoice + ‘and be glad’ 2,2m, B. 
And their spirits shall not perish, nor a. ‘their spirits and’ 8. 
5-8. The wicked are not at an end after death. Darkness, chains and a burning fire await them. 
5. when ye have died a-u. > 8. 
the wealth of a-g. >4,f8. ; 
7. Sheol. See Ixiii. 10 (note). Here, unlike in cii. 5, 11, it is the final place of punishment. Our text isa develop- 
ment of Jub. vii. 29, as it adds to Sheol one of the characteristics of Gehenna. See v. 8a. 
8. of the world a. ‘unto eternity’ B. 
have no peace. See v. 4 (note); xciv. 6 (note). are te 
9-15. An ironical description of the lot of the righteous. Cf. the Sadducean view in cil. 6, 7. o 3 
g. From this verse to the end of the chapter ,¢ stands frequently alone, exhibiting nearly sixty variations, mostly 
between ist and 3rd plurals. The MSS. evidence goes to prove that the 3rd person was original, for whereas ,g¢ gives 
the 3rd person in all but seven instances (these are confined to vv. 14 and 15), all other MSS. with few exceptions give 
the Ist person. Thus the wicked assume the rdle of the righteous and speak in their person in ciii. 9-15. Yet in civ. 
1-6 the author addresses his reply not directly to the sinners who have just spoken but to the righteous (cf. cilii. 1), 
and returns to the sinners in civ. 7-9. RB ; Ae 
our troubled days 2, 8: ‘their troubled days’ ggz'u: ‘the days of their life with their troublous toil’ ,g. 
we. ‘they’ ,g, and so on except in 14-15. _ 
been consumed : ‘ they have suffered from disease’ , 2. 
become few. Cf. Deut. xxviii. 62. 
our spirit small. Not ‘humble’ but ‘ poor-spirited’. ; 
Io. we... have not found any to help us even with a word a-,g¢. So,gbut with a change of persons. ‘ There 
has been none to help us in word or deed: we are powerless and have found nothing’ Z, 8. 
11. We hoped a. ‘and we hoped’ 8. 
to be the head. Deut. xxvi. 13. 
laid their yoke, &c. Pia ee a nee 
inion... hated us. pSther tx. Ee 
aint taicd us. I think this is a dittograph from the line before, and ‘that smote us’ belongs to this 
line. Thus we have: ‘ They have had dominion over us that hated us, And to those that smote us we have bowed 


oe ’ 
our necks, But they pitied us not. ae T 2 


BOOK OF ENOCH 1038. 13104. 7 


13 We desired to get away from them that we might escape and be at rest, 
But found no place whereunto we should flee and be safe from them. 


14 And we complained to the rulers in our tribulation, 
And cried out against those who devoured us, 
But they did not attend to our cries 
And would not hearken to our voice. 


15 And they helped those who robbed us and devoured us and those who made us few; and they 
concealed their oppression, and they did not remove from us the yoke of those that devoured us 
and dispersed us and murdered us, and they concealed their murder, and remembered not that they 
had lifted up their hands against us. 


CIV. Assurances given to the Righteous: Admonitions to Sinners and the Falsifiers of 
the Words of Uprightness. 


104: [swear unto you, that in heaven the angels remember you for good before the glory of the Great 
2 One: and your names are written before the glory of the Great One. Be hopeful; for aforetime 
ye were put to shame through ill and affliction; but now ye shall shine as the lights of heaven, 
3 ye shall shine and ye shall be seen, and the portals of heaven shall be opened to you. And in your 
cry, cry for judgement, and it shall appear to you; for all your tribulation shall be visited on the 
4 rulers, and on all who helped those who plundered you. Be hopeful, and cast not away your hope ; 
5 for ye shall have great joy as the angels of heaven. What shall ye be obliged to do? Ye shall not 
have to hide on the day of the great judgement and ye shall not be found as sinners, and the eternal 

6 judgement shall be far from you for all the generations of the world. And now fear not, ye righteous, 
when ye see the sinners growing strong and prospering in their ways: be not companions with them, 

7 but keep afar from their violence; for ye shall become companions of the hosts of heaven. And, 
although ye sinners say: ‘‘ All our sins shall not be searched out and be written down,” nevertheless 


13. we desired a-,g. 1g prefix ‘and’. 

14. cried out + ‘and made lamentation’ gv: ,g inserts this clause before ‘in our tribulation ’. 

14, 15. These verses help to fix the date of xci-civ. In Ixxxiii-xc the rulers appear as the divinely appointed leaders 
of the righteous. Here they are shown as the aiders and abettors of the persecutors. These enemies are the Sadducees, 
sinners, apostates, and paganizers. The righteous are the Pharisaic party. These issues only became clear in the 
Maccabean period, and after the breach between John Hyrcanus and the Pharisees. ‘ Dispersed’ and ‘ murdered’ 
point to Jannaeus, and the date 94-79 B.c. Possibly it is later, 70-64 B.C., when for the last time Sadducees and rulers 
acted in concert. 

15. they helped ,¢,8: ‘you have helped’ gw: ‘thou hast helped’ g. 

the yoke of those that 2,27, &c. ‘their yoke but’ g¢, &c. 


CIV. Again the writer replies, not to the wicked, but to the righteous, as in ciii.1. The righteous have indeed no 
hope in this life, but must look for the blessed future awaiting them in heaven. 
I. unto you + ‘ye righteous’ 278. 
the angels remember you. For angelic mediation cf. xv. 2 (note), xl. 5-7, xlvii. 2, Ixxxix. 76. 
and a,z. > -e7. 
names are written: xlvii. 3 (note). The Great One: xiv. 2, ciil. 4. 
2. now: used here of the impending future. 
shine as the lights. Cf. Dan. xii. 3; 4 Ezra vii. 97, 125. 
ye shall shine 2° a. >. 
portals of heaven. For the open gates cf. Rev. xxi. 25. There is no hope of a new earth. Cf. xci. 16 (note). 
3. Their demand for justice, unheard on earth, ciii. 14, 15, will one day be satisfied. Cf. for the cry of the righteous 
XCVil. 3, 5 (note), xcix. 3, 16. 
the rulers. Cf. clil. 14, 15 (note). 
4. as the angels of heaven. Cf. Matt. xxii. 30; 1 En. civ. 6. 
5. what shall ye ...doa-t,e. ‘as for what ye shall... do’ Z, B-e. 
day of the great judgement. Cf. xix. 1, Ixxxiv. 4, xciv. 9, xevill. 10, xcix. 15. 
: the — judgement. Cf. xci. 15, also xlv.2(note). This verse seems to imply no judgement for the righteous. 
ontrast h. 2. 
6. in their ways 2,emqz. ‘in their lusts’ B. 
Note Pharisaic exclusiveness. Cf. xci. 3,4. The hope of the righteous can be realized in heaven alone. The 
Messianic kingdom falls into the background. 
be nota. ‘and be not’ B. 
z. Ce a &e.; cf. civ. 2, 4. In 2 Bar. li. 5, 10, 12 the righteous attain and even transcend the glory of 
he angels. 
hosts. So #, reading hara. Cf. Luke ii. 13; Rev. xix. 14; gmgt read hérana = ray dyad@v (corrupt for ayyédov 
Flemming). : ; 
7, 8. He warns the wicked that, though they know it not, their sins are recorded daily. 
_7. All our sins... out. So Beer and x, Other MSS. read ‘ ye shall not search out all our sins’, 7,8 give ‘all our 
sins’ in nom.: £,gmg in acc. 
be written down 7,8. ‘they (‘he’ ,g¢; ‘ye’ mz) shall write’ g, 


276 


gmgu. 


EQOKSOr ENOCH 104, 8-105. > 


8 they shall write down all your sins every day. And now I show unto you that light and darkness 

9 day and night, see all your sins. Be not godless in your hearts, and lie not and alter not the words 
of uprightness, nor charge with lying the words of the Holy Great One, nor take account of your 

1o idols; for all your lying and all your godlessness issue not in righteousness but in great sin. And 
now I know this mystery, that sinners will alter and pervert the words of righteousness in many 
ways, and will speak wicked words, and lie, and practise great deceits, and write books concerning 

11 their words. But when they write down truthfully all my words in their languages, and do not 
change or minish ought from my words but write them all down truthfully—all that I first testified 

12 concerning them. Then, I know another mystery, that books will be given to the righteous and the 

13 wise to become a cause of joy and uprightness and much wisdom. And to them shall the books 
be given, and they shall believe in them and rejoice over them, and then shall all the righteous who 
have learnt therefrom all the paths of uprightness be recompensed.’ 


CV. God and the Messiah to dwell with Man 


1051 In those days the Lord bade (them) to summon and testify to the children of earth concerning 
their wisdom : Show (it) unto them; for ye are their guides, and a recompense over the whole earth. 
2 For I and My Son will be united with them for ever in the paths of uprightness in their lives; and 

ye shall have peace: rejoice, ye children of uprightness. Amen. 


8. For the witness of natural powers cf. c. 10 (note). 
9-13. Disclosures and directions regarding his own book. 
g. The wicked are bidden not to alter or misinterpret the O.T. Cf. xciv. 5, xcviil. 14, xcix. 2. 
Holy Great One. See i. 3 (note). 
take account of 2,29. ‘praise’ mz, B. 
your idols. Cf. xcix. 7-9, 14. 
Io. A time will come when the words of revelation will be perverted, and books be written enforcing wicked and 
heathen doctrine. 
sinners ...in many ways 2,7. ‘many sinners’ g, 8. 
books 7,8. ‘my books’ g,gmqg. 
11. But the writings of Enoch will counteract these heathen teachings. The writer speaks here from Enoch’s stand- 
point. 
my words ¢u,8. ‘words’ 2,gmg. 
their languages, i.e. Greek and Aramaic. 
12. At last a righteous and wise generation will receive and understand his works (cf. i. 2). Gf Dan exis 4, o> 10m 
13. recompensed : i.e. find their reward in these books (xciii. 10, c. 6, civ. 12, 13, cv. I), or perhaps in the Messianic 
kingdom thereupon set up. 


CV. This chapter does not seem to belong to xci-civ. (1) Children of earth is used in a good sense. Contrast c. 6. 
(2) The Messiah is introduced, here alone in xci-civ. (3) The emphasis is on the finite life of the saints on earth (an 
idea of i-xxxvi), not on the immortal life in heaven, as in xci-civ. 

1. In those a-m. ‘and in those’  . 

and testify > 7. 
recompense. Cf. civ. 13. ; : ; 

2. Tand My Son, i.e. the Messiah. Cf. 4 Ezra vii. 28, 29, xiii. 32, 37, 52, xiv. 9. The righteous are God's children, 

and pre-eminently so the Messiah. Cf. the early Messianic interpretation of Ps. ii, also 1 En, Ixii. 14 ; John xiv. 23. 
in their lives, thus finite. 
ye shall have peace. Contrast the curse of the wicked, xciv. 6 (note). 


277 





FRAGMENT OF THE BOOK OF NOAH 


1061: Andafter some days my son Methuselah took 
a wife for his son Lamech, and she became 

2 pregnant by him and bore a son. And his body 
was white as snow and red as the blooming of 
a rose, and the hair of his head fand his long 
locks were white as wool, and his eyes beautifulf. 
And when he opened his eyes, he lighted up the 
whole house like the sun, and the whole house 
3 was very bright. And thereupon he arose in the 
hands of the midwife, opened his mouth, and 
fconversed witht the Lord of righteousness. 
4 And his father Lamech was afraid of him and 
5 fled, and came to his father Methuselah. And 
he said unto him: ‘I have begotten a strange 
son, diverse from and unlike man, and resem- 
bling the sons of the God of heaven; and his 
nature is different and he is not like us, and his 
eyes are as the rays of the sun, and his coun- 
6 tenance is glorious. And it seems to me that 
he is not sprung from me but from the angels, 
and I fear that in his days a wonder may be 
7 wrought on the earth. And now, my father, 
I am here to petition thee and implore thee that 
thou mayst go to Enoch, our father, and learn 
from him the truth, for his dwelling-place is 
8 amongst the angels. And when Methuselah 
heard the words of his son, he came to me to the 
ends of the earth; for he had heard that I was 
there, and he cried aloud, and I heard his voice 
and I came to him. And I said unto him: 
‘Behold, here am I, my son, wherefore hast 
g thou come to me?’ And he answered and said : 
‘Because of a great cause of anxiety have 
I come to thee, and because of a disturbing vision 
to have I approached. And now, my father, hear 
me: unto Lamech my son there hath been born 
a son, the like of whom there is none, and his 
nature is not like man’s nature, and the colour 


CVI—CVII. A fragment of a Noah Apocalypse. 
I print side by side with the text. 
2. and his long locks... beautiful. 


(uv. 2) septdes seems corrupt for capitis. 
as wool. Cf. xlvi. 1. 

3. And thereupon ,g. Other MSS. ‘and when’. 
opened his mouth. Cf. v. 11. 
teonversed witht. 

adoravit also occurs. See my Comm. 27 Joc. 
Lord of righteousness. Cf. xxii, 14, xc. 40, 

5. and * 9,2. > other MSS. 

sons of the God of heaven. 

_ 6. but from the angels. 
in v. 4. 

7- Latin corrupt; observe eamus. 


Cf. v. Io. 








Latin defective here. 
Here tanagara is corrupt for taganaja = ‘ praised’ = [/audavi¢] in the Latin, where, however, 


Latin FRAGMENT. 
Factum est autem [cum esset Lamech annorum 1 
tricentorum quinquagenta] natus est ei filiu(s) 
cui oculi sunt sicut radi solis capilli autem eius 2 
candi(disores in septies niue corpori autem eius 
nemo hominum potest intueri. 


et surexit inter manus obstetricis suae et 3 
adorauit dominum uiuentem in secula [laudauit]. 


et timuit Lamech. 4 
et uenit ad patrem suum Mathusalem et 5 
narrauit illi ommza. 


ne non ex eo natus esset nisi nontius dei. 6 


dixit Mathusalem: Ego autem non possum 7 
scire nisi eamus ad patrem nostrum Enoc. 


quum autem uidit Enoc filium suum Mathu- 8 
salem uenientem ad se [et] ait. quid est quod 
uenisti ad me nate? 


dixit: 9 


quod natus est filio suo [nomine] Lamech cui 10 
oculi sunt sicut radi solis capilli[s] etuscandidiores 
septies niue, corpori autem eius nemo hominum 
potest intueri 


Part of this section has been preserved in a Latin Version which 


: } . The Latin does not mention these ‘long locks *, and the Eth. is easily emended 
Into ‘was white... and his eyes were like the rays of the sun’, 


Cf. the Eth. version in v. 5,and v. 10. In the Latin 


Cf. Ixix. 4, 5, also Ixxi. 1 (note). 
The Lat. gives a different idea. 


Nontius = dyyedos. The Lat. of 6 follows ‘Lamech’ 


amongst the angels, i.e. at the ends of the earth, as in lIxv. 2. 


8. wherefore. So Latin guid est guod = b.a vi. 
9. cause of anxiety v,em/. ‘matter’ 8. 
to, And now + ‘hear me’ ,gm. 
colour of his body ,2. Other MSS. = ‘his colour’. 
Apoc. Petri support 2. 


But Eth, = dvdr, a corruption. 


But corfori in the next clause in the Lat. and gpara in 


278 


FRAGMENT OF THE BOOK OF NOAH 106. 10-19 


of his body is whiter than snow and redder than 
the bloom of a rose, and the hair of his head is 
whiter than white wool, and his eyes are like 
the rays of the sun, and he opened his eyes and 
11 thereupon lighted up the whole house. And he 
arose in the hands of the midwife, and opened 
12 his mouth and blessed the Lord of heaven. And 
his father Lamech became afraid and fled to me, 
and did not believe that he was sprung from 
him, but that he was in the likeness of the angels 
of heaven; and behold I have come to thee that 
thou mayst make known to me the truth.’ 
13 And I, Enoch, answered and said unto him: 
‘The Lord will do a new thing on the earth, 
and this I have already seen in a vision, and make 
known to thee that in the generation of my 
father Jared some of the angels of heaven 
14 transgressed the word of the Lord. And behold 
they commit sin and transgress the law, and have 
united themselves with women and commit sin 
with them, and have married some of them, 
17and have begot children by them. And they 
shall produce on the earth giants not according 
to the spirit, but according to the flesh, and there 
shall be a great punishment on the earth, and the 
15 earth shall be cleansed from all impurity. Yea, 
there shall come a great destruction over the 
whole earth, and there shall be a deluge and 
16a great destruction for one year. And this son 
who has been born unto you shall be left on the 
earth, and his three children shall be saved with 
him: when all mankind that are on the earth 
18 shall die [he and his sons shall be saved]. And 
now make known to thy son Lamech that he 
who has been born is in truth his son, and call 
his name Noah; for he shall be left to you, and 
he and his sons shall be saved from the destruc- 
tion, which shall tome upon the earth on account 
of all the sin and all the unrighteousness, which 
shall be consummated on the earth in his days. 
19 And after that there shall be still more unrighte- 
ousness than that which was first consummated 
on the earth; for I know the mysteries of the 
holy ones; for He, the Lord, has showed me and 
informed me, and I have read (them) in the 
heavenly tablets. 


the colour... rose, eyes... sun. 
11. Lord of heaven. se 
13. doa new thing. Num. xvi. 30; Isa. xlili. 19. 

in the generation of... Jared. Cf. vi. 6. 

some of the angels. 
14. transgress the law—of spiritual beings. Chix. 
17. I have restored this verse to its original place. 

Andigt,2 > —*. 3 ve 
15. one year. Cf. Gen. vu. II, and vill. 14. 
16. and 1° g,gg. > other MSS. 

[he and his sons shall be saved] > g,¢9. 
18. unrighteousness which shall w7/, [3 : 
19. the mysteries of the holy ones. 

in the future. 


heavenly tablets. See xlvii. 3 (note). 





Easily emended from Eth.=‘ some from the heights’. 


et surexit inter manus obstetricis suae eadem 11 
hora, qua procidit de utero matris suae. orauit 
dominum uiuentem in secula et laudauit. 

et timuit Lamech. 12 


et dixit Enoc: nontiatum est mihi fili quia 13 
post quingentos annos 


mittefé deus cataclismum aquae ut deleat 15 
omnem creaturam [XxL.] ostendit oculis nostris. 


et erunt illi - 11 - filii [et erunt nomina filiorum 16 


eius - Sem - Cham - lafeth]} 


et ipse uocabitur Noe qui interpretatur requies 18 
quia requiem prestabit in archam. 


Borrowed by Apoc. Petri. _ , 
Here only in Enoch. But note Lat. = ‘ dominum viventem in saecula. 


Also cf. v. I. 


mz reads ‘angels’. 


gg are defective through hmt. here. 


It is a repetition of the clause in v. 18. 
£29 read ‘unrighteousness of apostasy (which) shall’. y 
Either the secrets known to the angels, or the secrets relating to the righteous 


279 


FRAGMENT OF THE BOOK OF NOAH 107. 1—108. i 


107: And I saw written on them that generation upon generation shall transgress, till a generation 
of righteousness arises, and transgression is destroyed and sin passes away from the earth, and all 
2 manner of good comes upon it. And now, my son, go and make known to thy son Lamech that this 
3 son, which has been born, is in truth his son, and that (this) is no lie” And when Methuselah had 
_ heard the words of his father Enoch—for he had shown to him everything in secret—he returned 
and showed (them) to him and called the name of that son Noah; for he will comfort the earth 
after all the destruction. 
108: = Another book which Enoch wrote for his son Methuselah and for those who will come after him, 
2 and keep the law in the last days. Ye who have done good shall wait for those days till an end is 
3 made of those who work evil, and an end of the might of the transgressors. And wait ye indeed till 
sin has passed away, for their names shall be blotted out of the book of life and out of the 
holy books, and their seed shall be destroyed for ever, and their spirits shall be slain, and they 
shall cry and make lamentation in a place that is a chaotic wilderness, and in the fire shall they 
4 burn; for there is no earth there. And I saw there something like an invisible cloud ; for by reason 
of its depth I could not flook overt, and I saw a flame of fire blazing brightly, and things like shining 
5 mountains circling and sweeping to and fro. And I asked one of the holy angels who was with me 
and said unto him: ‘ What is this shining thing ? for it is not a heaven but only the flame of a blazing 
6 fire, and the voice of weeping and crying and lamentation and strong pain.’ And he said unto me: 
‘This place which thou seest—here are cast the spirits of sinners and blasphemers, and of those who 
work wickedness, and of those who pervert everything that the Lord hath spoken through the mouth 
7 of the prophets—(even) the things that shall be. For some of them are written and inscribed above 
in the heaven, in order that the angels may read them and know that which shall befall the sinners, 


CVII. 1. The fresh growth of sin after the Deluge: its destruction and the advent of the Messianic kingdom. 
till: 7,8: ‘that’ 2,emg. 
3. The meaning of the name Noah given in Gen. v. 29 is here repeated. 
everything in secret a: ‘every secret thing’ 8. 
returned and showed m. So g (but omits two letters through hmt.): ‘ returned after having seen’ 4abcdlory,b: 
A Sq. 


CVIII. This final chapter forms an independent addition. The writer is acquainted with i-xxxvi and xci-civ, or at 
least with parts of those sections. But his acquaintance with i-xxxvi is very inaccurate. What in chapters xviii and 
xxi was the place of punishment for the disobedient stars becomes in cviii. 3-6 practically Gehenna. Note the Essene 
tone of this chapter, the high honour paid to asceticism, the scorn of silver and gold in 8-10, the blessed immortality of 
the soul but apparently not of the body, and the duration of light and darkness so prominent in 11-14. 

This chapter is more akin to xci-civ than any other in the book. Its object is to encourage the righteous still to hope 
on despite the long delay in the coming of the kingdom. 

1. keep the law. Contrast ‘fall away from the law’, xcix. 2. 

2. The faithful are exhorted to further patience. 

good g,¢. > other MSS. 

shall wait 9,99. ‘and are waiting’ Z, 8. 

3. And l°a, >. 
blotted out of the book of life. Cf. xlvii. 3 (note). 
out of the book of life and ¢,¢: ‘ out of the books of the living’, g, x: © out of the book and ’ sz. 
holy books, mg?, ¢,6 (cf. ciii. 2). ‘book of the Holy One *g. ‘books of the holy ones’ B-ex,d. These contain the 
roll of the members of the kingdom. Cf. ciii. 2, 3. 
spirits shall be slain. Cf. xxii. 13; xcix. 11 (note). It does not imply annihilation as the victims still ‘ cry and 
make lamentation’. 
ina place. This chaotic flaming hell beyond the limits of the earth is the place of punishment for the angels in 
XVilil. 12-16; xxi. 1-7. 
chaotic. Eth.=déparos, the LXX rendering of 19M in Gen. i. 2. 
in the fire shall they burn. So after xxi. 3 I emend the Eth. = ‘in fire they have burnt’ (g,.¢7g7¢, B-abcx): ‘in 
fire they shall burn’ (aécx)—a different form of the verb. 
4. Further description of this hell and its inhabitants in terms borrowed from xviii. UE Nans ghee 
t look over t+. We might emend to ‘ behold its height’ or ‘tell its circuit’ (or ‘size ’). 
of fire ¢,¢~: other MSS. = ‘of its fire’. 

5. one of the holy angels. This phrase is borrowed from i-xxxvi: cf. xxvii. 2. 
voice, &c. Cf. xviii. 13. 
weeping and crying a: w B. 

6. This hell which is outside the earth is the final place of punishment for sinners and blasphemers and perverters 
of God’s revelation through the prophets. In vv. 3-6 the writer has confounded places (i.e. Gehenna, and the hell of 
the disobedient stars) that are most carefully distinguished in i-xxxvi, and yet he has borrowed the phraseology of that 
section. 

blasphemers. Cf. xci. 7. 
spoken mu, 8: ‘done’ g,24. 
the prophets. Here only expressly mentioned in Enoch. 

7. written and inscribed—refers to the heavenly tablets. Cf. xlvii. 3. These records are also called the books 

of the holy ones, for their purpose is to let the angels know of the future: cf. ciii.2. See also Asc. Isa. vii. 27. 


280 


PRAGMENT OF THE BOOK OF NOAH 108. 7-15 


and the spirits of the humble, and of those who have afflicted their bodies, and been recompensed 
8 by God; and of those who have been put to shame by wicked men: Who love God and loved neither 
gold nor silver nor any of the good things which are in the world, but gave over their bodies to 
g torture. Who, since they came into being, longed not after earthly food, but regarded everything 
as a passing breath, and lived accordingly, and the Lord tried them much, and their spirits were 
to found pure so that they should bless His name. And all the blessings destined for them I have 
recounted in the books. And He hath assigned them their recompense, because they have been 
found to be such as loved heaven more than their life in the world, and though they were trodden 
under foot of wicked men, and experienced abuse and reviling from them and were put to shame, 
11 yet they blessed Me. And now I will summon the spirits of the good who belong to the generation 
of light, and I will transform those who were born in darkness, who in the flesh were not recompensed 

12 with such honour as their faithfulness deserved. And I will bring forth in shining light those who 
13 have loved My holy name, and I will seat each on the throne of his honour. And they shall be 
resplendent for times without number ; for righteousness is the judgement of God; for to the faithful 
14 He will give faithfulness in the habitation of upright paths. And they shall see those who were 
15 born in darkness led into darkness, while the righteous shall be resplendent. And the sinners shall 


cry aloud and see them resplendent, and they indeed will go where days and seasons are prescribed 
for them.’ 


7-9. the humble. The O%2P and O°)3Y of the Psalms. They constitute the true Israel as opposed to the proud, 
the selfish and the paganizers. Cf. Cheyne on Ps. ix. 13. 
those who have afflicted their bodies ... loved neither gold nor silver...longed not after earthly 
food. These phrases would apply well to the Essene party. Cf. xlviii. 7, cil. 5. These marks of the righteous have 
their counterpart in those of the wicked: cf. xcvi. 5-7, xcvil. 8-10, xcviil. 2. 
8. loved a, B-canoy,b: ‘love’ , 2, caénoy,0. 
9. Who, 29 (gm slightly corrupt) : ‘and’ z: ‘and who’ B. 
everything ~. ‘their bodies’,g. ‘themselves’ gwgt, 8. ‘ Bodies’ is unsuitable, and ‘ themselves’ would read 
better if the sinners were speaking: cf. Wisdom ii. 2-4. Cf. Job vii. 7, 8. 
the Lord tried them much, &c. Cf. Wisdom iii. 5. 
10. Enoch speaks, and refers his hearers and readers to his books. 
their life in the world, Cf. xlviii. 7. 
11. Verses 11 and 12 are spoken by God. 
generation of light. Cf. Ixi. 12 (note), xxxviii. 4 (note). 
who were born in darkness. Of those who are born in darkness, i.e. heathenism, the faithful who were not 
recompensed with ,honour are transformed: but those who remain in their darkness are cast therein as their 
condemnation. Cf. v. 14. 
were not recompensed with a—guz, 8: ‘did not seek’ g. : a Hews 
12. in shining light, i.e. clad in it. Cf Matt. vil. 15. Or we might render ‘into shining light’. Cf. 2 En. xxii. 
8-10, the garments of the blessed are composed of God’s glory. In 1 En. Ixii. 16, they are ‘garments of life’. Really 
they are the spiritual bodies of the blessed. Cf. Rev. 111. 4, 5, 18, &c. ; 4 Ezra ii. 39, 45; Asc. Isa. iv. 16, vil. 22, vill. 14. 
throne of his honour a,z. ‘throne of honour, of his honour’ B-7. Cf. Matt. xix. 28; Rev. iii. 21, iv. 43 Asc. 
(sani 10; 15; 
13. Enoch again speaks. a 
resplendent, &c.: cf. xxxix. 7, Civ. 2, cvill. 14. ae : : cae 
the habitation of upright paths /, 8: ‘the habitation and (> g) upright paths’ eg: ‘the habitation and 
uprightness’ #z: ‘the upright paths’ z. 
14. born in darkness. See v. II (note). 
led into darkness. Cf. ciii. 8. 
led gmg. Cf. ciii. 8. ‘cast’ Z, 2. 
15, Ch Wan.ext, 2,3. 
resplendent a. ‘shining’ 8. 


281 


THE TESTAMENTS; OF THE, PWweky 
PACT RUAR CG 


INTRODUCTION 


$1. THE BOOK AND ITS FORTUNES. 


THE Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs were written in Hebrew in the latter years of 
John Hyrcanus—in all probability after his final victory over the Syrian power and before his breach 
with the Pharisees—in other words, between 109 and 106. Their author was a Pharisee who 
combined loyalty to the best traditions of his party with the most unbounded admiration of 
Hyrcanus. The Maccabean dynasty had now reached the zenith of its prosperity, and in its reigning 
representative, who alone in the history of Judaism possessed the triple offices of prophet, priest, and 
king, the Pharisaic party had come to recognize the actual Messiah. 

Won over by the purity of life, nobility of character, and pre-eminent gifts of the Maccabees as 
high-priests, civil rulers, and military commanders, the Hasids, or early Pharisees, had some decades 
earlier attached themselves to this new high-priesthood, though with many a misgiving on account 
of the break in the high-priestly succession. 

The approval thus won from the reluctant Hasids, the Maccabees had deepened and strengthened 
by their achievements every year in every province of their activity, till the thought was begotten in 
many a breast, that at last the hope of Israel had come, and, in defiance of all ancient prophecy, was 
sprung from the house and lineage of Levi. 

There are good grounds for regarding Psalm cx as the outcome of such an expectation, and as 
greeting one of the Maccabees as the long-expected deliverer of Israel. But, however this may be, 
there is no doubt that our author addresses two or more Messianic hymns to John Hyrcanus, in 
whom had culminated al! the glories and gifts of this great family. The writer already sees the 
Messianic kingdom esta hed, under the sway of which the Gentiles will in due course be saved, 
Beliar overthrown, sin disappear from the earth, and the righteous dead rise to share in the blessed- 
ness of the living. 

Alas for the vanity of man’s judgement and man’s prescience. Our book had hardly been 
published, when Hyrcanus, owing to an outrage done him by the Pharisees, broke with their party, 
and joining the Sadducees, died a year or two later. His successors proved themselves the basest of 
men. Their infamy is painted in lurid colours by contemporary writers of the first century B.C., 
and by a strange irony the work, or rather, fragments of the work of one of these assailants of the 
later Maccabees, has achieved immortality by finding a covert in the chief manifesto that was issued 
on behalf of one of the earlier members of the dynasty. 

This second writer singles out three of the Maccabean priest-kings for attack, the first of whom 
he charges with every abomination; the people itself, he declares, is apostate, and chastisement 
will follow speedily—the temple will be laid waste, the nation carried afresh into captivity, whence, 
on their repentance, God will restore them again to their own land, where they shall enjoy the 
blessedness of God’s presence and be ruled by a Messiah sprung from Judah. 

When we contrast the expectations of the original writer and the actual events that followed, it 
would seem that the chief value of his work would consist in the light that it throws on this obscure 
and temporary revolution in the Messianic expectations of Judaism towards the close of the second 
century. But thisisnot so. The main, the overwhelming value of the book lies not in this province, 
but in its ethical teaching, which has achieved a real immortality by influencing the thought and 
diction of the writers of the New Testament, and even those of our Lord. This ethical teaching, 
which is very much higher and purer than that of the Old Testament, is yet its true spiritual child, 
and helps to bridge the chasm that divides the ethics of the Old and New Testaments.! 


’ That this ethical teaching belongs to the essence of the book is obvious to any careful student of the work. As 
such it forms alike its warp and woof. On the other hand, the dogmatic Christian interpolations are patches differing 
alike in colour and texture from the original material, stitched on at times where originally there was no rent at all, and 
at others rudely thrust in where a rent had been deliberately made for their insertion. See § 13. 


282 


INTRODUCTION 


After the first century of our era the fortunes of the Testaments speedily declined in Christendom. 
Though they are referred to occasionally in the next three centuries, they came to be discredited as 
an Apocryphal writing and fell under the ban of the Church. Unhappily, further, in the course of 
these centuries of their waning popularity, they underwent interpolation at the hands of Christian 
scribes, but happily many of these interpolations had not been made when the book was done into 
Armenian. 

_ The reappearance of the Testaments on the stage of history was due to the great Bishop of 
Lincoln, Robert Grosseteste, in the thirteenth century, who procured from Greece the MS. of this 
book, which is now in the University Library of Cambridge. This scholar took the book with all its 
Christian additions to be a genuine writing of the twelve sons of Jacob. 

It is perhaps needless to state that, when the critical instinct revived with the Reformation, 
Grosseteste’s view of the Testaments was summarily rejected. Nay more, as the book was regarded 
as the work of one writer, it was simply condemned as a Christian forgery. In the course of four 
centuries only one voice was raised against this mistaken verdict, and that in vain for about two 
hundred years. The twentieth century sees this book at last come into its own.! 


$2. THE TITLe: 


The general title was in all probability ‘The Testaments of the Patriarchs’. Such is the 
designation in use in the Armenian version. In the Greek MSS. the title varies. In a (= chz) bd it 
appears as Avaéfjxat rOv dddexa TlarpiapxSv tv vidv “laxoB (+ rod Harpidpxov a), a ai diabijKa Tov 1 
marp. mpos Tovs viovs adrév. In the Stichometry of Nicephorus, the Synopsis of Athanasius, and the 
anonymous list of books edited by Montfaucon, Pitra, and others, the book is simply called 
Tlatpudpyar. 

As regards the title of the individual testaments, it was no doubt simply ‘The Testament of 
Reuben’, ‘ The Testament of Simeon’, &c. If the reader refers to my edition of the Greek Versions 
of the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, pp. xliv-xlvi, he will see that, whereas the a MSS. 
uniformly give one form of title, the 8 MSS. (with the exception of adg), that is, def, give another, in 
which in addition to the name of the Patriarch the main subject of the Testament is given. Thus the 
title of Gad’s Testament is dvaOjxn [ad wept ulcovs. The titles in d are generally conflated from def and 
a; in a simply the name of the patriarch is given, while as for g, it takes a line of its own. In the 
Armenian the titles agree partly with those given in the Greek MSS. def, but oftener do not. From 
this short summary of the facts it follows that the titles in def, A are secondary. There remain now 
the forms in a and the single MS. a, and that found in the Hebrew Testament of Naphtali, i.e. 
apy) ja ne: many ‘The Testament of Naphtali the son of Jacob’. The form in a (i.e. simply the 
name of the patriarch) may be at once dismissed as an idiosyncrasy of this MS. Inthe a MSS. the 
title of the individual Testaments resembles closely that of the Hebrew Testament of Naphtali, but 
the greater number of them are obviously inaccurate and therefore not original. That of Reuben and 
some others are accurate enough ; thus a gives dia0jKn “PovBry rod mpwtordKov viod "Tax@B kal Aelas, which 
is true enough; but in the case of Naphtali we have the impossible d.adjkn NepOarelp rob dyddov viod 
"Tax® kal BéAAas. Naphtali was the second son of Bilhah. If, however, we omit in each case the name 
of the mother, we arrive possibly at the original form of the titles of the individual Testaments. 
Possibly, I say; for the order of the Testaments is not chronological, but depends on the groupings 
of the patriarchs according to their respective mothers. Thus the first six patriarchs are the sons 
of Leah, the next two are the sons of Bilhah, the next two of Zilpah, and the last two of Rachel. 
Hence it is more than probable that the position of the patriarch as the first, third, or seventh son, 
was not mentioned in the original title. Thus we conclude that the evidence points to the following 
as the original form. ' 

apy pS ONNY = Siad7j«n “PovBiys viod "laxé8 = ‘ The Testament of Reuben the son of Jacob’. 


§ 3. THE GREEK MSS. 


(2) Bodley MS. Baroccio 133. Quarto. This paper MS. contains several treatises by different 
hands of the latter part of the fourteenth century. The Testaments occupy folios 1794-2056. Their 
general title and. those of Judah and Gad are written in red. There are two copies of this MS. on 
paper, one in the Bodley MS. Smith 117, belonging to the close of the seventeenth century, and the 
second in Emmanuel College, Cambridge. This MS. is remarkable for the large number of 
omissions, at times of entire chapters. 

(6) University Library, Cambridge, ff. i. 24. Quarto. This parchment MS. contains four 


1 From the present writer’s edition of the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, p. xvi sq. 


283 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCH SM 


works, of which the Testaments are the fourth, written on folios 203a-2626. It belongs to the tenth 
century. It is written in double columns, twenty lines ina column. The initials and titles are in 
red, except the first, which is in gold. It was from this MS. that Grossetestes Latin Version 
was made. ; ; 

(c) Vatican Library, Cod. Graec. 731. This is a small octavo MS. written on paper, with 
twenty-two or twenty-three lines on each page. Besides the Testaments it contains extracts from 
the Fathers. The Testaments are given on folios 97a-1674. The script of the latter belongs 
probably to the thirteenth century. This is the most important of all the MSS. 

(d) Vatican Library, Gk. 1238. This is a vellum MS. in three volumes of the LXX belonging 
to the thirteenth century. On the close of the LXX follows the Testament of Job, folios 340a-3490, 
and on 350-380 of our present text. There are from 33-39 lines in each page. Strangely enough, 
above the general title of the Testaments, Avaéjjxat rv 18 Tarpiapyv vidy ’laxéB, appear the words 
Aentijs Tevéoews, which is one of the titles of the Book of Jubilees. That there was a close relation 
between these books we know independently. 

(e) Mount Athos MS. This MS. is written in two columns of forty lines each in a good hand 
of the tenth century. The Testaments are given on folios 1970-229a. This MS. is of great interest, 
as it contains three large additions to the text: the first before xal éxi a¥pyous in T. Lev. ii. 3, 
consisting of a prayer of Jacob; the second after the word 7jyepév in T. Lev. xviii. 2, and the third 
after ris ys in T. Ash. vii. 2. The third consists of two and two-third columns of certain Christian 
disquisitions on love and the Trinity. The second is the remarkable Greek fragment, which I have 
printed in Appendix III in my edition of the Text, and which we show elsewhere to be a translation 
from a Hebrew work, which was probably an original source of the Testaments. 

(f) Paris MS. 938. This is a beautifully written MS. of the tenth century. The Testaments 
are given on the first seventy-two folios. Each page contains twenty-three lines. On folio 1a there 
is a list of Old Testament names, including the twelve patriarchs, with their meanings. The 
Testaments proper begin on 1d. It is characteristic of this MS. that after the title of each Testament 
it adds the meaning of the proper name, and also that, at the conclusion of each Testament, it adds 
the number of years that the patriarch lived. In the latter feature it is followed by the first Slavonic 
Recension (S'). After the Testaments follow the Testament of Job and other writings. 

(g) MS. 411 in the Library of the Monastery of St. John the Evangelist in Patmos. It is 
a quarto MS. written on parchment, and assigned by H. C. Coxe to the sixteenth century. 

(2) Mount Sinai MS. No. 547 in the Library of St. Catherine. See Gardthausen, Caz. Codd. 
Graec. Sinaiticorum, p. 132. This MS., 14°5 by 10°35 cm., was written in the seventeenth century. 
It contains seventeen lines on each page. It is incomplete and comes to an end with T. Jos. xv. 7. 
This MS. has the following peculiar introduction : "Iwdvvov rod more éBpaiov eldnots TGv diaOnKOy Tv 1/3" 
vidv Tod Tarpidpxov “laxk@B petappacdeioa amd lovdarxod d.ad€xtov eis “EAAnvixjv. The statement is true. 
but where the scribe got it we cannot determine. 

(2). Mount Sinai MS. This MS. was discovered accidentally in the Convent Library in the spring 
of 1906 by Mrs. Gibson. This MS. was written not earlier than the seventeenth century. It con- 
tains 21-23 lines on each page. It has the same peculiar introduction as %. See preceding MS. 


$4. THE ARMENIAN MSS. 


There are many MSS. of this version. The first five are designated by the symbols attached 
to them in the Venice edition of the text by the Mechitarist Fathers. The rest owe their designa- 
tion to the present editor. When cited they appear as A%, A», &c. 

A*. Mechitarist Library of St. Lazzaro, Venice, No. 345. This MS.., five by seven inches, was 
written in the year 1220 on paper. It belongs to the first recension of the text. 

A™. Mechitarist Library of St. Lazzaro, No. 280. This MS. is the worst representative of the 
second recension of the Armenian version. 

A. Mechitarist Library of St. Lazzaro, No. 679. This MS., six by ten inches, was written 
towards the end of the fifteenth century, in double columns of twenty-six lines each, and consists of 
679 folios. It belongs to the first recension. 

A’. Mechitarist Library of St. Lazzaro, No. 229. This MS. Bible, eight by ten inches, was 
written on vellum in double columns of fifty lines each in the year 1655. 

A*. Mechitarist Library of St. Lazzaro, No. 1366. This MS. Bible was written in the sixteenth 
century on paper, in double columns of forty-three lines each. 

& evs This MS. Bible was written in the sixteenth century and belongs to the London Bible 
ociety. 

A‘. This MS. Bible, which belongs to the Catholicos of the Armenian Church at Edschmiadzin 

284 


Ney 


in Armenia, was there photographed by Conybeare in 1891. The MS. is written in two columns of 
fifty lines each in a beautiful hand. 

As. This MS. Bible, which was written in the seventeenth century, belongs to Lord Zouche. 

_ _A*. Bodleian Library, Oxford, No. e. 30 (thirteenth century). Only five Testaments are found 
in this MS., and in the following order: Simeon (folio 168"), Levi (1737), Joseph (183°), Benjamin 
(195°), Judah (2022). The MS. is written in two or more hands (latest eighteenth century), and there 
are two types of text. Fortunately the four first-mentioned Testaments and T. Judah i-xiv. 8° ° 
(i.e. gay... aloxpopnporeiv) belong to the first recension, and only T. Jud. xiv. 8*°-xxvi, to the 
second. This MS. thus attests the same type of text as A*?, but it is more closely related to A® 
than to A®. 

All the preceding MSS. have been used by the present editor. There are three others, of two 
of which he has no knowledge. 

Ai, A Vatican MS. of the Bible cited once by Conybeare. See 7QR viii. (1896), p. 260. It 
belongs to the seventeenth century. 

A*, Mechitarist Library, Vienna, No. 126 (Dashian’s Catalog der armenischen Handschrifien 
der Mechitaristen-Bibliothek zu Wien, 1895, p. 71, 411 sqq.), This MS. was written in the year 
1388. On the first 105 folios it contains the history of Joseph and Asenath. Then follow the 
Testaments. Of these Reuben, Dan, Naphtali, are missing. The order of the remaining nine is 
peculiar, agreeing in the first five with that of A®. Thus we have Simeon, Levi, Joseph, Benjamin, 
Judah, Issachar, Zebulun, Gad, Asher. A study of the titles of these Testaments given in Sinker’s 
Appendix, p. 25, and the German translation of the T. Jud. xxiv-xxvi, and T. Benj. x. 8°-xii, by 
Dr. Paul Hunanian, makes it at once clear that A* belongs to the first Armenian recension, and 
furthermore, that Ak is more nearly related to A** than to A”, and to A® than to ines 

(A}). The Hof-Bibliothek, Vienna, No. 11 (Dashian’s Catalog der armenischen HSS.,p.ig,1891). 


INTRODUCTION 


§ 5. THE SLAVONIC VERSION AND ITS TWO RECENSIONS Slot 


This version is late and is based on the type of text represented by ae/, and of these it attaches 
most closely to f; for S' always and occasionally S* agree in making the addition at the close of 
each Testament, that is to be found in f alone of the Greek MSS. This version, as I have shown in 
my edition, exhibits traces of the influence also of a. 

The two Slavonic recensions S! and S? are primarily taken from the so-called Palea (Greek 
[laAad), which contain short accounts of events mentioned in the Old Testament. They are printed in 
Tichonravov’s work entitled Pamjatniki otrechennot Russkoi Literaturt (2 vols., St. Petersburg, 1863). 


§ 6. THE ARMENIAN VERSION IN ITS TWO RECENSIONS As, AB. 
VALUE OF THIS VERSION. 
As we have already observed in § 4, there are two recensions of this version, At, A8. A+, which 
is found in non-Biblical MSS., includes four MSS., Ak, The relations of these MSS. can be repre- 
sented as follows :— 








i ne Ab 
A8, which appears to be found only in Biblical MSS,., includes AP*"s, Of these AY” stands aloof 
from the rest. Its idiosyncrasies are innumerable, but in a very few cases, where it diverges from the 
other representatives of this recension, it has the support of the best Greek MSS. The relations of 
these MSS are as follows :— 
AB 





a Acts Abe 
The variations between A“ and A¥% are very numerous, but the greater part of them appear to have 
arisen from internal corruption, or from the attempt on the part of the scribe of A* to abbreviate the 
But over and above these differences, there are certain important sections where the differences 


285 


escte 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


between the two recensions go back to the Greek, as in T. Levi ii. 7-10, xiv. 1, where A« agrees 
with a against 6, and in T. Levi iii. i-5, where Aa is less corrupt than a, and gives the nearest 
reproduction of the original Hebrew archetype. 

Exclusive of the sections just mentioned, A, taken as a whole, agrees with 8 S against a (see my 
edition of the Text, p. xv sq.), But within @ there are two secondary types of text, to which aef and 
bag belong respectively. All but universally A agrees with ddg where ddg differs from aéf. 

The value of A will be best understood when we come to deal with the Christian interpolations 
inthe text. These are by no means absent from A, but they are present in a much less degree in A 
than inaand£. This is especially the case in the last two Testaments. 

But, however valuable A is, it must be admitted that on almost every page it is guilty of omis- 
sions. These omissions are made obvious to the reader by the use of brackets. All words enclosed 
thus ' 'are omitted by A. 


§ 7. THE GREEK VERSION IN TWO RECENSIONS a, f. 


The Greek version is found in two forms, a and 8. I do not call them recensions, since, as I have 
sought in my edition to prove, they very probably go back to distinct forms in the Hebrew. 
a and tts characteristics. a is represented by three MSS., chi. Their relations may be represented 


as follows :— 
Qa 


| | 


C ht 





hi are derived from one and the same parent and show signs of a mixed ancestry (i.e. the influence 
of 8), and herein diverge occasionally from c. a shows some omissions such as T. Reub. ii. 3-43, 
T. Jud. vi. 1-2, xii. 6-10, &c. Though much freer than 8 from Christian interpolations, it too has 
suffered from the Christian scribes’ ill-directed activity. 

B and its characteristics. B is represented by six MSS., abdefg, which represent two diverging 
types of text, aef showing affinities with a, and ddg with A. We have already pointed out (§ 5) 
that S is derived from aef. aef agree closely together, but not so bdg. Furthermore ddg are 
remarkable for large additions to the text in T. Zeb. vi. 4-6, vii—viii. 3, ix. 8°. These may have 
belonged to the original tradition. 

Space will not admit of a description of dg, but a few characteristics of 6 should here be noted. 
The variants of this MS. are sometimes due to deliberate emendation. Thus in T. Lev. xvii. 2 the 
priesthood of an ancient worthy is said to have been TAnpys peta Kuplov, ie. » DY ody, ‘perfect with 
the Lord.’ But the scribe of 0, failing naturally to understand this Semitic idiom, wrote mAnpns pera 
poBov kvpiov. Not infrequently it alters the text against all the other authorities. Thus it adds kal 
Oavpacov in T. Jos. xvii. 5, Gioeode in T. Jud. xvi. 2, changes ovvrpéxer into cvvepyet in T, Benj. iv. 5 
ovyyevy into cuynevoOns in T. Jos. vii. 3, and in iv. 5, &c. On the other hand, it possibly preserves 
two words kai vorov in T. Jud. v. 2, which have been lost in all the other MSS. Though a good 
Sere ne the pepe édg, b cannot form a secure foundation on which to build a text. 

: is MS, exhibits peculiarities on every page. Though acreein n ith be, i 
readings of a and also of af against dg. es es DO ee 

The affinities of the various MSS. and Versions may be represented as follows :— 


H CHebrew Archetype) 


Hi & (ist Hebrews Recension) tH B(2ndHebrew Recension) 





In this table all the main connexions : i 
are represented, but n j ; 
the descendants of B have exerted on 47. : Batiniepre nis LS Bk 


286 


INTRODUCTION 


§ 8. THE GREEK VERSION A TRANSLATION FROM THE HEBREW. 


Apart from Grabe, no notable scholar has advocated a Hebrew original till recently. Even 
Grabe, though he declared for a Hebrew original, advanced no linguistic arguments in support of his 
contention. It is remarkable that such a great Semitic scholar as Dillmann (Herzog’s Real-Encyc.? 
Xli. 362) could write: ‘Since the publication of Nitzsch’s study all are agreed that the book is not 
a translation, but was originally written in Greek.’ Dr. Sinker in the Cambridge edition of the 
Greek text is still more pronounced. 

To two Jewish scholars, Kohler (1893) and Gaster (1904) within the last twenty years belongs 
the honour of reopening the question of a Hebrew original of the Testaments, but the former did not 
advance any linguistic evidence, and the latter, though he brought forward a few good points, failed 
to establish his thesis. Shortly after the above articles were written the present writer began his 
study of the Testaments, in the course of which he early came to the conclusion, which he set forth 
in the Excyc. Biblica i. 241 (1899), that the bulk of the work was written before 100 B.C., and sub- 
sequently in fuil detail in The Greek Versions of the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs in 1908. 
Since that date this thesis has been accepted by all Semitic scholars. 

In what follows only a few specimens of the evidence for a Hebrew original can be given. A fuller 
statement of the evidence will be found in my edition of The Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, 
pp. xlii-l (1908), and a nearly complete one in my edition of the Greek Versions (pp. xxiii-xxxix) 
above referred to. 


1°, Hebrew constructions and expressions are to be found on every page. Though the vocabulary is Greek, 
the idiom is frequently Hebraic and foreign to the Greek language. 

T. Reub. i. 6 dyvot vedrnros = ‘sins of youth’, i.e. ONY) PWD; iil. 8 curr év 73 vouw = ANA JI; iv. 6 
ovK ev Kaip@ atTov = ONY NPI; vi. IT ev atTo é€eAcEatro = IN 13. 

T. Sim. ii. 12 xa¢ye = D3) in its adversative meaning = ‘ but’—a non-Greek use. Cf. Eccles. ili. 13, vi. 7 ; 
in iv. 4 Hyarnoé pe orv Tois ddeAois pov (a) = "NX DY INN. In B we have the normal rendering és tods 
dAXovs ddeAhovs. Vv. 4 ev Aevl adiKjoovor = VT da; V. 5 od dvvncovTa mpos Aevi = 155 sda x5 (the same 
Hebraism recurs in T. Iss. iv. 4; T. Dan v. 4); vi. 5 cwlwv év aird tov “Addy. Here as in T. Lev. il, 11 & 
aire (or éav7o) = Ysa, which the translator should have rendered simply by atrés. Cf. Midrash Wajjikra 
on Ley. xvii. 3 DANS DNt ‘DyyI NON. 

T. Lev. viii. 8 cAddov . . . éAatas awudrytos = ‘a branch of the oil-olive’,i.e. jow mt; cf. Deut. vin. 8 ; 
Vill. 14 éruxAnOynoerar aiT@ dvoma Kavov = WIN DY » Sp. 

T. Jud. vii. 1 dyAos Bapis = 135 Sm ‘a numerous army’; xii. 8 fws tHs Cuffs pov = "na ‘so long as 
I lived’; xx. 4 év o77/Oe édcréwv airod, which is absolutely unintelligible, is full of meaning in the Hebrew = 
yoxy 353 ‘on his very heart’; xxv. 1 éapyou oxijmrpwv = ‘chiefs of the tribes’ (nwA3Y). 

T. Ash. iii. 1 6 Ocds dvarravetau cis aitny = AI jw onds ‘God hath his habitation therein’. 

T. Jos. ii. 3 2%uxé pe 6 Kvpios cis oixtippors évadriov = spd orvonnd one ind (cf. Dan. i. 9), ‘granted me to 
find mercy in the sight of’; xil. 3 rotnoov per’ aitod kpiow = YOY DAWID NYY. 

T. Benj. x. 11 karouxynoere er eArride ev €por = 13 noid yawn ‘ye shall dwell secuvedy with me’. The same 
mistranslation is found in Ezek. xxviii. 26, xxxiv. 28, &c. 

The above instances are sufficient in themselves to prove the derivation of the text from a Hebrew 
original. The bulk of the above expressions could hardly, on any hypothesis, have been written for the first 
time in Greek. But the evidence can be multiplied fourfold, both in quantity and conclusiveness. 

2°. Dittographic renderings of the same Hebrew phrase, and expressions im the Greek implying dittographs 
in the Hebrew MS. before the translator. : 

In T. Naph. iii. 5 dad xarouxnoias . . . Taas THY yhV doikyrov is a clear instance of dittography. The 
original may have been 1 s53 which is twice rendered in the Greek. In vi. 2 the meposthiS pegeey Taplxwv 
éxros vavtov is due to the same cause. peorov Tapixov = omy xd, a corruption of Dn nba = EKTOS 
vavrév. One more will here suffice. In viii. 4, 6 there are a strophe and an antistrophe. The latter consists 
of six lines, but the former of seven. Now if we compare them closely, we discover the six lines of the 
antistrophe correspond line for line to the first six lines in the strophe. Thus the seventh line 1s against 
the structure of the stanza. It is also against the sense. How then did it come to be here? We discover 
the reason the moment we retranslate into Hebrew. The genuine line kal 6 xvipwos dyamjoa iuas (cf. the 
corresponding line in the antistrophe Kai 6 xvpios puojoes avrov) = DIAN’ ods) which was written corruptly 
a second time as D3INN) DSN7, Sane 

20; Paronomasiae which are lost in the Greek can be restored by retranslation into Hebrew. 

We can recover more than a dozen of these by retranslation, the most of them having to do with the 
names of the patriarchs, i. e. on Simeon, Gershom, Kohath, Merari, Jochebed, Judah, Issachar, Gad, Zebulun, 
Naphtali, Bilhah, Asher, Benjamin. See my edition of the Greek Versions, pp. XXVi-Xxvil. 

4°. Many passages which are obscure or wholly sieges in the Greek become clear on retranslation. 

2.07 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


In T. Reub. iv. 9 wodda éroinoe air, where the text is speaking of Potiphar’s wife trying to ensnare 


Joseph, cannot be right. As Perles has pointed out, 1 m25n is corrupt for y5 39NN, ie. ‘she lay in wait 
for him’. 

In T. Sim. iit. 6 Kai Aowrov cvprabet To POovovpéev 

Kal ovyywooKer Tos "teyardow't adtov 

kal oUTws Taverat TOD POdvov 
cannot be right, and as Perles recognizes the error lies in éyaréow which is against the parallelism and sense. 
Here rots dy. avréy = INN, corrupt for "8 ‘those hostile to him’. 

In T. Lev. ii. 8 the second heaven is said to be brighter and more brilliant-than the first, jv yap Kal thos 
év ait@ dzeipov. Clearly there is something wrong here. The greater brightness of the second heaven cannot 
be due to its greater loftiness. The error, therefore, lies in the twos. This word = 7123, which is corrupt for 
A = fas or déyyos. Thus the brightness of the second heaven was due to a boundless light (pds dzreipov) 
that was therein. This light may have been physical, if we may adopt the Talmudic view, which represents 
the sun, moon, and stars as being in the second heaven (Chag. 12>). 

In T. Jud. ix. 3 xat typOnt vexpos év dpe Zueip, Kal mropevdmevon év ’Avovipap aréOavev (8, S*), the words 
kai. . . dmé€Gavey are omitted by a as unintelligible. But a comparison with the Midrash Wajjissau where 
the same incident is recounted shows that this clause belongs to the original text, and in the form in which it 
appears in B, S. Moreover these authorities help us to discover how the corruption in vexpds arose. 
vexpoés = 723), whereas the Midrash has mbna = Tetpavpaticpevos. ‘Thus Esau was wounded on Mount Seir 
and died as he was passing over Anoniram. 

T. Jud. xxi. 6 of péev tKudvvevovowt aixpaduriopevot, of d€ mAovTODTW apmracovres To. ddAdtpia. Here 
instead of xwdvvevovow, we require a verb forming an antithesis to zAovrotow. Now xuwduvevovow = 13D" 
(late Hebrew) which in earlier Hebrew = rroxevovow. 

T. Zeb. 1x. 2 édy dé cis todd StapeOdow, 7 yn adavie aird, kal yivovta. teixatappovytat. Here, as Perles 
has pointed out, edxarappdvyra = OND), which is either a corruption or secondary form of 359° = ‘ melt away’, 
‘vanish’. The same corruption underlies és %3wp ‘taxpynorovt (= ‘as useless water’) = DYDNID2 DDD, corrupt 
for DYDD) DDD ‘ vanishing away as water’. 

In T. Jos. xi. 7 érAnOuvey airov év Xproiw Kat dpyupiv Kal tépywt(a). 8, A omit Kat epy as unintelligible. 
But by retranslation the source of the corruption springs to light. py» = 72y, which the translator read as 
M73¥ = épyw, but which he should have read as 772Y = ‘household servants’. 


The above form a small part of the passages where the Greek text has to be retranslated in order 
to discover the source of the corruption. In all these passages there is no divergence between the 
MSS. and Versions. In the next section we shall discuss only those passages in the text where the 
MSS. and Versions attest different readings, a generally standing in opposition to B, A, S. 

By means of the evidence thus forthcoming we hope to advance a stage further than we have yet 
reached. We have proved that our book is derived from an Hebrew original: we shall now try and 
prove that a and 8 did not originate in the Greek but are derived respectively from two distinct 
Hebrew recensions H« and HB. 


§9. THE TWO GREEK TYPES OF TEXT, a AND B, APPEAR TO BE DERIVED FROM TWO 
HEBREW RECENSIONS, He anp HBé, 


a and B are not, strictly speaking, Greek recensions; for their chief variations appear not to 
have originated in the Greek, but to go back to diverse forms of text already existing in the Hebrew 
which we denote as H« and HS. Of these two recensions, He and H&, sometimes one gives the 
correct text, sometimes the other. According to the most likely hypothesis He was first translated 
into Greek, i.e. a, and then H& was rendered into Greek by a translator who had a before him. In 
regard to the Book of Daniel the same hypothesis is necessary. The LXX version was undoubtedly 
made first, and subsequently that of Theodotion from a Semitic text diverging considerably from 
that used by the translator of the LXX version, not merely in individual readings but also in the 
subject-matter, especially in Daniel iv. Now in the case of the text before us the same phenomenon 
is repeated, but on a very much smaller scale. In T. Lev. ii. 7-ili, the description of the Three 
Heavens is more or less faithfully handed down in a A , whereas in the corresponding chapters in 
8 there is an account of the Seven Heavens. There is no good ground for assuming that this 
divergence originated in the Greek and not in the Hebrew ; for such duplicate accounts of the same 
Se are aa eee the Hebrew books of the O.T., and in the Zadokite Fragments 

oreover, 1 will now give a few of the passages, where a and 3 un iatione 
in the Hebrew. The eee will be ucdenlyees ee Oh eae aes ae 


Hw Benj, xi. 2:(a) exounOn vrvw Karo. (B, A) dréOave . . . ey Ynper KAAG. 
Here H8 (i.e. 8, A) is undoubtedly right. In He apy (= yijpe.) Was corrupted into mw = verve. The same 
288 





INTRODUCTION 


corruption was present in both H¢ and H6 in T. Zeb. x. 6; T. Dan vii. 1 (); T. Ash. viii. r; T. Jos. xx. 4; 
whereas both Hebrew recensions were right in T. Iss. vii. 9. The above conclusion is confirmed by the fact 
that in the Hebrew Test. Naph. i. 1 we find Any mwa. Though this Testament is not the original 
Testament of Naphtali, it preserves in several passages a more original text than the Greek. 


T. Ash. vi. 6 (a) etopéper airov eis Conv aidvor. (8, A) wapoprbetras adrov ev Cw. 
Here His right and not HS. The angel of peace, who is mentioned earlier in the verse 
soul into eternal life. Here eiodéper = mn’, which in H4 was corrupted into on». 
the usual rendering of nny, as we find in T. Ben 
LXX implies the same corruption of An» into 
converse corruption in Job xxxix. 25. 


, conducts the good 
ch i édynyet would have been 
J. VL. I 6 yap dyyeXos Tijs cipnvys Sdyyel Tiv Wuxnv airov. The 

on’ in 1 Sam. xxii. 4; Isa. lvii. 18, and Symmachus the 


T. Reub. iv. 1 (a) oxOodvres év Epyous Kadots Kal év (B) woxOoivres ev epyois Kat arothavipevor ev ypap- 
ypdppacu. pact. 


Here a, which is in part supported by A, is clearly right.  é épyos KaAois = OY DYDYOA, of which ow 
was corrupted in H& into ow) = xal GrroTAavepevor.' 





T. Ash. vi. 5 (a) dre yap rovnpa 7 Wyn darépyerau. (B, A) dre yap rerapaypévn 4 Wuyi, amrepxeTat. 
Here nvayn (= rerapaypévn) in H8 was corrupted in H@ into nyvn = Trovnpa. 
T. Jos. iv. 7 (aaef) dvrediroveccet. (4g, A) éovdsrnoe. 


Here H?@ read ananna which was a corruption of H8 ayinnn. 


T. Jos. iv. 3 (a) ris 8oAubryTOs airis. (B, A) rijs Aiyurrias. 
Here Ht = 1782) ‘from her snares’ (so Perles, but neither SdAvos nor its derivatives ever render. this 
Hebrew word in the LXX): or = AM IND and H4 nyyny. 


T. Zeb. iv. 3 (a) dwed00n = 70103. (B, A) éxpaby = 75100. 


The above instances are sufficient to establish the existence of two distinct types of text in the 
Hebrew—H2, H8, For over thirty other passages in the Testaments where the variations postulate 
the same conclusion see Introd. to my Text, § 12. 


§ 10. DATE OF THE ORIGINAL HEBREW. 


The date of the original Hebrew is not difficult to determine. Thus Reuben (T. Reub. vi. 10-11) 
admonishes his sons: ‘ Draw ye near to Levi in humbleness of heart, that ye may receive a blessing 
from his mouth . . . because him hath the Lord chosen to be king over all the nation.’ Herea high- 
priest who is also king is referred to. Such a combination of officers naturally makes us think of the 
Maccabean priest-kings of the second century B.C. Moreover, the possibility of doubting this reference 
is excluded by the words that immediately follow: ‘And bow down before his seed; for on our 
behalf it shall die in wars visible and invisible and shall be among you an eternal king.’ A similar 
statement is made in T. Sim.v. 5. Thus the high-priest is not only to be high-priest and civil ruler, 
but also a warrior. That the Maccabean high-priests are here designed cannot be reasonably 
doubted. But the identification becomes undeniable as further marks and tokens of this priestly 
dynasty come to light. Thus it is said that this priesthood shall be called by a new name 
(T. Lev. viii. 14). Now the Maccabean high-priests were the first Jewish priests to assume the title _ 
‘ priests of the Most High God’—the_title-anciently_borne by Melchizedek, and applied to the 
Maccabean high-priests in Jubilees, the Assumption of Moses, Josephus, and the Talmud. A kindred 
title of the same significance is applied according to a growing body of expositors to Simon the 
Maccabee in Ps. cx. In due accord with these facts our text (T. Lev. viii. 14) declares that a new 

ould mark the new priesthood. 
Rha ae praises Bade in this book could not apply to all the Maccabean priest-kings ; for, 
since it was written by a Pharisee, it could not have been composed after the breach arose between 
John Hyrcanus and the Pharisees towards the close of the second century B.c. Thus the date of 
composition lies between 153, when Jonathan the Maccabee assumed the high-priesthood, and the 
year of the breach of Hyrcanus with the Pharisees. But the limits can be determined more closely. 
To only one member of the Maccabean dynasty are the prophetic gifts assigned in our text (T. 
Lev. viii. 15) in conjunction with the functions of kingship and priesthood. Now in all Jewish 
history the triple offices were ascribed to only one individual, John Hyrcanus. Hence we conclude 
that the Testaments were written between 137 and 107 B.C. But the limits may be fixed still more 





1 Since xadois would be the stock rendering of D°3'0, it is possible that this word stood in H* and was corrupted 
into D'Vid) in HEP. 
1105 ,2 


289 U 


THE TESTAMENTS ‘OF THE TWELVE PATRiXNRGr. 


definitely. For the text refers most probably to the destruction of Samaria, T. Lev. vi. 11. In 
that case our book was written between 109 and 107 B.C. (see my edition, pp. I-liii). 


$11. INTEGRITY, AUTHORSHIP, SOURCES. 


The groundwork, which consists of about eleven-twelfths of the Testaments, after the removal 
of the Jewish and Christian additions (§§ 12, 13), presents, it must be confessed, a certain want of 
coherence, and the parts dealing with the duty of submission to Levi, or to Levi and Judah jointly, 
come in at times very abruptly. Notwithstanding, I accept on the whole the unity of the book; for 
its two main characteristics—the strictly Hasid element in the book and its loyal acceptance of the 
Maccabean dynasty—belong to the period to which our author belongs and to none other before or 
after. Furthermore, both these parts of the book are universalistic in tone. On the other hand, 
much of the unevenness of the book may be due to the use of sources and to faulty transmission of 
the text. 

The author was a Pharisee of the early type. He was an upholder of the Law and of the 
Temple sacrifices: he looked for the Messianic kingdom and the resurrection of the body to a new - 
life therein. He taught the duties of chastity, truthfulness, forgiveness, self-control, and temperance. 
Our author has drawn freely on earlier books and traditions. He shows a wide acquaintance with 
the O.T., Sirach, and 1 Enoch, as well as of other ancient works—such as the account of the War of 
Jacob and his sons against the Amorites utilized in T. Jud. iii—vii, Jubilees xxxiv. 1-9, the Midrash 
Waijjissau (see my Text, pp. 235-8), and the Book of Jasher: the account of the war between Jacob 
and Esau utilized in T. Jud. ix, Jubilees xxxvii-xxxviii, and the Jalkut Shimeoni i. 132. 

Another very important source for the T. Levi has just been discovered in the lost Hebrew 
document, from which the Aramaic and Greek fragments are printed in my Greek Versions of the 
Testaments, pp. 245-56, and translated in my Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, pp. 228-35. This 
source deals with the temple ritual of the second century B.C. and is therefore of great importance 
from an historical] standpoint. 

Our author drew also upon a Hebrew document dealing with the ‘Two Ways’ in the T. Asher 
and upon Jewish tradition generally on a great variety of points. 


§ 12. JEWISH ADDITIONS TO THE ORIGINAL WorK. 


A large body of these additions can be classed under one head, as interpolated at a certain 
period and written with a well-defined object. The period was about 70-40 B.C., and the object of 
the additions was the overthrow of the Maccabean high-priesthood, which in the first century B.C. 
had become guilty of the most abandoned. lewdness and baseness. 


1% Furst century additions :-— 

Lev. x, xiv—xvi. 

Jud. xvii. 2—xviii. 1 (?), xxi. 6-xxiii, xxiv. 4-6. 
Zeb. ix. 

Dan v. 6—7, vii. 3(?). 

Naph. iv. 

. Gad viii. 2. 

Ash. vii. 4-7. 

In these passages the nation is declared to be guilty of apostasy ; the laying waste of the 
Temple is predicted, and a second captivity: a redemption of the nation either by God Himself or 
by a Messiah sprung from Judah, and a blessed return to their own land. In all these respects these 
passages agree with the Psalms of Solomon, which belong to the same period. 

_ Another characteristic of these additions is their frequent citation of the Enoch literature. The 
citations cannot be found in 1 Enoch, but bear a close affinity to certain passages in 2 Enoch, whence 
we may reasonably infer the existence of certain portions of that literature. which were subsequently 
embodied in some form in 2 Enoch. 


HHSHSSH 


2°. Other additions of various dates :— 
Dy Reub. it, =i. 

T. Lev. xvii. 1-9. 

T. Zeb. vi. 4-6, vii-viii. 3. 

PS jios. x5 —xviti. 

On this section see my edition, pp. lvii-lxi. 


290 


INTRODUCTION 


§ 13. CHRISTIAN ADDITIONS. 


These additions are found in nearly all the Testaments and were made at different periods. 
The dominant characteristic of all these additions (which are bracketed in the following translations 
and a full list of which is given in my edition, pp. Ixi—Ixv) is their dogmatic character. They always 
import dogmatic Christian statements into a Jewish text, to which they are naturally alien in 
character. A few English scholars on the ground of these undoubted interpolations have proceeded 
to infer that all other passages common to the Testaments XII Patriarchs and the N.T. must have 
been interpolated in the former from the latter. But these scholars have failed to observe the 
characteristic differences between the two sets of passages in question. In the case of the first we 
have dogmatic Christian statements interpolated in a Yewish work at variance not only with the 
teaching and character of that work as a whole, but also at variance with their respective contexts. 
But in regard to the second, we have ethical sayings and teachings, which are in harmony not only with 
the spirit of the book as a whole, but also with their respective contexts. The ethical teaching, while 
very much loftier than that of the O.T., is yet its true spiritual child, and, though not so pure and 
sublime as that of the N.T., is a product of the school that prepared the way for the N.T. 

It is.hard to understand the mental attitude of those who regard these ethical teachings as 
Christian interpolations. Three-fourths of these teachings have no direct parallels in the N.T., and 
they stand practically on the same level as the rest, which are parallel to, or rather have exercised 
a direct influence on, the N.T. The only reasonable conclusion is that these ethical teachings belong 
to the original Testaments. 

Fragments of an ethical tradition which was largely independent of the O.T. are preserved in 
the Story of Ahikar. That this story with its moral goes back to a very ancient date we now know, 
since Aramaic fragments of the fifth century B.C. have been recently discovered. For the account 
of this story the reader should consult Dr. Rendel Harris’ study of it at the close of this volume. 
Now our author appears to have borrowed a few of his sayings from this story. Thus— 


Ahikar, Syr. Version 28 (Syr. 28; Arab. 19>, 58>). 
‘If thine enemy meet thee with evil meet him 
with wisdom’ (‘ with good’ Syr. Frag. 20). 


Greek version preserved in Aesop. xxvi. 6 tots €& 
re x‘ , > x 4 a x AN 
tpdtrovow pi) POdver, dAAG adyxarpe- POovav yap ceavTov 


pardAov Brawes. 


T. Jos. xvii. 2 ‘If any one seeketh to do evil 
to thee do him a good turn, and pray for him, and 
so from all evil shall ye be redeemed of the Lord’. 
Ctl Benj: iit. 3. 


T. Gad ill. 3 (6 pucdv) 7d KatopBodyte pOovet. vii. 1 
ed 8¢ eis irép buds ebododrar py AvTEloOe, GAN’ ebxeoHe 
brép adtov iva TeAciws evododirar (bdegAS'). 2 kat 
édv ert mAciov sWodta, ph Oovette. T. Sim. ill. 6 
cuptrabet TE Pbovoupeve. 


These parallels are close; but it will be observed how our author has touched to finer issues 
and glorified what he has borrowed, far above the highest imaginings of Ahikar. 


Ahikar Syr. 19 (Syr. Frag. 7) ‘My son, go not 
after the beauty of a woman: and lust not 
after her in thy heart.’ 


T. Reub. iv. 1 ph otv mpoodgxete, Téxva pou, KéNos 
yuvauxGv. Cf. T. Jud. xvii. 1; T. Iss. iv. 4. T. Benj. 
Vill. 2 6 €xwv Sidvoray Kaapdy (8S)... obx dpa yuvatka 
eis Topvetav. 


With the above we might compare Matt. v. 28 was 6 BXémwv yuvaika mpds TO emBuptoar abtihy dn énolyevoev 


> XN > aA $2. > a 
QuTnV eV TH KGPOLG GUTOU. 


Once more in T. Jos. iii. 5 the words, which Joseph uses with regard to himself, éav d€ ame dnjper 

Ns \ 297 Pee lal / 
6 Kbpids ov olvoy ovK Emivov Kal eAdpBavdv pov Thy Tpopyy Kal edidouv adriy rots menowv, seem to be used 
deliberately to contrast his conduct with that of Nadan the nephew of Ahikar, who acted in the 


opposite fashion, when he believed Ahikar was dead. 


As Drs. James and Harris have already 


pointed out, the story of Ahikar lies at the base of the Parable of the Wicked Servant, Matt. xxiv. 


48-51 || Luke xii. 45-6. 


§ 14. 
See my edition pp. lxxiv—lxxviii. 


INFLUENCE ON JEWISH AND PATRISTIC LITERATURE. 


§ 15. INFLUENCE ON THE NEW TESTAMENT. 
Since the influence of the Testaments on the N.T. has been very extensive only some of the 


chief instances of this influence can be touched on here. 


The reader can consult my edition, 


pp. Ixxviii-xcii, where it is shown that the Sermon on the Mount reflects in several instances the 


2g1 


U 2 


‘ 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRI. 


spirit and even reproduces the very phrases of our text: that many passages in the Gospels exhibit 
traces of the same, and that St. Paul seems to have used the book as a vade mecumt. 


1. Forgiveness. Matt. xvill. 15 édv 8€ dpaptioy 
Cae: , Y mr SUX \ a \ > na 
5 ddeAdds Gov vraye Edey§ov adrov petakd vod Kai adrov 
povov. 

XVili. 35 €dy ph afte Exacros TO GdeAPG adtod Grd 
TOV Kapdi@v bydr. 


T. Gad vi. 3 (8) édv tis Gpaprioe Els oe cire ev 
225A DS: See Nog eek , ” Ss. 
avTo ev eipyvy . . . Kal €av . . . peTavonon aes atTw. 


vi. 6 Hovxacov py ed€yEns. v. 7 dhes adta dd 


Kapdias. 


With the above we must take Luke xvii. 3 édv dpdpty 6 ddeddds cov émtipynoov atte, Kai éav peTavonoy 


” > A 
Aes AUTH. 


That the N.T. passages are here dependent cannot be reasonably denied. 


2. Duty of loving God and our neighbour. 
Matt. xxii. 37-9 dyamnoets KUptov Tov Oedv cov év Sy 
6. TH UX Dou... dyamycets TOY TANGIov Gou ws TEeavTOV. 


T. Dan v. 3 d&yamjoarte tov Kiptov év aon tH tort 
ipav kal &AdAHAous ev GAO} Kapdia. 


Our text, which enunciates the same duty twice elsewhere, T. Iss. v. 2, vii. 6, is the first literatory 


authority to conjoin the two great commands of love to God and love to our neighbour. 
commandments are given separately in Deut. vi. 5 and Lev. xix. 18. 


These 
In the latter passage and 


possibly in our text the sphere of neighbourhood is limited to Israelites, but in our Lord’s use there 


is no limit of race or country. 
3°. Various borrowings of ideas or diction. 


Matt. xxv. 35, 36 émeivagca yap kal €ddKxaTé por 
gaye . . . Hoevnoa Kal emeckepacbe pe, ev pudaky 
Heyy Kal nAOare mpds pe. 

Luke ii. 19 ouvetyper Ta pyyata taita .. . 
kapdia adTis. 

Acts xii. 11 efaméoretXev 6 KUpios Tov dyyeov atTod 
kat e€elAaTd pe Ex XeELpds, 


John i. 9 16 $@s .. . 


év TH 


& putiver mdvta &vOpwrror. 


v. 41 Sdfav rapa dvOpdrwy ob LapBdve. 


4°. The Pauline borrowings are too numerous to be dealt with here. 


my text. 


T. Jos. i. 5, 6 év Aup@ ouverxéOnv Kat adros 6 Kvpuos 
Sr€Opee pe . . . ev doeveia juny Kat 6 Kipuos éweoké- 
Ward pe, év dudaky Hpny Kal Geds pov éxapirwoe pe. 

T. Lev. vi. 2 cuvetyjpouv tods Adyous rovrous év ™mH 
Kapdta. jLov. 

T. Sim. i. 8 6 Geos... dréoreire tov dyyedov abrod 

> , > x > a an 
Kal €ppvoato avTov é€k TOV XELpOV jLOV. 

T. Lev. xiv. 4 16 ps rod vépov 76 Sober eis Pwriopoy 
TravTos avOparrou. 

T. Benj. vi. 4 od« émddxetar Sdfav . 


(B-a, Soe 


. . 6vOpdTeV 


The reader can consult 


There are over seventy words which are common to the Testaments and the Pauline 


Epistles, but which are not found in the rest of the N.T. Only a few of the most notable passages 
where St. Paul draws upon the Testament will here be appended : 


1 Thess. ii. 16 €pOacev S€ ew adtods H dpyh (+7100 
@eod D E FG, Itala. Vulg.) ets téXos. 

Rom. 1. 32 od povov aira trovodaw GAA kal cuveudo- 
KOUGLY TOLS TPaCGOUOLY. 

xii. 21 vika év TO dyabo Td Kakdy. 

1 Cor. iv. 4 ode .. . Quaut@ ctvorda. 

Vil. 5 pt Gmootepette AGAAjAous, ef pyTe.. . iva 
oXohdonTE TH TPOTEUX7. 

2 Cor. vil. 10 } yap kata Gedy AUTH peTdvoLay eis 
cwTnplay aperapednrov éepydterar. 


T. Lev. vi. 11 €pOace 8€ adtots H épyh rot Oeod eis 
Téhos, 

T. Ash. vi. 2 kal mpdocouot 7rd Kady, Kal cuveudo- 
kodowy Tois mpdocouawy (a). 

T. Benj. iv. 3 obros 16 dyaQdy moudy viKd Td Kady. 

T. Iss. vil. 1 ob« éyvwv év pol dpapriav. 

T. Naph. viii. 8 kaxpos yap ovvovelas yuvaikds, Kal 
kapdos €ykpatetas eis mpooeuyhy a0T00. 

T. Gad v. 7 9 yap Kara Oedy dAnOijs petdvorw . 
odnyet 76 diaBovdAtov mpds owrnpiay, 


§ 16. THEOLOGY, FORGIVENESS, THE TWO GREAT COMMANDMENTS, UNIVERSALISM, THE 
MESSIAH, THE RESURRECTION, THE ANTICHRIST.! 


Forgiveness.—W ce have in our text a passage of truly epoch-making importance. Its importance 
cannot be grasped until we contrast the teaching of the New Testament with that of the Old on the 
question of man’s forgiveness of his neighbour. In the New Testament from the first page to the 
last it is either explicitly stated or implicitly understood that a man can only receive the divine 
forgiveness on condition that he forgives his neighbour. Indeed, in their essential aspects, these two 
forgivenesses are seen to be one and the same. But in the Old Testament it is very different 
There, thdeed, God’s forgiveness is granted, without money and without price, to the sinner who 
truly seeks it. But the penitent in the Old Testament could accept and enjoy the divine pardon, 
and yet cherish the most bitter feelings towards his own personal enemy. David on his death-bed 
shows. this unforgiving spirit when he charges Solomon not to let Joab’s hoar head go down to the 
grave in peace ; and commands him to deal similarly with Shimei, though David had promised to 


? This section is reprinted in the main from my edition of the Testaments, pp. xcii sqq. 
292 


INTRODUCTION 


gee tae se Slang the notable instance of Joseph’s forgiveness of his brethren ; 

g ph’s part does not seem to have impressed later O.T. writers, or led them 
to urge Joseph s conduct therein as worthy of imitation. There is, of course, the noble passage on 
the subject of beneficence to one’s enemy in Prov. xxv, 21, 22: ‘If thine enemy be hungry, give him 
bread to eat ; And if he be thirsty, give him water to drink. For thou shalt heap coals of fire on 
his head, And the Lord shall reward thee.’ But to show how far these words are from representing 
the attitude which the saints should adopt to those who wronged them, we have only to turn back 
to the preceding chapter (Prov. xxiv. 17, 18), where we receive this remarkable piece of advice, 
‘Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, And let not thine heart be glad when he is overthrown: 
Lest the Lord see it and it displease Him, And He turn away His wrath from him.’ Moreover, the 
righteous man can pray to God to make him strong enough to pay out his enemies: ‘Do thou, O 
Lord, have mercy upon me, and raise me up, that I may requite them’ (Ps. xli. 10). Thus we may 
conclude on the whole that in the Old Testament the saint as well as the sinner could indulge in 
resentful feelings or even in personal vengeance. 

Now that we have grasped the conflicting attitudes of the Old and New Testaments on this great 
moral and religious question, we are able to appreciate the value of the contribution which the Testa- 
ments make in this direction. This contribution is found in T. Gad vi. 3-7 (see also § 26, p. lxxviii of my 
edition). These verses, as I have said in my notes, contain the most remarkable statement on the 
subject of forgiveness in all ancient literature. They show a wonderful insight into the true psycho- 
logy of the question. So perfect are the parallels in thought and diction between these verses and 
Luke xvii. 3, Matt. xviii. 15. 35, that we must assume our Lord’s acquaintance with them. The meaning 
of forgiveness in both cases is the highest and noblest known to us, namely, the restoring the offender 
to communion with us, which he had forfeited through his offence. And it is likewise the essence 
of the divine forgiveness—God’s restoration of the sinner to communion with Him, a communion 
from which his sin had banished him. But, though such is the meaning of forgiveness in the full 
sense of the word, our author is aware that it is often impossible to attain to such a perfect relation 
with the offender. Thus forgiveness comes often to be synonymous with banishing the personal 
feeling of resentment which rises within us when we suffer wrong, and which, when indulged, leads 
to hate. When we have achieved this right attitude towards the offender the way is always open for 
his return to a right relation with us, and so far as we do so we reflect the attitude of God Himself 
to His erring children. 

For the further prosecution of the parallels the reader should consult p. 292. We now see the 
importance of our text. It shows that pre-Christian Judaism possessed a noble system of ethics on 
the subject of forgiveness. By the early school of the Hasidim, or the pious ones of the Psalms, 
the best elements of the Old Testament had been taken up, studied and developed, and the highly 
ethical code of conduct deduced therefrom had been carried out in actual life by these ancient 
Quietists. But when Pharisaism, breaking with the ancient ideals of its party, committed itself to 
political interests and movements, and concurrently therewith surrendered itself more and more 
wholly to the study of the letter of the Law, it soon ceased to offer scope for the further development 
of such a lofty system of ethics as the Testaments attest, and so the true successors of the early 
Hasids and their teaching quitted Judaism and found their natural home in the bosom of primitive 
Christianity. 

Duty of loving God and one’s neighbour.—lt is remarkable that the famous command in the 
Gospels that embodies all duty in itself, ‘ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thinc heart .... 
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself’ (Mark xii. 30, 31)—is already found in the Testaments, 
though less emphatically and vigorously stated. Thus in T. Iss. v. 2 we have, ‘ Love the Lord and 
your neighbour’ ; T. Dan. v. 3, ‘Love the Lord through all your life, And one another with a 
true heart’; and again in T. Iss, vii. 6, Issachar declares, ‘I loved the Lord; Likewise also every 
man with all my heart.’ 

Various ethical teachings.—The Testaments deal largely with the questions of hatred, lying, 
envy, hate, lust, covetousness and the virtues of long-suffering, truthfulness, love, purity, generosity, 
and the like. We can touch here only on a few of their pithy sayings on such subjects. Thus: 
‘ Anger is blindness, and does not suffer one to see the face of any man with truth’ (T. Dan ii. 2), 
‘Hatred, therefore is evil; for it constantly mateth with lying’ (T. Gad v. 1). ‘Envy dominates 
the whole mind of man’ (T. Sim. iii. 2), ‘it has no rest while the object of it prospers’ (it.12): 
‘ Deliverance therefrom cometh through the fear of God’ (iii. 4). Wherefore ‘If a man prospereth 
more than you, do not be vexed, but pray for him that he may have perfect prosperity ’ (Tf. Gad 
vii, 1). ‘When envy goes a man’s mind is lightened, so that he can enjoy the well-being of his 
former rival’ (T. Sim. iii. 5, 6). A man is ‘not to keep a ledger account of the evil done him by 
his neighbour’ (T. Zeb. viii. 5), a clause that St. Paul borrows in 1 Cor. xiii. 5, where Aoyt erat TO Kakov 


2.93 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE ‘TWELVE PAT Rigas 


is wrongly rendered in A.V. by ‘thinketh no evil’, and misleading in R.V. by ‘ taketh not account 
of evil’. 

As regards the questions of temperance and total abstinence, what better advice could be given 
than that of this old writer: ‘If ye drink wine with gladness, be ye modest with the fear of God. 
For if in your gladness the fear of God departeth, then drunkenness ariseth and shamelessness 
stealeth in. But if you would live soberly do not touch wine at all, lest ye sin in words of outrage... 
and perish before your time’ (T. Jud. xvi. 2-3). ‘Be not drunk with wine ; for wine turneth away 
the mind from truth and inspireth the passion of lust... and if the occasion of lust be present, he 
worketh the sin and is not ashamed’ (T. Jud. xiv. 1—3). 

Universalism.—Although the Testaments were written about the same date as the Book of 
Jubilees and both books were the work of Pharisees, the views of the two authors were widely 
sundered on some of the greatest questions, and particularly on that of the destiny of the 
Gentiles. The author of Jubilees taught that there was no hope for the Gentiles: God had 
placed them under angelic guardians with the object of accomplishing their destruction (xv. 31). 
Moreover, the Jew who intermarried with them should be put to death, and the man who gave his 
daughter in marriage to a Gentile should be stoned with stones (xxx. 7-17). How different the 
spirit of the author of the Testaments. A true son of the larger-hearted O.T. prophets, he 
proclaims the salvation of the Gentiles. The promised time has come. The kingdom is already 
established, and all the Gentiles will be saved through Israel. In the Judgement the conduct of the 
best heathen will form the norm according to which Israel shall be judged. The teachings of the 
author on this question will be found in the note on T. Benj. ix. 2. 

The first century B.C. additions are likewise characterized by the same Universalism. The 
Law was given to lighten every man, and the Gentiles were to be saved through the example and 
teaching of Israel (T. Lev. xiv. 4). The same view of the destiny of the Gentiles is found in the 
Pss. of Solomon (xvii. 32), though it is perhaps not as favourable as that in these additions. In other 
literature of the first century B.C. a harsher fate is predicted for the Gentiles, as in 1 Enoch xxxvii- 
Ixxi and the Assumption of Moses, and in 4 Ezra in the next century. 

The Messiah.—In the original work the Messiah is to be descended from Levi, and not from 
Judah—in other words he is to be first of all priest, and then prophet and king. There are many 
passages expressing this view: T. Reub. vi. 7-12; T. Lev. viii. 14, xvitl;’ 2. Jud:ecxivar—3)s 
T. Dan v. 10,11; T. Jos. xix. 5-9. We have here the attestation of a most remarkable revolution 
in the Jewish expectations of the Messiah. For some thirty or forty years the hope of a Messiah 
from Judah was abandoned in favour of a Messiah from Levi. But with the breach of Hyrcanus 
with the Pharisees this hope was abandoned, and so we find that in the first-century additions 
the hope of a Messiah from Judah reappears (T. Jud. xxiv. 5-63-10; Naph.cive5(e))): 

The prerogatives and powers ascribed to the priestly Messiah from Levi are very lofty. He 
was to be free from sin (T. Jud. xxiv. 1); to walk in meekness and righteousness (T. Jud. xxiv. 1) ; 
to establish a new priesthood under a new name (T. Lev. viii. 14), and also be a mediator for the 
Gentiles (T. Lev. viii. 14, emended) ; likewise he was to be a prophet of the Most High (T. Lev. 
viii. 15); to be a king over all the nation (T. Reub. vi. 11,12; T. Lev. viii. 14) ; to war against 
Israel’s national enemies and against Beliar and the powers of wickedness (T. Reub. vi. 12; T. Lev. 
xviii. 12; T. Dan v. to), and deliver the captives taken by him, even the souls of the saints 
(T. Dan v. 11); to open Paradise to the righteous (T. Lev. xviii. 10; T. Dan v. 12), and give the 
saints to eat of the tree of life (T. Lev. xviii. 11). Moreover, he should give the faithful power to 
tread upon evil spirits and bind Beliar (xviii. 12), who should be cast into the fire (T. Jud. xxv. 3), and 
sin should come to an end (T. Lev. xviii. 9). 

It was the priestly character of the Maccabean priest-kings that gave rise to the expectation 
that the Messiah was also to be a priest as well as a king. 

The Resurrection.—There is to be a resurrection, first. of the O.T. heroes and patriarchs, and 
next of the righteous on the right hand and of the wicked on the left (T. Benj. x. 6-8). The scene 
of the future kingdom is to be the present earth. It is to last for ever. 

Demonology.—The book represents a very developed demonology as a reference to ‘ Spirits’ in 
Index II in my edition will show. The conception of Beliar in the Testaments is very advanced 
for this early date. 

The Antichrist.—In the first century addition, T. Dan v. 6, we have the most ancient authority 
at present known to us for the view which connects the tribe of Dan with Antichrist, and helps 
to explain the exclusion of this tribe from the list of the Twelve in the N.T. Apocalypse. 


294 


INTRODUCTION 


$17. BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
(2) EDITIONS OF GREEK VERSIONS, i.e. 

Of 8. Grabe, Spicilegium Patrum’, i. 129-44, 335-74. The text here given is 4 with a few readings from a. 

Sinker, Testamenta XII Patriarcharum ad fidem codicis Cantabrigiensis edita: accedunt lectiones cod. Oxoniensts 
Cambridge, 1869. 4 

Appendix containing a collation of the Roman and Patmos MSS., 1879. 

Of aandB. Charles, The Greek Versions of the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, edited from nine MSS. 
together with the Variants of the Armenian and Slavonic Versions and some Hebrew Fragments, The 
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1908. 

The Armenian Version. H. Sargis Josepheanz, 7he Treasury of the Old and New Fathers, i. 27-151. 

The Slavonic Version. Tichonravoy, Pamiatniki otrechennoi Russkot Literaturi, 1863. 

(6) EDITIONS OF THE HEBREW FRAGMENTS. 

Fragments of the T. Judah are found in the Midrash Wajjissau: see the Charles edition of the Greek Versions, 
pp. 235-8; and of the T. Naph. in the late Hebrew Test. of Naphtali, of. cit. pp. 239-44; Gaster, ‘The 
Hebrew Text of one of the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs,’ PSBA, Dec. 1893, Jan. 1894. 

(¢) CRITICAL INQUIRIES. 

Grabe: see above and Sinker in his edition, and Dict. Christ. Biog. iv. 865-74. 

Schnapp, Die Testamente der zwolf Patriarchen untersucht, 1884. 

Conybeare, ‘ On the Jewish Authorship of the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs,’ /Q2, 1893, 375-98. 

Kohler, Zhe Pre-Talmudic Haggada, JQR, 1893, 400-6; ‘Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, /ew7?sh Encyc., 
1906, Xil. 113-18. 

Charles, ‘ Apocalyptic Literature, Aucyc. Bib., 1899, 1. 237-41. 

Hastings, B. D., 1902, iv. 721-5 ; Hibbert Journal, 1905, 558-73; Eucyc. Brit., 1911, xxvi. 666-8. 

Bousset, ‘ Die Testamente der zwolf Patriarchen’ in 7. ff NTliche Wissenschaft, 1900, pp. 187-209, 344-6. 

(@) COMMENTARY. 

Charles, Zhe Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, translated from the Editor's Greek Text and edited with 
Introduction, Notes, and Indices, A. & C. Black, London, 1908. 

For a complete bibliography see this volume. 


§ 18. BRACKETS AND SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS. 


Brackets. The same brackets are used in this book as throughout the entire work; and in addition the brackets 
‘ 1 to signify that the words so enclosed are omitted by A. 
Symbols and Abbreviations. 
a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i denote the Greek MSS. 
a denotes the MSS. cz of the first class. 
8 denotes the MSS. adde/fg of the second class. 
A denotes the Armenian Version. 
A®, Ab*, Ab, Ac, &c., denote the Armenian MSS. 
A« denotes the MSS. A#>5E of the first class. 
AB denotes the MSS. Ab*¢defg of the second class. 
S! denotes the first Slavonic recension. 
S? denotes the second Slavonic recension. 


295 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE*PAl Riera 


THE TESTAMENT OF REUBEN, THE FIRST-BORN SON OF JACOB AND LEAH 


1: The copy of the Testament of Keuben, even the commands which he gave his sons ‘before he 
2 died in the hundred and twenty-fifth year of his life. Two years after the death of Joseph ‘his 
~ 3 brother', when Reuben fell ill, his sons and his sons’ sons were gathered together to visit him. And 
4 he said to them: My children, behold I am dying, and go the way of my fathers. And seeing 
‘there! Judah, and Gad, and Asher, his brethren, he said to them: Raise me up, that I may tell to 
my brethren and to my children what things I have hidden in my heart, for behold now at length 
5 Iam passing away. And he arose and kissed them, and said unto them: Hear, my brethren, and 
6 do ye, my children, give ear to Reuben your father. in the commands which I give unto you. And 
behold I call to witness against you this day the God of heaven, that ye walk not in the sins of 
7 youth and fornication, wherein I was poured out, and defiled the bed of my father Jacob. And 
I tell you that he smote me with a sore plague in my loins for seven months ; and had not my father 
8 Jacob prayed for me to the Lord, the Lord would have destroyed me. For I was thirty years old 
9 when I wrought the evil thing before the Lord, and for seven months I was sick unto death. And 
10 after this I repented with set purpose of my soul for seven years before the Lord. And wine and 
strong drink I drank not, and flesh entered not into my mouth, and I eat no pleasant food; but 

I mourned over my sin, for it was great, such as had not been in Israel. 
21 And now hear me, my children, what things I saw concerning the seven spirits of deceit, when 


TITLE. So hi. cis corrupt: bef add ‘regarding thoughts’; A®¢fé ‘the Book of the Chronicles, the words of 
Reuben, First (> A®*) Testament’; A» ‘Testament and words of Reuben from the Book of the Chronicles’. 


I. hundred and twenty-fifth year. This agrees with the Midrash Tadshe (vill. Eppstein’s edition) which is itself 
based on Jubilees and the Testaments. It gives Reuben’s age as 125, Simeon’s as 120, Levi’s 137, Dan’s 125, 
Judah’s 119 (?), Naphtali’s 133, Gad’s 125, Issachar’s 122, Asher’s 123, and Joseph’s 110, 

2. Two years after the death of Joseph. This agrees with Jub. xxviii. 11, 24, which says Reuben was born in 
2122 A.M. and Joseph in 2135. As Joseph died at the age of 110, Reuben lived two years longer to attain the age 
of 125. 

his brother. So ad only. 

3. go the way of my fathers. Cf. Joshua xxiii. 14 ‘Go the way of all the earth’. Cf. 1 Kings ii. 2, ro. 

4. Judah, and Gad, and Asher, his brethren. Joseph alone of the other patriarchs addresses his brethren as well 
as his sons. 

what things I have in my heart. T.S. ii. 1. 
now at length, = dmd rod viv. Thus the LXX translates DYDM in Gen. xlvi. 30 DYAN NNYON. Cf. dw dpre in 
John i. 51 insome MSS. Also dx’ apr, Matt. xxvi. 64 = am6 rod viv, Luke xxii. 69. 

5. Hear, my brethren, and do ye, my children, give ear. SoaA®S', Cf. T. Jos.i.2. This reading suits the 
context better than ‘hear, my brethren, and give ear’ B-d gA?es; or ‘hear, my (>d) children, and give ear’? dA», 

6. I call to witness against you this day. A reminiscence cf. Deut. iv. 26 where Moses calls heaven and earth 
to witness. emtwapripopuatis, however, unsuitable with ‘God ’, and 6px6, ‘I adjure,’ is more so. Still we might compare 
Exod, xix. 21 dtaudprupac. 

I was poured out. A classical use of eexvOnv. Cf. Pindar, sth. i. 4. 

7. The importance of prayer is emphasized by our author. Jacob prays for Judah, T. Jud. xix. 2; for Gad, T. G. 
v. 9; for his ten eldest sons, T. B. iii.6. Cf. T.S. ii. 2,13; T.N.vi. 8; T. Jos. iii. 3, vii. 4, viii. 1; T.B. v. 5. Fasting 
accompanies prayer, T. Jos. iii. 3, iv. 8, x. 1, PIS bsnl 8 ahs 7k 

8. thirty years old. Jub. xxviii. 11, xxxiii. I-5 says Reuben was only twenty-one. 

g. The chastisement lasted seven months, the penance seven years. 

to. eat no pleasant food. Cf. Dan. x. 3. Reuben practises abstinence for seven years, Simeon for two, T. S. iii. 4, 
and Judah till old age, T. Jud. xv. 4, xix. 2, in expiation of their sins. Joseph fasts seven years to preserve his chastity, 
T. Jos. iii. 4. _Issachar in his righteousness and self-control abstains from wine all his life, T. Iss. vii. 3. The righteous 
man ‘combines fasting with chastity’, T. Jos. ix. 2: the double-hearted man superstitiously combines fasting and 
adultery, T. A. ii. 8, iv. 3. 

such as had not been in Israel. Soc and practically A. Cf. 2 Sam. xiii. 12. 


II. 1. seven spirits of deceit. Origen refers to this passage (Hom. in Iosuam 15, ed. Lommatzsch, xi. 143, as from 
the Testaments of the XII Patr. as implying various ‘Satanae’. Matt. xii, 45 speaks of seven evil spirits. 

Spirits of deceit. The Testaments contain a vast demonology. The chief of the demons is called Beliar passim 
(see T. Lev. iii. 3); the Devil, T. N. viii. 4; the Prince of Deceit, TS. tis7e aa. Jud. xix. 4; or your Prince (of 
Dan), T. D. v. 6. Beliar’s works are opposed to God’s law, T. L. xix. 1; T. Iss. vi. 1. He rules over disturbed souls, 
T. D. iv. 7, or those which yield to their evil inclination, T. A.i.8. He flees, however, from the righteous and keepers 
of the law, T. D. v. 1 3 T.N. viii. 4. The Messiah will make war on Beliar and take away from him the captive souls, 
T. D. v. 10; Beliar will be bound, T. L. xviii. 12, and cast into the fire, T. Jud. xxv. 3. The evil spirits in general are 


296 


ieee PANMENT OF REUBEN 1. 1—8. 6 


2 I repented. Seven spirits therefore are appointed against man, and they are the leaders in the works 

3 of youth. [And seven other spirits are given to him at his creation, that through them should be 

4 done every work of man. The first is the spirit of life, with, which the constitution (of man) is 

5 created. The second is the sense of sight, with which ariseth desire. The third is the sense of 

hearing, with which cometh teaching. The fourth is the sense of smell, with which tastes are given 

6,7 to draw air and breath. The fifth is the power of speech, with which cometh knowledge. ” The 

sixth is the sense of taste, with which cometh the eating of meats and drinks ; and by it strength is 

8 produced, fer in food is the foundation of strength. The seventh is the power of procreation and 

9 sexual intercourse, with which through love of pleasure sins enter in. Wherefore it is the last in 

order of creation, and the first in that of youth, because it is filled with ignorance, and leadeth the 
youth as a blind man to a pit, and as a beast to a precipice. 

1 Besides all these there is an eighth spirit of sleep, with which is brought about the trance of 

2, 3nature and the image of death. With these spirits are mingled the spirits of error.] First, the 

spirit of fornication is seated in the nature and in the senses; the second, the spirit of insatiableness, 

4in the belly; the third, the spirit of fighting, in the liver and gall. The fourth is the spirit of 

5 obsequiousness and chicanery, that through officious attention one may be fair in seeming. The 

fifth is the spirit of pride, that one may be boastful and arrogant. The sixth is the spirit of lying, 

6 tin perdition and jealousy} to practise deceits, and concealments from kindred and friends. The 


called spirits of deceit, T. R. ii. 1,2; T.S. iii. 1; and fassim: also wicked spirits, T. S. iv. 9; spirits of Beliar, 
T. Iss. vii. 7, &c.; unclean spirits, T. B. v. 2; angels of Satan, T. A. vi. 4. Their function is threefold as in 
1 and 2 Enoch and the N. T., (1) to tempt men, (2) to accuse them when they fall, (3) to torment them. (2) is not 
a feature in this book, (3) is mentioned twice, T. L. iii. 2, spirits of retribution, and T. A. vi. 5, the evil spirit which a 
man serves waits for his soul as it leaves the body at death to torment it. (1) is their most prominent function in the 
Testaments. Of the tempting spirits, there are the seven spirits of deceit which attack youth, T. R. ii. 1-2, namely, 
those of fornication (cf., too, T. Jud. xiii. 3), insatiableness, fighting, obsequiousness, pride, lying, and injustice, T. R. iii. 
3-6. T. Jud. xvi. 1 adds the spirits of lust, hot desire, profligacy, and filthy lucre. There are also the spirits of jealousy, 
T. Jud. xiii. 3; and of envy, T. S. iii. 1, iv. 7, which are wicked and poisonous spirits, T. S. iv. 9; the spirits of anger, 
T. D. ii. 4. There are angels, moreover, which stir men to murder, T. D. i. 7; and idolatry, T. N. il. 3; and 
lust, T. Jos. vii. 4. The faithless and wicked fall an easy prey to them, but the spixits first require permission to tempt 
men, T. B. iii. 3 (cf. Job i. 12, ii. 6). If men yield, the devil makes them into his own instruments, T. N. vill. 6; but 
if they are single-hearted and do right, then neither the spirits of deceit nor Beliar have power over them, T. Iss. iv. 4; 
T. B. iii. 3; indeed, the devil and the spirits of Beliar and unclean spirits flee from them, T. N. viii. 4; T. Iss. vil. 7 ; 
T. B. v.2. Nay, more, the righteous rule over them, T.S. vi. 6, and tread them under foot, T. L. KV 12s) eee S 
(bdg). These spirits are punished on the judgement day, T. L. iii. 3. 
2. against man + ‘by Beliar’ BAS. - 

leaders in the works. ‘leader,’ B-fgA®*S, which points to the singular WN) in Hebrew, which = ‘ poison’ as 

well as ‘leader’. Cf. ‘ poisonous spirit’, T. S. iv. 9. 


II. 3—III. 2. A late addition to the text, undoubtedly first made in Greek, and chiefly drawn from Greek sources. 
Not only does this passage intrude between the promise in ii. I and its fulfilment in iii. 3, 7, but it has no organic 
connexion with either. Moreover, the division of the bodily senses here given is based on Stoic theories, e. g. the 
peculiar meaning attached to mvevpara as that of senses, organs, or appetites. The Stoics held that the soul had eight 
parts, namely, the five senses, the powers of reprodaction and speech, and the dominant part or reason which ruled 
the other seven. They discharged themselves into the various parts of the body in the form of immaterial currents or 
nvevpara. Cf. Plutarch, De Plac. iv. 21; also Zeller, Stoics, 214-15 (Eng. Trans.). For full quotations see my Comm. 
on the Testt.; also my note in Slav. Enoch xxx.9. A parallel interpolation occurs in MS. 248 of Sirach xvil. 4, and 
precedes as here the Hebrew division of various powers. , é 

3. seven other spirits. ‘other’ a, >8S, ‘again’? A. This use of mvevpara is confined to the Stoics, and has no 
parallel in the Hebrew 04). The Stoic division gives eight rvevpara, but our text omits 47, and replaces the eighth 

ower 70 Hryepouxdy by mvevpa Cans. nt 
Pp 4. anes at life. Aloo ae is used in its usual sense, cf. Gen. vi. 17, Vil. 15. But the Hebrew usage would not 
imply more than life in an impersonal sense, whereas the Stoic parallel ro jycporexor, and the next phrase ‘ with which 
the constitution of man is created’ suggest the power which gives vitality and life to the material organism and 
constitutes man’s powers into a unity which is personal. 

5. sense. mvedpa, and so in verses 5 and (cs re ; 

sight ... desire. Cf. 1 John ii. 16 9 émOvpia roy dpCarpor. 
to draw air and breath. Cf. T. N. ii. 8 (note); also Arist. De Spzr. 2. 

6. power. mvevpa. 4 ge aes 

7- aad by it i eaetes is produced, air@ can refer only to mvevpa. Only d reads airy (yevors). 

g. as a blind man toa pit. Cf. Matt. xv. 14. ‘ly 

III. 1-2. This reference to an eighth spirit, of sleep, is due to the interpolator himself, who has also inserted iii. 7. 
It is not found in Stoic teaching. 

1. trance of nature (ékotacis picews). 
bution to human activity. , 

the image of death. Cf. Homer, VLXIVe 231, SCC: 

2. An adaptation of ii. 3-ii1. ce its aps ee 

. spirit of fighting, in the liver. disp Ni0115 2 
os ‘a poiditen ai jealousyt. Probably corrupt in the Hebrew text, 182?) ANWI for N21 nid, Hence read 
‘to practise deceits on an enemy and a rival and concealments’, &c. 
¥ 


297 


Unlike the preceding bodily powers, sleep is not credited with any contri- 


B 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIA Cre 


seventh is the spirit of injustice, with which are thefts and acts of rapacity, that a man may fulfil the 
desire of his heart; for injustice worketh together with the other spirits by the taking of gifts. 
7,8 [And with all these the spirit of sleep is joined which is (that) of error and fantasy. | And so 
perisheth every young man, darkening his mind from the truth, and not understanding the law of 
9 God, nor obeying the admonitions of his fathers, as befell me also in my youth. And now, my 
children, Jove the truth, and it will preserve you: hear ye ‘the words of ! Reuben your father. 
10 Pay no heed to the face of a woman, 
Nor associate with another man’s wife, 
Nor meddle with affairs of womankind. tae 
tr For had I not seen Bilhah bathing in a covered place, I had not fallen into this great iniquity. 
12 For my mind taking in the thought of the woman’s nakedness, suffered me not "to sleep! until I had 
3 wrought the abominable thing. For while Jacob our father had gone to Isaac his father, when we 
were in Eder, near to Ephrath in Bethlehem, Bilhah became drunk and was asleep uncovered in her 
14 chamber. Having therefore gone in and beheld her nakedness, I wrought the impiety ‘without her 
15 perceiving it', and leaving her sleeping I departed. And forthwith an angel of God revealed to my 
father concerning my impiety, and he came and mourned over me, and touched her no more. 
4, Pay no heed, therefore, 'my children’, to the beauty of women, nor set your mind on their affairs ; 
but walk in singleness of heart in the fear of the Lord, and expend labour on good works, and on 
study and on your flocks, until the Lord give you a wife, whom He will, that ye suffer not as I did. 
2 For until my father’s death I had not boldness to look in his face, or to speak to any of my brethren, 
3 because of the reproach. Even until now my conscience causeth me anguish on account of my 
4impiety. And yet my father comforted me much, and prayed for me unto the Lord, that the anger 
of the Lord might pass from me, even as the Lord showed. And thenceforth until now I have 
5 been on my guard and sinned not. Therefore, my children, ‘I say unto you’, observe ‘all’ things 
6 whatsoever I command you, and ye shall not sin. For a pit unto the soul is the sin of fornication, 
separating it from God, and bringing it near to idols, because it dececiveth the mind and under- 


6. fulfila. ‘do’ BAS. 
7. An interpolation. See iii. 1 (note). Sleep is properly a natural power, not a vice like the other seven. aae read 
‘which is error and fantasy’. 
8. darkening his mind. Cf. Eph. iv. 18 éoxoriopévor ty Stavoia, also Rom. i. 21. 
understanding the law. Here cunay ev r6 véuo is a Hebraism. 
g. the words of. Souaaef, 
to. Pay no heed, &c. See iv. 1. 


associate (a): ‘be alone’ B-g¢ S!. Cf. Sir, ix. 9, where the verb is xdOov, ‘sit, in the Greek, OYUN ‘eat’ in the 
Hebrew, and AMY HIN ‘talk much’ according to the Syriac (cf. Aboth i. 5). In Sanh. 100 and Yebam. 63, where 


Sir. is quoted, we have ndyx pn 5x ‘turn not aside to her’. Cf. also Nedarim 202. 
meddle with affairs, &c. Cf. Sir. xli.21. For mpagw (abfS), ‘affairs’,areads éyuv, A »* kédXos Kal mpakes. 


11-15, Cf. Gen, xxxv. 21, 22; Jub. xxxiii. 1-9. Reuben’s sin is denied in late works, e.g. Gen. rabba 98, 99; Ps.-Jon. 
on Gen. xxxv, 22. See note on Jub. xxxiii. 2. 


13. had gone to Isaac. Jub. xxxiii. 1. 

Eder near to Ephrath. Gen. xxxv. 19, 21; Jub. xxxiii. 1. 

Bilhah became drunk. Peculiar to our text. Hence the new turn to the story in uv. 15. 
14. without her perceiving ita: > BAS. 


leaving her sleeping. Jub. xxxiii. 4-7 says Bilhah awoke and cried out. She also told the matter to Jacob on 
his return. 


IV. 1. Pay no heed . . . to the beauty of women, &c. Cf. iii. 10; T. Jud. xvii. 1; T. Iss. iv. 4; also Sir. ix, 8. 
Abodah Zara 20” forbids a man to look on’a beautiful woman if single, or a homely one if married. 
Singleness of heart, d\dryri ris kapdias = aap-on, Wisd. i. 1; Col. ii. 22; Eph. vi. 5. See note on upright- 
ness in T. Iss. iii. 1. 
on good works and. So aA. éy épyos kai drom\avomevo. BS. i.e. the B recension had a corrupt Hebrew 
OMb Dyna instead of OW DYyDI, 
your flocks. Cf. stress on husbandry, T. Iss. v. CLA 
3- This is the first occurrence in Jewish literature of the conscience as a fully-developed conception. The LXX first 
uses the word in the technical sense in Wisd. xvii. 10 Gel dé mpooeihnpev ta Yadera (srovnpia) ouvexopern TH Tuvedjoet. 
See also T. Jud. xx. 2 (a). The action of the conscience is described (without the term) in T. Jud. xx. ign alo ene oh 
impiety a. ‘Sin’ BS}. 
4. that the anger of the Lord might pass. Jub. xxxili. 15 says ‘Reuben was granted life and forgiveness’. 
until now, és viv a. peravody, ‘repenting’, dg A. éws evvoiwy, ‘ (even) in thought’, aef. 
5. Tsay unto you. a only. 
6-7, Ci. I. Jud. xv.1, xviis. 2-6, on the evils of fornication. 
6. A pit, Bd@pos, aaf. de Opos, ‘destruction’ B-af. MMW has both meanings. 
separating it from God . .. near to idols. This recurs in T. S.v. 3. Cf. Kethub. 11> ‘ Most idolaters are 
adulterers’, also Wisd. xiv. 12 dpyiy yap mopveias (= spiritual unfaithfulness) émivora cidddou. 


298 


Pit TESTAMENT -OF REUBEN 38° 66, 5 


7 Standing, and leadeth down young men into Hades before their time. For many hath fornicati 
destroyed ; because, though a man be old or noble, “or rich or poor!, he brin oth reproacl igo 
8 himself with the sons of men and derision with Beliar. For ye heard eceatding Tok h howaee 
guarded himself from a woman, and purged his thoughts from all fornication, and fotind favour in 
9 the sight of God and men. For the Egyptian woman did many things unto him, and summoned 
10 Magicians, and offered him love potions, but the purpose of his soul admitted no evil desire. There- 
11 fore the God of your fathers delivered him from every evil (and) hidden death. For if fornication 
SV esconics not your mind, neither can Beliar overcome you. 
ae a = evil are a my children ; and since they have no power or strength over man, they use 
s by outward attractions, that they may draw him to themselves. And whom they cannot 
3 bewitch by outward attractions, him they overcome by craft. ‘For! moreover, concerning them 
the angel of the Lord told me, and taught me, that women are overcome by the spirit of fornication 
more than men, and in their heart they plot against men; and by means of their adornment they 
deceive first their minds, and by the glance of the eye instil the poison, and then through the accom- 
4 plished act they take them captive. For a woman cannot force a man openly, but “by a harlot’s 
5 bearing she beguiles him. Flee, therefore, fornication, my children, and command your wives and 
your daughters, that they adorn not their heads and faces to deceive the mind: because every woman 
6 who useth these wiles hath been reserved for eternal punishment. For thus they allured the 
Watchers who were before the flood; for as these continually beheld them, they lusted after them, 
and they conceived the act in their mind ; for they changed themselves into the shap@’ of men, and 
7 appeared to them when they were with their husbands. And the women lusting in their minds after 
6 their forms, gave birth to giants, for the Watchers appeared to them as reaching even unto heaven. 
t Beware, therefore, of fornication ; and if you wish to be pure in mind, guard your senses from every 
2 woman. And command the women likewise not to associate with men, that they also may be pure 
3in mind. For constant meetings, even though the ungodly deed be not wrought, are to them an 
4 irremediable disease, and to us a destruction of Beliar and an eternal reproach. For in fornication 
5 there is neither understanding nor} godliness, and all jealousy dwelleth in the lust thereof. There- 


leadeth down .. . to Hades. Cf. Prov. vii. 27, where LXX has xardyovoa as here. 


before their time, ovk év xaip@ avrav = ONY Boa ree Jud. xvi. 3. 
7. many hath fornication destroyed. Cf. Prov. vii. 26; also Sir, ix. 8, where read dmexravOnoar for émdavnOnoar. 
So Sanh. 100°, Yebam. 63?. 
or rich or poor. a only. 
derision, yédora, de AS. mpédoxoppa, ‘an offence’ or ‘stumbling-block’, a, i.e. WPiD for Pin. 


I 


8. For ye heard, &c., ‘for since Joseph guarded himself from every woman . . . he found’, &c. BAS". 
found favour in the sight of God (‘of the Lord’ BAS'). Cf. T.S.v.2; also 1 Sam. ii. 26; Luke il. 52. 
Acts vii. 10 says of Joseph ‘God .. . gave him favour’. 
OL CEaL. fossevi. 


did many things unto = 737M, perhaps corrupt for JINN, ‘lay in wait for ’. 
10. delivered him, &c. Cf. Acts vii. 10. 
evil, a. ‘visible and’ B-d Af S}, i.e. NN) for YO. 
11. Beliar is powerless with the pure. Cf. Jub. i. 20, x. 6 (note); Eccles. vil. 26. 
Wet. hor, aionly. 
evil are women. Cf. Eccles. vii. 27, 28. 
by outward attractions, ¢v ocx7jpaor, i.e. figure, bearing, attire, and gestures. 
2. by outward attractions, dia cxjparos a. duvdpews BAS? i.e. fT for TT or jn. 
3. they plot. Cf. Eccles. vii. 26, 27. 
glance of the eye. Cf. T. Iss. vii. 2; T. B. vi. 3: also Prov. vi. 25; Sir. xxiil. 4. 
4. openly ... beguiles him. a only. 
5. adorn not their heads and faces. Enoch viii. 1 says that the fallen Watchers taught women to beautify the 
face and wear precious metals. For Hebrew adornments see Isa. iii. 16. , 
reserved for eternal punishment, «7s kéAaow aimmoy rernpnra. Cf. Jude 6 eis kpiow .. . rernpnkey ; 2 Pet. il. 4 
eis Kplaw Tnpoupevors 
6. thus they allured the Watchers. Jub. iv. 15 (see note) says the Watchers descended to instruct the children 
of men, and afterwards proceeded to take wives of the daughters of men (Jub, v. 1). See Chron. Jerahmeel xxv. 2-4. 
In xxv. 7, 13 Azazel is said to be ‘appointed chief over all dyes and all kinds of ornaments by which women entice men 
to thoughts of sin’, Is this story in view in 1 Pet. iii, 3-5; 1 Tim. il. 9? a 
Watchers. See Dan. iv. 13, 23; 1 En. vi-viii; Jub. iv. 15, v.13; 2 En. xviii. 3. 
lusted after them A >>* cde; ‘lusted after one another’ a B-g. 
7. reaching unto heaven. Their height was 3,000 ells, 1 En. vii. 2. 
VI. 1. Beware... of fornication. Cf. iv.6; T. S. v. 3; Tobit iv. 12. 
if you wish ... guard BA S}: ‘be pure in mind: guard also’ a. 
2. C£ iii. 10. Note that purity of heart is required. Cf. Matt. v. 27, 28. wt? rae 
3. a destruction of Beliar and an eternal reproach a: ‘an eternal reproach of Beliar’ BS: ‘a great 
reproach ’ A. es ve ae 
4. godliness, evo¢Besar. Probably corrupt for evAaBevay, discretion ’. 
jealousy. Cf. Num. v. 29; Prov. vi. 34. ; , : ee ; ¥ ae: 
5-12. Many passages in the Testaments set forth Levi’s merits and claims. Cf. T. S. vii. 2; T. L. i. 11, vin. 14, 


299 


6 


7 
8 


9 


THE TESTAMENTS'OF THE TWEEVE PA TRInRG is 


fore, 'then I say unto you’, ye will be jealous ‘against the sons of Levi', and will seek to be exalted 
over them; but ye shall not be able. For God will avenge them, ‘and ye shall die by an evil death’. 
For to Levi God gave the sovereignty [and to Judah with him and to me also, and to Dan and 
Joseph, that we should be for rulers]. Therefore I command you to hearken to Levi, because he 
shall know the law of the Lord, and shall give ordinances for judgement and shall sacrifice for all 
{srael until the consummation of the times, as the anointed High Priest, of whom the Lord spake. 
I adjure you by the God of heaven to do truth each one unto his neighbour and to entertain love 


to each one for his brother. And draw ye near to Levi in humbleness of heart, that ye may receive 


II 
1} 


71,2 


to 


a blessing from his mouth. For he shall bless Israel and Judah, because him hath the Lord chosen to 
be king over all the nation. And bow down before his seed, for on our behalf it will die in wars 
visible and invisible, and will be among you an eternal king. 

And Reuben died, having given these commands to his sons. And they placed him in a coffin 
until they carried him up from Egypt, and buried him ‘in Hebron! in the cave where his father was. 


THE TESTAMENT OF SIMEON, THE SECOND SON OF JACOB AND LEAH. 


The copy of the words of Simeon, the things which he spake to his sons before he died, in the 
hundred and twentieth year of his life, at which time Joseph, ‘his brother’, died. For when Simeon 


kvilei, 23 4. Dy. 4; VoNe ville 0G. ville Jos. xix. 11. The salvation of Israel is to come from both Levi 
and Judah jointly, T. S. vii. 1, &c. Only in T. G. viii. 1 (probably corrupt) is Judah placed before Levi. Levi is 
priest and king, T. R. vi. 7-12; T. L. viii. 14, xviii. 1,25 as high-priest, T. S. vii. 2. Judah is king T. S. vii. 2; 
T. Jud. i. 6, xvii. § ; T. N. viii. 2 (corrupt ?). T.R. vi. 7? and T. Jud. xxiv. 4-6 are additions. 
5. then, I say unto you a only. 
jealous against the sons of Levi. Cf. the charge against Simeon’s sons, T. S. v. 4, and Dan’s, T. D. v. 5. 
The purpose of this admonition is to establish the Maccabean hegemony. 

6. and ye ... death. These words are omitted by A. 

7. Levi is to be king. The bracketed words are a foolish interpolation. Why ‘to Dan’ is not clear. In Ps.-Jon. 
on Gen. xlix. 3 we have the non-Maccabean view: ‘because thou (Reuben) didst sin, my son, the primogeniture is 
given to Joseph, the kingdom to Judah, and the priesthood to Levi.’ 

8. shall know: ‘shall make known’ A. 

give ordinances for judgement, dworedei els xpiow cB-bgS: duarehet cis xpiow hg A, ‘fulfil as regards 
judgement,’ perhaps corrupt for duaredéoer kpiow. 
all Israel (> ‘all’ a). The Twelve Tribes are considered as in Palestine by our author. John Hyrcanus, who 
is meant by our text, is to bless Israel and Judah, verse 11. The title ‘ Twelve Patriarchs’ points to the same view. 
Cf. the letter of Aristeas, which says that Eleazar the high-priest sent six men from each of the Twelve Tribes to 
Ptolemy. The pre-Maccabean view (1 En. Ixxxix. 72) was that the Northern tribes were still in captivity. The 
Maccabean view was due to the extensive sway of those native kings. With the failure of the Maccabees, the 
Messianic promises were again attached to Judah instead of Levi, and the idea of the Captivity of the Northern Tribes 
revived. See Pss. Sol. xvii. 28, 34, 50; Ass. Mos. iv. 8,9; Sib. Or. ii. 170-3; 4 Ezra xiii. 39-47 ; Apoes Bars 1 203, 
Ixxvili. 1, 5, 7, Ixxxiv. 10. For the rejection of Dan see T. D. v. 6-7. 
consummation of the times, reherdoews ypdvor. Cf. T. L. x. 2 (T. B. xi. 3) cuvreeia trav aidvev; T. Z. ix. 8 
katpov oupreeias. This means the closing years of the age present to the writer, and the opening of a new era, 
possibly with no catastrophe, as in Jub. i. 29, v. 12, xxiii. 26-30 (sce notes). Cf. Daniel’s ‘time of the end’ (Dan. viii. 
19, Xi. 35, 40, xii. 49), YP"NY. The LXX gives Spay xatpod, Spay cuvredetas, karpod ovrredeias. Cf. 1 En. x. 13 7épas 
Tedeopov, XVI. I iMépa Tis tedemoews. Also Ass. Mos. i. 18 ‘in consummatione exitus dierum’; x. 13 ‘(tempora) 
consummentur’; 2 Bar. xxvii. 15, &c. ‘consummation of the times’ ; lvi. 2 ‘of the world’; Ixxxiii. 7 “of the age’. 
Cf. 4 Ezra ix. 5 and T. Iss. vi. 1 (note); also Matt. cuvrédera ai@vos, Xlli. 39, XXiv. 3. 
ee the anointed High Priest. So emended from apxtepeds xpiorov h: (times) ‘ of the anointed High Priest’ 
cBSs. 
of whom the Lord spake. Ps. cx, originally written in honour of Simon, is here interpreted of John Hyrcanus. 
Cf. for reinterpretation Dan. vii. 7, 8 as explained in Dan. vii. 23-5, and interpreted anew in 4 Ezra xi. 1 ff. 
9. do truth hi8S: ‘walk in truth’ A: ‘ speak truth’ c, as also T. D. v. 2 (Zech. viii. 16 ; Gal. iv. 25). 
entertain love. Cf. T. L. xix. 18; also T. S. iv. 7; T. D. v. cp 
10-11. Levi as priest and king. Cf. 1 Macc. xiv. 41 concerning Simon, *yovpevoy Kal dpytepéa. 
receive a blessing. Cf. Jub. xxxi. 15; Sir. 1. 20. : 
11. him hath the Lord chosen, i.e. Levi: ép avt@ e&eheEato—a Hebraism. 
nation afA: ‘nations’ 6-f S}. 
12. Achievements of the Maccabean prince-priests. Most ‘died in wars visible’, cf. T. S. v. 5. As spiritual 
leaders they spent themselves in warfare against spiritual opposition. Cf. Ps. Ixix. 9, CxIx. 139. 
eternal king (‘kings’ A). Cf. icpeds eis aiéva 1 Macc, xiv. 41; Ps. cx. 4. ‘Seed’ and ‘die’, however, may be 
corrupt. If so, read IY} for 1973 and 41yy for ny, and render ‘ Bow down before his might, for he will stand forth 
- a king for ever’, of Hyrcanus. 


VII. 2. Joseph’s bones alone remained in Egypt till the Exodus. Cf. Acts vii. 16. 
TITLE a: +‘regarding envy’ B-adeA°fgS}, 


[. 1. The copy of the words hB-deS': ‘testament’ c: ‘copy of the testament’? de A», 
before ... died >ada. 


hundred and twentieth year B-dgA>*¢d, See T. R.i. 1. 
Joseph died. Jub. xxviii. 13, 24 makes Joseph ten years younger than Simeon. 
300 


TES UES TANENI-OF SIMEON 1) 1—4. 4 


= se aes sons came to visit him, and he strengthened himself and sat up and kissed them, 
21 Hearken, my children, to Simeon your father, 
And I will declare unto you what things I have in my heart. 
2 I was born of Jacob as my father’s second son; 
And my mother Leah called me Simeon, 
Because the Lord had heard her prayer. 
3 Moreover, I became strong exceedingly ; 
I shrank from no achievement, 
Nor was I afraid of ought. 
4 For my heart was hard, 
And my liver was immovable, 
And my bowels without compassion. 
5,6 Because valour also has been given from the Most High to men in soul and body. For in the 
time of my youth I was jealous 'in many things' of Joseph, because my father loved him ‘beyond 
7all’. And I set my mind against him to destroy him, because the prince of deceit sent forth the 
spirit of jealousy and blinded my mind, so that I regarded him not as a brother, nor did I spare even 
8 Jacob my father. But his God and the God of his fathers sent forth His angel, and delivered him 
9 out of my hands. For when I went to Shechem to bring ointment for the flocks, and Reuben to 
Dothan, where were our necessaries and all our stores, Judah my brother sold him to the Ishmaelites. 
1o And when Reuben heard these things he was grieved, for he wished to restore him to his father. 
11 But on hearing this I was ‘exceedingly! wroth against Judah in that he let him go away alive, and 
12 for five months I continued wrathful against him. But the Lord restrained me, and withheld ‘from 
13 me! the power of my hands; for my right hand was half withered for seven days. And I knew, my 
children, that because of Joseph this had befallen me, and I repented and wept; and I besought the 
Lord God that my hand might be restored, and that I might hold aloof from all pollution and envy 
14 Tand from all folly’. For I knew that I had devised an evil thing before the Lord and Jacob my 
father, on account of Joseph my brother, in that I envied him. 
31,2 And now, my children, "hearken unto me and! beware of the spirit of deceit and envy. For envy 
ruleth over the whole mind of a man, and suffereth him ‘neither to eat nor to drink', nor to do any 
3 good thing. But it ever suggesteth (to him) to destroy him that he envieth ; and so long as he that 
4 is envied flourisheth, he that envieth fadeth away. Two years 'therefore' I afflicted my soul with 
fasting in the fear of the Lord, and I learnt that deliverance from envy cometh by the fear of God. 
5 For if a man flee to the Lord, the evil spirit runneth away from him, and his mind is lightened. 
6 And henceforward he sympathiseth with him whom he envied and forgiveth those who are 
hostile to him, and so ceaseth from his envy. 
1 And my father asked ‘concerning me', because he saw that I was sad ; and I said unto him, I am 
2 pained in my liver. For I mourned more than they all, because I was guilty of the selling of Joseph. 
3 And when we went down into Egypt, and he bound me as a spy, I knew that I was suffering justly, 
4 and I grieved not. Now Joseph was a good man, and had the Spirit of God within him: being 


Il. 2. Simeon ... heard her prayer. Cf. Gen. xxix. 33 for this play on the name. 
4. liver. Here the spirit of war dwells, T. R. iii. 4. i : : A 2 
6. jealous of Joseph. Cf. iv. 2, 3; and Targum Ps.-Jon. which attributes Gen, xxxvii. 19, 20 to Simeon and Levi. 
in many things a only. 
beyond all a only. 
7. mind, #mara. See v. 4. 
prince of deceit. See T. R. ii. 1 (note). 
blinded my mind. Cf. T. R. iii. 8. . : 
8. sent forth his angel and delivered. Dan. iii. 28; Acts xi. II. Ch PSsi xxiv yao 
g. Reuben to Dothan. Reuben’s absence explains Gen. Xxxvil. 21. 
Judah ...soldhim. Cf. Gen. xxxvii, 26-8. ee 
10. heard these things, dkovwas c (cf. Gen. xxxvii. 21): ‘came’ BA S}, i.e. 12WA for OWI. Same corruption in 
ih Ne 
restore cA = 27: ‘save’ B-afS'=ypwvy. : 
13. the Lord God ad: ‘the Lord’ B-d A >* edegs!; ‘God’ Ah, 


Ill. 1. spirit of deceit and envy aAS*. Cf. it. 7. ‘spirits’ 8 S*. 
3. and so long, &c. Perhaps render * And he that is envied flourisheth, and ’, &c. 
4. afflicted my soul with fasting. Ps. xxxv. 15. Cia: BS 10. 
6. forgiveth, cvyywooke: aaefS*. od karaywooker bdgAz % 
are hostile to. The text has ‘love’ = in the Hebrew original 308 corrupt for YIN. 


IV. 4. Joseph is commended here and always in the Testaments except Naph. Ch lyRotvy. 8-10; 
301 


I, 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


compassionate and pitiful, he bore no malice against me; but loved me even as the rest of his 
5 brethren. Beware, therefore, my children, of all jealousy and envy, and walk in singleness of 
pas 
heart, soul and with good heart, keeping in mind 
Joseph your father’s brother, 


that God may give ‘you also! grace and glory, and blessing upon your heads, even as ye saw in 
6 Joseph’s case. All his days he reproached us not concerning this thing, but loved us as his own 
7 soul, and beyond his own sons glorified us, and gave us riches, and cattle and fruits. Do ye also, 
my children, love each one his brother with a good heart, and the spirit of envy will withdraw from 
8 you. For this maketh savage the soul and destroyeth the body; it causeth anger and war in the 
mind, and stirreth up unto deeds of blood, 


a BABS} 
and leadeth the mind into frenzy, and leadeth the mind into frenzy, ‘and suffereth 
not prudence to act inmen!; moreover, it taketh 
away sleep, 


[and causeth tumult to the soul and trembling to the body]. 

9 For even in sleep some malicious jealousy, deluding him, gnaweth, and with wicked spirits dis- 
turbeth his soul, and causeth the body to be troubled, and waketh the mind from sleep in confusion ; 
and as a wicked and poisonous spirit, so appeareth it to men. 

1 Therefore was Joseph comely in appearance, and goodly to look upon, because no wickedness 

2 dwelt in him ; for some of the trouble of the spirit the face manifesteth. And now, my children, 

Make your hearts good before the Lord, 
And your ways straight before men, 
And ye shall find grace before the Lord and men. 

3 Beware, therefore, of fornication, 

For fornication is mother of all evils, 
Separating from God, and bringing near to Beliar. 

4 For I have seen it inscribed in the writing of Enoch that your sons shall be corrupted in fornication, 

5 and shall do harm to the sons of Levi with the sword. But they shall not be able to withstand Levi ; 

6 for he shall wage the war of the Lord, and shall conquer ‘all! your hosts. And they shall be few in 
number, divided in Levi and Judah, and there shall be none of you for sovereignty, even as also our 
father prophesied in his blessings. 

2 Behold [ have told you all things, that I may be acquitted of your sin. Now, if ye remove from 
you your envy and all stiff-neckedness, 

As a rose shall my bones flourish in Israel, 

And as a lily my flesh in Jacob, 

And my odour shall be as the odour of Libanus ; 

And as cedars shall holy ones be multiplied from me for ever, 
And their branches shall stretch afar off. 


5. Singleness of heart. See T. Iss. iii. 2 (note). 
of heart a. BAS'read ‘soul and (> A® ) with good (pure? Aahb*¥cdeg y A?) heart, keeping in mind 
Joseph (> b) your father’s brother (‘brother ’ A)’. d is corrupt. The twofold recension obviously goes back to the 
Hebrew original. 
6. gave us riches, &c. Cf. Gen. xlvii, is 1 
7- love each one his brother. Cf. T. R. vi. 9. 
will withdraw a &c.: ‘put ye away’ B-e gSt. For ‘withdraw’ cf. iii. 5, 6. 


8. and suffereth ... men > Ab*cdetg: <moreover.. . sleep’ recurs T. Jud. xviii. 4 with a new verb. 
[and causeth tumult . . . body], bracketed as a corrupt dittography of 84, 
g. Sir. xl. 5-7. 


poisonous. Cf. T. R. v. 3; also ii. 2 (note). 


V. 1. comely, &c. Gen. xxxix. 6. 

2. grace before the Lord and men. Luke ii. 52; T.R. iv, 8. 

3. Separating from God, &c. See T. R. iv. 6. 

4. in the writing of Enoch. Cf, T. L. x. 5, &c. Not in our Enoch: 2 En, xxxiv. 2 says similar things of the 
Antediluvians. Possibly a reference to Num. XXv. 6, 7, 14. 

the sons of Levi. See T. R. vi. 5 

5. wage the war of the Lord—refers to the Maccabees, T. R. vi. 12. 

6. few in number, divided in Levi and Judah. Cf. Gen. xlix.7. ‘I will divide them (Simeon and Levi) in Jacob 
and disperse them in Israel.’ Levi is omitted from this curse here, yet Levi claims the credit of destroying Shechem 
s es vi. 4, and is praised for it in Jub. xxx. 18-23. Cf.T.L.v. 3. Contrast the tone of Gen. xlix. 6-7 and later Rabbinic 

radition. 

VI. 1. acquitted of your sin. Cf. T. L. xiv. 2. 


302 


THE TESTAMENT OF SIMEON 4. 4—9. 2 


3 Then shall perish the seed of Canaan, 
And a remnant shall not be unto Amalek, 
And all the Cappadocians shall perish’, 
And all the Hittites shall be utterly destroyed. 
4 Then shall fail the land of Ham, 
And all the people shall perish. 
Then shall all the earth rest from trouble, 
And all the world under heaven from war. 


Restored Text ya 
5 Then the Mighty One of Israel shall glorify Then shall Shem (MSS. ‘ Seth’) be glorified, 
Shem, For the Lord our God shall appear on earth 
For the Lord God shall appear on earth, [as man] 
And Himself save men. And Himself saves again. 


6 Then shall all the spirits of deceit be given to be trodden under foot, 
And men shall rule over wicked spirits. 


7 Then shall I arise in joy, 
And will bless the Most High because of his marvellous works, 
[Because God hath taken a body and eaten with men and saved men]. 


7x1 And now, my children, obey Levi and Judah, and be not lifted up ‘against these two tribes, for 
2 from them shall arise unto you the salvation of God'. For the Lord shall raise up from Levi as it 
were a High-priest,and from Judah as it were a King [God and man], He shall save all [the Gentiles 
3 and] the race of Israel. Therefore I give you these commands that ye also may command your 
children, that they may observe them throughout their generations. 
8x And when Simeon had made an end of commanding his sons, he slept with his fathers, being an 
2 hundred and twenty years old. And they laid him in a wooden coffin, to take up his bones to 
3 Hebron. And they took them up secretly during a war of the Egyptians. For the bones of Joseph 
4 the Egyptians guarded in the tombs of the kings. For the sorcerers told them, that on the departure 
of the bones of Joseph there should be throughout all the land darkness and gloom, and an exceeding 
great plague to the Egyptians, so that even with a lamp a man should not recognize his brother. 
91,2 And the sons of Simeon bewailed their father. And they were in Egypt until the day of their 
departure by the hand of Moses. 


3. The destruction of Israel’s foes. 
And all... perish >A. The Cappadocians seem to mean here the Caphtorim or Philistines. Cf. Deut. ii. 23, 
and note on Jub. xxiv. 29. 
Hittites, either ‘NN ‘ Hittites’ or D'ND (i. e. Greeks, or Macedonians). 
4. all the people. Which people? ads generally refers to Israel, and so perhaps the Messianic odives are meant. 
5-8. A Theophany. God Himself comes to save men, subdues the evil spirits, and raises the righteous. 
5. For other Theophanies see T. L. ii, 11, v. 2, vili. 11; T. Jud. xxii. 2; T. Z. ix. 8; T. N. viii. 3; T. A. vii. 3. 
the Mighty One of Israel. So 8S A >*¢4eg (in 2nd clause), while a reads péya 7 “Iopana (in Ist clause). 
shall glorify. Conjectured from évdo£acOjcera, all MSS., i.e. 122% corrupt for 733). 
Shem. SobdA*¢deg: ‘Seth’ A®>b: ‘thesign’a®-bdS. Possibly onueioy = }3*¥ misread for }¥¥ = ‘Zion’. 
[as man] aB-—a S, a Christian addition. E f 
and Himself save men: lit. = ‘and save in Himself the Adam’ a8S. ev airé (or €avre) = yO¥yI, which 
the translator should have rendered by airés. D‘NM defied translation into Greek, hence rov ’Addp, 
This third clause is wanting in A®* ¢4¢8 and corrupt in A®>4, S 
For this primitive view of the Messianic kingdom as a visible Theocracy cf. 1 En. xxv. 3, Ixxvii. 1. It will be on 
this earth, and the righteous dead will rise to share in it. i 
6. Cf. Luke x. 19, 20 ‘to tread . . . on every power of the enemy’, ‘the spirits are subject unto you oy teeing 
xvili. 12. Basedon Ps. xci. 13. Pig a) Mie ‘ 5 
7. [Because God hath taken a body, &c.] Cf. alike Christian interpolation in T. A. vii. 3; also T. D. v. 134, vi. 9. 
VII. 1. and Judah c: ‘and in Judah shall ye (‘ we’ A>* ¢4@f8) be redeemed’ hBAS. 
be not lifted up. Cf. T. R. vi. 5. 
from them shall arise .. . salvation. See T. R. vi. 5-12 (note). ey : 
2. Levi’s supremacy is here (with the text of N. viii. 2) alone in this work limited to the priesthood. 
all the Gentiles. See T. B. ix. 2 (note). 
VIII. 2. wooden coffin a A>* ¢4defe; ‘coffin of incorruptible wood’ 8-g A * bhs, 
during a war of the Egyptians BAS. See T. B. xil. 3 (note). ‘ oe 
3. tombs a: ‘treasure-houses’ 8B A®S.  Ps.-Jon. on Gen. 1. 26 says, ‘they embalmed him and placed him in 
a coffin and sank him in the middle of the Nile of Egypt.’ Cf. Exod. rabba xx. 17. R. Nathan says Joseph was ° 
Sate 
ee i carting of Joseph’s bones. Why should the darkness be chosen for mention out of all the 
Plagues? : 
1X. 1. their father + ‘according to the law of mourning’ 6S. 


393 


li 


»2 I, Levi, was born in Haran, and I came with my father to Shechem. 


6 le Hs TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


THE TESTAMENT OF LEVI, THE THIRD SON OF JACOB AND LEAH. 


The copy of the words of Levi, the things which he ordained unto his sons, according to all that 
2 they should do, and what things should befall them until the day of judgement. He was sound in 
health when he called them to him; for it had been revealed to him that he should die. And when 
they were gathered together he said to them: 
And I was young, about 
3 twenty years of age, when, with Simeon, I wrought vengeance on Hamor for our sister Dinah. And 
when I was feeding the flocks in Abel-Maul, the spirit of understanding of the Lord came upon me, 
and I saw all men corrupting their way, and that unrighteousness had built for itself walls, and law- 
4 lessness sat upon towers. And I was grieving for the race of the sons of men, and I prayed to the 
5 Lord that I might be saved. Then there fell upon me a sleep, and I beheld a high mountain, and 
6 I was upon it. And behold the heavens were opened, and an angel of God said to me, Levi, enter. 


a | At BAECS? 

7 And I entered from the first |. 7, And when I had entered And I entered from the first 7 
heaven, and I saw there a great | into the first heaven, tand he | heaven into the second, and I 
sea hanging. escorted raised me} to the | saw there a sea hanging between 

second. And I saw there a | the one and the other. 

great sea hanging. 


And further I saw a third 8 
heaven far brighter and more 
brilliant than these two; for 
there was also a_ boundless 
theight therein. 

And I said unto the angel: 9 


8 And further I saw a second 
heaven far brighter and more 
brilliant, for there was a bound- 
less light also therein. | 


9 And I said to the angel, Why g. And I said unto him: | 


is this so? And the angel said 
to me, Marvel not at this, for | 
thou shalt see another heaven | 
more brilliant and incomparable. 


What is this, Lord? And he 
said unto me: 


Wherefore is it so? And the 
angel said unto me: Marvel not 
at these ; for thou shalt see four 
other heavens more brilliant and 








incomparable, 


TITLE. Soa: ‘Testament of Levi concerning the priesthood’ B-ade AS: +‘and arrogance’ bde fAb*cdefg 
8 Pp g 


I. 1. until the day of judgement. This event is therefore conceived as near to the time of the writer. 
revealed to him. Levi has several revelations. 


II. 2, about twenty years; eighteen according to T. L. xii. 5. Jub. xxviii. 13, 14 makes Simeon two years older. 
3. Abel-Maul = the Abel-meholah of the O.T. e.g. Judges vii. 22. 

corrupting their way. Cf. Gen. vi. 12. 

unrighteousness had built ... towers 8B AC4°8S!: ‘sin was built upon a wall and unrighteousness sat upon 


towers’ a. Cf. 1 En. xci. 5 ‘ unrighteousness will come to an end, ... and its whole structure will be destroyed’. Cf. 
also Zech. v. 8-11. 

After 3 e makes a long addition, describing the call and purifying of Levi. 

5. and I was upon it a. ‘This is the mountain of the shield in Abelmaul ’ gAb*fg See T. L. vi. tr. 

II. 7—III. The original passage described three heavens, but it has been worked up to include seven. The first 


heaven really has the great sea, as v. 8 in a shows, for the second heaven is further on. This second becomes the third 
in 8 Af S‘. Again in 9, to a speaks of ‘ another heaven’. 8 A® S* makes ‘four other heavens’ of it. In 10 the word 
‘thither’ and the general effect require no more than one heaven. In iii. I-4 a once more gives us three heavens, and 
God dwelling in the highest. §A® S! makes four of the first two, and then passes at a leap to the highest, which in 
verses 5-8 we find has two or three others between it and the fourth or third heaven. a also has undergone alteration 
in verses 5~8 and mentions three other heavens. 

The doctrine of the seven heavens was prevalent in Judaism before and after the time of Christ. 
ili-xxi ; Talmud, Chag. 12”; 4 Ezra vii. 81-7. 

Christian apocalypses like Asc. Isa. followed Hebrew teaching on this point. 
Hebrew, and has been betrayed by the testimony of the first and better of the two 
That they are independent is shown by iii. 2 Kpivews, a: mpoordyparos, B, iii. 6 Ouciav, a: 
cahevoueda, B. 

7. @ great sea, i.e. the waters above the firmament, Gen. i. 7. Cf. Jub. ii. 4 and 1 En. liv. 8. 
perhaps read ‘in the firmament’ )°P73 for yp. 
8. The ‘second’ in a becomes the ‘third heaven’ 
hosts in it. 
light. 
MD) = bos. 
9. Note that the one heaven in a becomes four in B. 


See e.g. 2 En. 


Thus the redaction originated in 
independent Greek Versions —a, 
mpoahopay, 3 iii. 9 Tpépopev, a; 


For ‘ hanging’ 
in 8. Instead of the brightness iii, 3 mentions the avenging 


Text = ‘height’ = 7123 corrupt for 723, ‘light’ or ‘brightness’. So read 729 = péyyos or pas instead of 


304 


oti TESTAMENT OF LEVI 1. 1—3, > 


a Aa 
to =©>6 And when thou hast ascended to. When thou hast ascended 

thither, Thou shalt stand near | thither, Thou shalt stand before 
the Lord, the Lord, - 

And shalt be His minister, And shalt be His minister, 

And shalt declare His mys- And his coming mysteries 
teries to men, thou shalt declare unto men. 
And shalt proclaim fconcerning 
Him that shall redeem} Israel. 


tr And by thee and Judah shall the Lord appear among men, 
"Saving every race of men.! 

12 And from the Lord’s portion shall be thy life, 
And He shall be thy field and vineyard, 
And fruits, gold, and silver. 


a Aa 
Hear, therefore, regarding the 1. Hear, therefore, regarding 
heavens which have been shown | the heavens which were shown 
to thee. The lowest is for this | to thee. The first heaven is for 
cause gloomy unto thee, in that | this cause gloomy unto thee, 
it beholds all the unrighteous | since it beholds the unrighteous 
deeds of men. - deeds of men. 

2 And it has fire, snow, and 2. And the second hath fire 
ice made ready for the day of | and snow and ice made ready 
judgement, in the righteous | for the day of the ordinances. 
judgement of God; for in it are 
all the spirits of the retributions 
for vengeance on }men. 


31 


3 And in the second are the 
hosts of the armies which are 
ordained for the day of judge- 
ment, to work vengeance on the 
spirits of deceit and of Beliar. 
And above them are the holy 
ones. 


°8) 


BA S} 
When thou hast ascended 1° 
thither. ‘Because! thou shalt 


stand near the Lord, 

And shalt be His minister, 

And His mysteries shalt thou 
declare to men, 

And shalt proclaim concern- 
ing the redemption of Israel. 


PALS 
Hear, therefore, regarding the t 
seven heavens. The lowest is 
for this cause gloomier, since 
it beholds all the unrighteous 
deeds of men. 


The second has fire, snow, ice 2 
ready for the day of the ordi- 
nance of the’ Lord in the 
righteous judgement of God. In 
it are all the spirits of the retri- 
butions for vengeance on the 
lawless. 

In the third are the hosts of 3 
the armies which are ordained 
for the day of judgement, to work 
vengeance on the spirits of de- 
ceit and of Beliar. tAnd those 
in the fourth} who are above 
these are holy. 


10-12. Levi has not yet ascended into the third heaven ; in fact he does not do so till v. 1. The angel appears to 


anticipate in 10-12, and resumes his account in iii, I. 

10. Levi is to be made priest on ascending into the third heaven. 

stand near the Lord, and shalt be His minister. 

the redemption of Israel. 
influence to ‘ Him that shall redeem Israel’. > A*%. 

11. by thee and Judah. See T. R. vi. 5-12 (note). 


As alone preserves the original reading. 


Otherwise 10-12 would follow naturally on iv. 2. 
See v. I, 2. 4 
Cf. Deut. x. 8, xviii. 11; Jub. xxxi. 14. 


aS are all modified by Christian 


appear among men. That God Himself would appear and dwell with men was the older Jewish view in the 


second century B.c. Cf. T. S. vi. 5 (note); T. L.v.2; 1 En. xxv. 3. 
Saving every race of men >A. See T.S. vi. 5 (note). 
12. from the Lord’s portion. See viii. 16 (note). 
portion. 


Ill. 1. gloomy... in that it beholds, &c. Cf. 2 Bar. liii. 5, lvi. 5, 7 ‘the black waters’. 


Apoc. Esdrae; Apoc. Pauli 4; and see James, Zexts and Stuidies, Wir te 07 


2. The first (a) heaven contains the instruments of God’s retribution for sin. 
that the treasuries of the ice and snow, and the great sea, are in the first heaven. 
Cf. eis exdiknow ékrioral, Sir. XXXIX. 29. Cf. also Sir. xxxix. 28, 30 and xl. 9, Io. 


for the day of judgement. 


Cf. Deut. xxxii. 9; Sir. xvii. 17, where Israel is the Lord’s 


Cf. also 3 Baruch viii; 


2 En. iii. 3; v. 1 also holds, like a, 


spirits of the retributions. Natural phenomena are the agents of punishment, but they are under the control 


of spirits or angels. Cf. 1 En. Ix. 12. 


on the lawless, ‘on men’ a, by textual corruption. Cf. SiraxiealO: 


3. In the second heaven are the angelic armies in readiness to destroy Beliar. 


but in the fourth heaven and for a different purpose. 
+And those in the fourtht. 
by the redactor. 


Perhaps we should read ‘ and the four heavens above these are holy’, i.e. AYIINM for WII). 


to the ‘for’ in v. 4 (8). 
above them are the holy ones a. 


a | ==! 
1105.2 305 


2 En. xvii gives us an armed host, 


The @ recension here cannot be cleared up by a, as it was independently altered 
Verse 8 in 8 naturally refers to the fourth heaven, which therefore need not be mentioned here. 


This gives a point 


These are the angels. For the first passage in which the abode of the 


x 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELV GaP yae ee 


a 


4 And in the highest of all 
dwelleth the Great Glory, far 
above all holiness. 


5 In [the heaven next to] it 
are the archangels, who minister 
and make propitiation to the 
Lord for all the sins of igno- 
rance of the righteous ; 


6 Offering to the Lord a sweet- 
smelling savour, a reasonable 
and a bloodless offering. 


7 And [in the heaven below 
this] are the angels who bear 
fanswers to the angels of the 
presence of the Lord. 

8 An fin the heaven next to 
this} are thrones and dominions, 
in which always they offer praise 
to God. 

aB A&® S} 

g When, therefore, the Lord 
looketh upon us, all of us are 
shaken; yea, the heavens, and 
the earth, and the abysses are 
shaken at the presence of His 
majesty. 


A& 
4. And tthe Holy One of the 
holy ones} is above all holiness. 


5. And the hosts of the angels 
are ministering, 


6. And praising the Lord, 


7, Who also are messengers 
of the Godhead. 


g. When, therefore, the Lord 
looketh upon all creation, the 
heavens and the earth and the 
abysses are shaken. 





BA8S! 

For in the Highest of all 4 
dwelleth the Great Glory, in 
the holy of holies, far above all 
holiness. 

And in [the heaven next to] 5 
it are the angels of the presence 
of the Lord, who minister and 
make propitiation to the Lord 
for all the sins of ignorance of 
the righteous. 

And they offer to the 6 
Lord a sweet-smelling savour, 
a reasonable and_ bloodless 
offering. 

And in [the heaven below] 7 
are the angels who bear the 
answers to the angels of the 
presence of the Lord. 

And in the heaven next to 8 
this are thrones and dominions 
in which always praises are 
offered to God. 


10 But the sons of men, having no perception of these things, sin and provoke the Most High. 


Now, therefore, know that the Lord shall ex 


Because when the rocks are being rent, 


And the sun quenched, 
And the waters dried up, 


blessed even after judgement is heaven is in i En. civ. 2, Ciil. 4, 6, xli. 2, li. 4, i.e. between 100 and 50 B.C. The 


intermediate abode of souls—even of the righteous—is Sheol at this date, 1 En. xxii. 4-9, li. 1, c. 5 (cf. 4 Ezra iv. 41) ; 


2eMacc:.vi12 3. 
4. the Great Glory. 


De Davin: 
sins of ignorance. 


6. reasonable, Noy«jr. 
behalf. 


bloodless offering. Cf. Essenes’ objection to bloody sacrifices. 
These are a lower order of angels. 
angels of the presence’, or ‘of the angels’, &c. (as g). 
‘ prayers’ instead of NID WN ‘ answers’, 


7- How ‘answers’ ? 


&. thrones and dominions. 
they offer praise. 


Ass. Mos. x. 4, 
Io. no perception . . . sin. 
We. Fe 
waters dried up. Cf. Pss. Sol, 


t En. xiv. 20, cl. 
5-8. Even a here has been interpolated. “The sixth, fifth, and fourth heavens are introduced, but th 

between v. 3 and v. 8, as there is no third heaven mentioned in 3 (a). 

original text, which thus enumerated the angels in the third heaven. 

5. minister and make propitiation. A s5 
spoken of in Exod. xxv. 9, 40; Num. viii. 4, 
intercession of angels occurs in Zech. i. 12; Job v. 1, xxxiii. 23, 

Cf. too 1 En. xxxix. 5, xlvii. 2, xl. ONCiveate 
Cf. T. R.i.6; T. Jud. xix. Sie Ladene 


Cf. Rom. xii. 1. Cf. Origen, De Orat. xi Aoyixny iepovpyiav, of Raphael offering on Tobit’s 


Cf. 1 En. xxv. 3, 7, xlvii. 3 


Cf. 3 Bar. xi-xii; 


Cf 1. En, levi 3, 


sun quenched. Cf. Matt. xxiv. 29; Mark xiii, 24. 


Xvii. 21; Ass. Mos. x. 6; 4 Ezra vi. 24. 


306 


acrificial service in heaven is 
and was already a familiar idea, 


ecute judgement upon the sons of men, 


ere is still a gap 


The descending order is a witness to the 


suggested by the heavenly patterns 
See my Commentary zz Joc. The 


and especially in 1 En. ix, 3, XV. 2, Ixxxix. 76. See 
For Aecrovpyoivres cf. Heb. i. 14. 


Cf. Philo ii. 457. 

Perhaps we should render ‘bear the answers for the 
The analogy of Rev. v. 8, however, would suggest n1>5n 
‘ Apoc. Pauli vii-x; Origen, De Princ. i. 8. 1 
Cf. Col. i. 16; Eph. i. PREP TINE Oy SOS I aa a gah 
a Cf. 2 En. xvii, xviii. 

ay2’_~ DIS verse and Sir. xvi. 18, 19 are independent versions of a lost Hebrew original 
Thus a has rpépopev, B oadevdueba, Greek of Sir. cuvcelorrat. as 


. 


Moreover a and £ differ. 


For parallels cf. Judges v. 4; Isa. Ixiv.1; Judith xvi. sis 


THE TESTAMENT OF LEVI 8. 4—5. 7 


And the fire cowering, 
And all creation troubled, 
And the invisible spirits melting away, 
And Hades taketh spoils through the visitations of the Most High, 
Men will be unbelieving and persist in their iniquity. 
On this account with punishment shall they be judged. 
2 'Therefore! the Most High hath heard thy prayer, 


To separate thee from iniquity, and that thou shouldst become to Him a son, 
And a servant, and a minister of His presence. 


3 The light of knowledge shalt thou light up in Jacob, 
And as the sun shalt thou be to all the seed of Israel. 
4 And there shall be given to thee a blessing, and to all thy seed, 
Until the Lord shall visit all the Gentiles in His tender mercies for ever. 
5 ‘And! therefore there have been given to thee counsel and understanding 
That thou mightst instruct thy sons concerning this ; ‘3 
6 Because they that bless Him shall be blessed, 
And they that curse} Him shall perish. 


1 And thereupon the angel opened to me the gates of heaven, and I saw the holy temple, and upon 
2a throne of glory the Most High. And He said to me: Levi, I have given thee the blessings of the 
3 priesthood until I come and sojourn in the midst of Israel. Then the angel brought me down to the 
earth, and gave me a shield and a sword, and said to me: Execute vengeance on Shechem because 
4 of Dinah, thy sister, and I will be with thee because the Lord hath sent me. And I destroyed at 
5 that time the sons of Hamor, as it is written in the heavenly tables. And I said to him: I pray 
6 thee, O Lord, tell me Thy name, that I may call upon Thee in a day of tribulation. And he said: 
I am the angel who intercedeth for the nation of Israel that they may not be smitten utterly, 
7 for every evil spirit attacketh it. And after these things I awaked, and blessed the Most High, 
and the angel who intercedeth for the nation of Israel and for all the righteous. 


And Hades taketh spoils. Cf. Isa. v.14. Or a Christian addition-—‘and Hades is despoiled ’, oxvAevopevou 
being taken in a passive not middle sense. ‘ 
visitations. A difficult but possible rendering of rade. If an interpolation, = ‘ passion ’. 
unbelieving and persist. Cf. Rev. xvi. 9, 11, 21; 1 En. Ixvii. 12, 13. For dmorotvres B-d ABS we have 
azelOotvres, ‘ disobedient’ a d. 
2. become to Him a son. Already in the second century B.c. we find the individual Israelite viewed as a son of 
God. Cf. Sir. xxiii. 1, li. 10 (Syriac); Jub. 1. 24 (note). 
minister of His presence. Cf. Jub. xxxi. 14. 
3. The light of knowledge. See xviii. 3 (note). 
4. This ‘blessing’ is probably God’s blessing on Levi, as Jub. xxxi. 13, not that pronounced by the priests (T. k. 
vi. 10, note), or the priestly privileges, T. L. v. 2. 
Until the Lord shall visit. Cf. v. 2. 
in His tender mercies. a8A8S read ‘in His Son’s tender mercies ’. 
A® reads in 4 ‘And it shall come to pass in the last days that God shall send [His Son] to save the created things 
[and thy sons shall lay hands on and crucify Him]’. a A8 S also have the last clause—an obvious Christian addition. 
6. For ‘ Him’ read ‘ thee’, as in Isaac’s blessing of Levi in Jub. xxxi. 17. 


V. 1. opened to me the gates. Cf. the opened door in Rev. iv. 1. Levi now enters the third heaven of ii. 9 (a). 
the holy temple. With xviii. 6 and perhaps iii. 4 (@ A® S*), the earliest reference to the heavenly temple. Cf. 
Rev. xi. 19, xvi. 17 and contrast Rev. xxi. 22. nae 
and upon . . . Most High BAS: ‘the Holy Most High One sitting upon a throne’ a. 
2. untilI ... sojourn. For the visible theocracy cf. iv. 4; T. 5S. vi. 5. 
3. a Shield. See vi. 1. ; 
Execute vengeance. Yet Levi says ‘ we sinned’ in vi. 7. 
4. This verse interrupts the. narrative. , u 
heavenly tables 8 AfS*. See T. A. ii. 10, vil. 5 (BA S1): ‘tables of the fathers’ a, perhaps better. Cf. Jub. 
Seis, BE y ; le 
6. oe who intercedeth for the nation of Israel. See my Commentary 7 /oc. mapattoupevos 70 yevos B-d: 
mpoiatdpevos Tod yévous d: mapemdpuevos Tov ‘yevous a: pora€ rod y. A: calor 70 y. Shee seems a bad rendering of yI5, 
asin D. vi.2a. dAS!=‘protector’. For B-d cf. Asc. Is. ix. 23 (Latin and Slavonic) ‘Iste est magnus angelus 
i 1 deprecans semper pro humanitate’. ab ty fae : 
Teale eae then Eos to be Michael. Cf. Dan. x. 13, 21, xii, 1. Also see 1 En. xx. 7, which limits his good 
offices to the rightéous in Israel, cf. T. L. v. 7. He intercedes for Israel, 1 En. Ixxxix. 76, helps Israel, xc. 14 and 
opposes the angels of the heathen nations in Dan. x-xii. God Himself is Israel s Patron in Deut. xxxii. 8-9 (LXX) ; 
Sir. xvii. 17; Jub. xv. 31, 32; Hebrew T. Naph. ix. 5, and only the other nations have angel-patrons. Or it may be 
the angel of peace that is referred to here. Cf. T. D. vi. 5: Dan. x. 5-6, 11%, 12-14, 19-21, xi-xii. See also T. A. 
vi.6; T. B. vi. 1; 1 En. xl. 8, lit. 5, iii. 4, &c., for this angel as a guide. He is distinct from Michael, Dan. x. 13; 
1 En. xl. 8-9. : 
utterly ... attacketh it >a. 


S 


307 es 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THEI WELVESPAt ie 


61 And when I was going to my father, I found a brazen shield ; wherefore also the name of the 

2 mountain is Aspis, which is near Gebal, to the south of Abila. And I kept these words in my 

3 heart. And after this I counselled my father, and Reuben my brother, to bid the sons of Hamor 

not to be circumcised ; for I was zealous because of the abomination which they had wrought on 

4,5 my sister. And I slew Shechem first, and Simeon slew Hamor. And after this my brothers 

6 came and smote 'that! city with the edge of the sword. And my father heard 'these things!’ and 

was wroth, and he was grieved in that they had received the circumcision, and after that had been 

7 put to death, and in his blessings he flooked amiss upon us. For we sinned because we had done 

g this thing against his will, and he was sick on that day. But I saw that the sentence of God was for 

evil upon Shechem; for they sought to do to Sarah ‘and Rebecca! as they had done to Dinah our 

g sister, but the Lord prevented them. And they persecuted Abraham our father when he was a 

stranger, and they vexed his flocks when they were big with young; and Eblaen, who was born in his 

1o house, they most shamefully handled. And thus they did to all strangers, taking away their 

11 wives by force, and they fbanished them. But the wrath of the Lord came upon them to the 
uttermost, 

71 And I said to my father Jacob: By thee will the Lord despoil the Canaanites, and will give 

2 their land to thee and to thy seed after thee. For from this day forward shall Shechem be 

3 called a city of imbeciles; for as a man mocketh a fool, so did we mock them. Because also 

4 they had wrought folly in Israel by defiling my sister. And we departed and came to Bethel. 

81,2 And there again I saw a vision as the former, after we had spent there seventy days. And I saw seven 

men in white raiment saying unto me: Arise, put on the robe of the priesthood, and the crown of right- 

eousness, and the breastplate of understanding, and the garment of truth, and the plate of faith, and the 

3 turban of the fhead, and the ephod of prophecy. And they severally carried (these things) and put 

(them) on me, and said unto me: From henceforth become a priest of the Lord, thou and thy seed for 


VI. 1. shield. Prof. Sayce suggests this = }1, i.e. Mount Hermon (Deut. iii. 9) which is 10 miles SE. of Abilene, 
but 40 miles from Gebal. 
wherefore 6.6. €v @ a. 
2. Ikept ... heart. Cf. Dan. iv. 25 LXX (contrast LXX in vii. 28); Luke ii. 19. 
3. my brother > c. 
not c only. Jub. xxx. 1-4; Josephus, Azz. i. 21. 1 omit the circumcision of the Shechemites. Levi was opposed 
to their circumcision as he intended to avenge the insult done to his sister. 
on my sister a A*: ‘in Israel’ 8 AS St. 
4-5. Cf. Gen. xxxiv. 25-7, where the other sons of Jacob ‘ came upon the slain and spoiled the city’. 
6. Cf. Gen. xxxiv. 30; Jub. xxx. 25. Gen. says Jacob reproached Simeon and Levi. 
looked amiss. sapeidev a: ‘did inequitably’, ddXas émoincer B-d g ABS}, 
7. he was sick cb: ‘I was sick’ h B-bA S}, 
8. upon Shechem >a. and Rebecca >a. The Shechemites.had done nothing to Sarah and Rebecca—for the 
incidents at Gerar see Gen. xx. 3, xxvi. 7. 
g. Also not in Genesis. 
10. their wives B-afAS!: ras £évas a af, i.e. wives of guests or strangers. 
banished, a mistranslation of /1" ‘seduced them’ (to idolatry), or ‘forced them *, as Prov. vii, 21. See Jub. 
Xxx. 7-17, where intermarriage with heathen involves the death penalty, as in the case of the Shechemites, Marriage 
with a Gentile was considered equivalent to worship of the Gentile idols. 
11. of the Lord 85S': ‘of God’ a. This verse, adopted by St. Paul in 1 Thess. ii, 16, seems to be based on Gen. 
XXXV. 5 and presupposes nin Y3")\ instead of NAN WT). Jub. xxx. 26 reads the latter. i 


VII. 1. Jacob a: ‘be not angry my (afg: > A*) lord Jacob (> d)’ B-bAS}. 
2. a city of imbeciles. Cf. Sir. ]. 26—of Shechem. 
3. wrought folly in Israel. Gen. xxxiv. 7; Jub. xxx. 5. 
4. And we +‘ took our sister’ beg. 
came to Bethel. Cf. Jub. xxxi. 3; Gen. xxxv. 6. 


VIII. 1. For this vision cf, Jub. xxxii. 1, where, however, Levi has already visited Isaac and returned to Bethel. 
See: Te Levixcat. 


2. Seven men. For the ‘seven angels’ cf. Ezek. ix. 2, and for their names see 1 En. xx. 
_ Tobe of the priesthood, &c. See my Commentary zz Joc. Cf. Exod. xxviii. 4, 36-8, xxix. 5; Sir xiv. 8-12; 
Philo, de Vita Mos. iii. 11-143 Josephus, Azz. iii. 7. 1-6. 
robe = N3jN) or tunic of every priest. 
crown = by, 
breastplate of understanding. Cf. ‘breastplate of judgement’, Exod. xxviii. 15); 2chOimaxlvelOs 
garment—the long outer robe or zodypns. 
plate = réradoy or JS. See Encyc. Bid. iii. 3157. 
turban of the thead. The pirpa should have some virtue or power associated with it. So for YX (kehadns a), 
and NV (onyeiov b de g A*, corrupted to ornéiov af $1), we must read WWD, « uprightness ’. 
ephod of prophecy. Cf. 1 Sam. xxiii. 9, 10. 
3. a priest...ever SAS‘. “A priest, thou and all thy seed’ a. Cf. Jub. xxxii. 1, which supports 8 A S4, 
308 


tee eho tAMENT OF LEVI 6. 1—9. 6 
4,5 ever. And the first anointed me with holy oil, and gave to me the staff of judgement. The second 
washed me with pure water, and fed me with bread and wine (even) the most holy things, and clad 
6, 7 me with a holy and glorious robe. The third clothed me with a linen vestment like an ephod. The 
_ 8, 9 fourth put round me a girdle like unto purple. The fifth gave me a branch of rich olive. The sixth 
1o placed a crown on my head. The seventh placed on my head a diadem of priesthood, and filled my 
11 hands with incense, that I might serve as priest to the Lord God. And they said to me: Levi, thy 
12 seed shall be divided into three offices, for a sign of the glory of the Lord who is to come. And the 
13 first portion shall be great; yea, greater than it shall none be. The second shall be in the priest- 
14 hood. And the third shall be called by a new name, because a king shall arise in Judah, and shall 
15 establish a new priesthood, after the }fashion of the Gentiles |to all the Gentiles]. And His presence 
is beloved, as a prophet of the Most High, of the seed of Abraham our father. 
16 Therefore, every desirable thing in Israel shall be for thee and for thy seed, 
And ye shall eat everything fair to look upon, 
And the table of the Lord shall thy seed apportion. 
17 And some of them shall be high priests, and judges, and scribes ; 
For by their mouth shall the holy place be guarded. 
18, 19 And when I awoke, [ understood that this (dream) was like the first dream. And I hid this also 
in my heart, and told it not to any man upon the earth. 
91,2 And after two days I and Judah went up with our father Jacob to Isaac our father’s father. And 
my father’s father blessed me according to all the words of the visions which I had seen. And 
3 he would not come with us to Bethel. ‘And when we came to Bethel’, my father saw a vision 
4 concerning me, that I should be their priest unto God. And he rose up early in the morning, 
5 and paid tithes of all "to the Lord’ through me. And 'so' we came to Hebron to dwell there. 
6 And Isaac called me continually to put me in remembrance of the law of the Lord, even as the 





4. of judgement > a. 

5. bread and wine, (even) the most holy things cif S!: ‘holy bread and wine’ hA. Cf. Gen. xiv. 18. Is 
Christian influence apparent here? 

g-10. Soa@S!: ‘And the sixth filled my hands with incense that I might serve as priest before the Lord’ A*: ‘And 
the sixth placed a diadem of ptiesthood on my head and the seventh filled,’ &c. A b* ; “And the sixth and the seventh 
gave me a diadem of priesthood and again filled, &c. Ae?°fS. 

filled my hands. This =ordination. Cf. Exod. xxviii. 41. 
Goda: >BAS. 

11. These three offices filled by Moses (12), the Aaronitic priesthood (13), and the Maccabean princes (14, 15), are 
signs of the Messiah’s coming. 

12. the first portion, kAjpos, is Moses. Text =a: +muorevoas (before patos) bdeg: ‘And those who believe 
first shall have a great portion’ A. 

14. the third, the Maccabees, and in particular John Hyrcanus. 

a new name: ‘priests of the Most High God’. Cf. Gen. xiv. 18 (Melchizedek) ; also Ass. Mos. vi. 1; Josephus, 
Ant. xvi. 6.23 Jub. xxxii. 1, xxxvi. 16; T. L. vill. 15. 

king. See 1 Macc. xiv. 41. Simon was apxtepeds, otpatnyds, and €Ovapxns. 

in Judah, ‘ out of Judah’ a8: ‘in Judah’ A, possibly. 

new priesthood. Cf. xviii. 2. ; 

after the fashion of the Gentiles, &c. aB-d A® S: ‘a new priesthood to all the Gentiles’ d. The bracketed 
words may go back to a dittography in the Hebrew. For “after the fashion’ read perhaps as in the note in my Com- 
mentary ‘for a mediator’. : 

15. Verses 14-15 date this work in the time of the Maccabean dynasty. Verse 15 dates it under John Hyrcanus, 
who alone of the Maccabees is credited with the gift of prophecy, Josephus, Bell. Iud.i.2.8. Cf. refs. in T. L. xviii. 6 
(note). Moreover, it must be earlier than his struggle with the Pharisees. 

beloved aafS?: ‘unutterable’ B-af A. : f 
16. Cf. Isaae’s blessing of Levi in Jub. xxxi. 16; also T. Jud. xxi. 55 Sixive2 us 
17. Cf. Jub. xxxi. 15. é 
guarded B-af A®: ‘taken’ af (ch imply). 
by their mouth = ‘at their word’, : 
18-ix. 9. Cf. Aramaic Fragment, Appendix II in Commentary. 
19. The first dream vision is also kept secret by Levi. Cf. vi. 2. 


LX. 1. Here the visit to Isaac follows the dream vision of T. L. viii. In Jub. xxxi. 13-17 the visit and Isaac’s 
blessing precede the vision at Bethel in xxxii. I. é 
foianac: Isaac was living in Abraham’s house (Jub. xxxi. 5) in Hebron (v. 5, Gen. xxxv. 27). Cf. Aram. and 
Gk. Frag. v. Il. 
2. Cf. Jub. xxxi. 13-17. con 
1d not come. Jub, xxx. 27. haieial 
a Ha chen .,. Bethel abeg. In Jub. xxxii. 1 Levi, not Jacob, has this vision. If ‘ Jacob’ be read there for 
‘ Levi’, the difference in order mentioned in ix. 1 (note) would be removed. 
unto God 8 S!: ‘before the Lord’ A: >a. 
- 4. Cf. Jub. xxxii. 2: Prather. 2 : 
3. At Hebron Isaac was living. : ; 
6-14. These instructions Abraham gives to Isaac in Jub. xx1. 1-23. 


Bio 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


7 angel of the Lord showed unto me. And he taught me the law of the priesthood, of sacrifices, 
8 whole burnt-offerings, first-fruits, freewill-offerings, peace-offerings. And each day he was instructing 
g me, and was busied on my behalf before the Lord, and said to me: Beware of the spirit of 
ro fornication ; for this shall continue and shall by thy seed pollute the holy place. Take, therefore, 
to thyself a wife without blemish or pollution, while yet thou art young, and not of the race of 
r1 Strange nations. And before entering into the holy place, bathe; and when thou offerest the 
12 sacrifice, wash ; and again, when thou finishest the sacrifice, wash. Of twelve trees having leaves 
13 offer to the Lord, as Abraham taught me also. And of every clean beast ‘and bird" offer a 
™4 sacrifice to the Lord. And of all thy first-fruits and of wine offer the first, as a sacrifice to the 

Lord God ; and every sacrifice thou shalt salt with salt. 
10; Now, therefore, observe whatsoever I command you, children; for whatsoever things I have 
2 heard from my fathers 'I have declared unto you. And behold! I am clear from your ungodliness 
and transgression, which ye shall commit in the end of the ages [against the Saviour of the 
world, Christ, acting godlessly], deceiving Israel, and stirring up against it great evils from the 
3 Lord. And ye shall deal lawlessly together with Israel, so He shall not bear with Jerusalem 
because of your wickedness; but the veil of the temple shall be rent, so as not to cover your 
4shame. And ye shall be scattered as captives among the Gentiles, and shall be for a reproach 
5 and for a curse there. For the house which the Lord shall choose shall be called Jerusalem, 

é as is contained in the book of Enoch the righteous. 

1 sae Therefore when I took a wife I was twenty-eight years old, and her name was Melcha. And 
she conceived and bare a son, and I called his name Gersam, for we were sojourners in our land. 
3, 4 And I saw concerning him, that he would not be in the first rank. And Kohath was born in the 
5 thirty-fifth year ‘of my life', towards sunrise. And I saw in a vision that he was standing on high 
6in the midst of all the congregation. Therefore I called his name Kohath [which is, beginning of 
7 majesty and instruction]. And she bare me a third son, in the fortieth year of my life; and since 
his mother bare him with difficulty, I called him Merari, that is, ‘my bitterness,’ because he also was 


7. law of the priesthood, i.e. DAW) ‘ custom? or ‘ prerogatives’ of the priests. Cf. Deut, xviii. 3. Cf. the peace- 
offerings and thank-offerings in Jub. xxi. 7-9. 
8. before the Lord > a. 
9. beware of .. . fornication. Cf. Jub. xxi. 21-2; Aram. and Gk. Frags 14, 165 Tene, wc 
holy place, or ‘holy things’. 
10. Take... a wife. Cf. Aram. and Gk. Eragec7,. 
11. For these ablutions cf. Jub. xxi. 16; Aram. and Gk. Frag. 19, 21, 53. 
wash, virrov, i.e. the hands and the feet, whereas ‘ bathe’, Aovou, refers to the whole body. 
12. trees having leaves ag; “evergreen trees’ B-g A. See Aram. and Gk. Frag. 23-4; Jub. xxi. 12, 
13. and bird > A. 
14. of ... first fruits . .. the first. Cf. Ezek. xliv. 30 (Heb.) ; Sir. xlv. 20 (Gk.). 
as a sacrifice to the Lord God a: ‘a sacrifice unto the Lord’ af: ¢ unto the Lord’ deg Af S!: > b, 
and every sacrifice thou shalt salt with salt > a. Cf. Jub. xxi. 11; Lev. ii. 13; Mark ix. 49, 50. 


xX. ae irene belongs to the first century B.C., and is an attack on the later Maccabean high-priests. See 
X1V—xv (note). 

1. Ihave declared unto you > d A. 

2. And behold > BA. 

[against the Saviour .. . godlessly.| A Christian addition. ‘Christ’ c only: ‘acting godlessly’ 8 A S}, 
stirring up ... evils. Cf. Isa. x. 26, &c. 
3. together with Israel 8 A S': ‘in Israel’ c. 
the veil, karaméragpa c(h plur.) ; cf. Mark xv. 38. €vdupa B-d A S suggests that rov vaov is an interpolation, and 
that the rending of garments is spoken of ; cf, Isa. xxii. 8. A” inserts koopov before rov vaod. 
4. there +‘and a trampling under foot’? BAS. Cf. Isa. xXvill. 18, 
5. This verse seems to be an addition or at least an afterthought. 
the house which the Lord shall choose. 1 En. Ixxxix. 54 calls Jerusalem ‘ the house of the Lord’. 
which the Lord shall choose. Deut. xii. 5, &e. 
the book of Enoch. The references to Enoch in the Testaments are suspicious. See my Commentary, 
PP- 49-50. References occur in T, S. v. 4; T.L. x. 5, xiv. 1 (>a), xvi. 1 (>a); T. Jud. xviii. 1 (> a); T. D. v. 6; 
DN Siva eB Saxcey (>A). Four of these belong to the first century B.C., and only in two, T. S. v. 7 ARC INSie Jin 
of the others do all our authorities agree. S? further refers to Enoch in T. A. ii. 10, Vil. I, 5. 
XI. 1. See xii. 5. 
Melcha. Gk. and Syr. Frag. 62 and Jub. xxxiv. 20. 
2. Gersam. Cf. Gen. xlvi. 11, 
Sojourners. Cf. Exod. ii. 22: ‘in a land of sojourning’ a. 

3. Cf. Gk. Frag. 64, 65. Gersam was born at sunset, and so was not to rise to honour. 

4. thirty-fifth : ‘ thirty-fourth’ Aram. (and Gk. ?) Frag. 

5-6. Cf. Aram. and Gk. Frag. 67, which also suggests a paronomasia of NP and Sap ‘congregation’, The 
brackets indicate a gloss. The Gk. Frag. 67 adds ‘and his seed shall be apy) Baoihéor tepareupa.’ Cf, here apxn 
HeyaXeiou Kat ovpBiBacpds. 

7. my bitterness > ‘my’a. Cf. Aram. and Gk. Frag. 69. 

310 


12 :, 


3: 


13 


THE TESTAMENT OF LEVI 9. 7—18, 9 


g like to die. And Jochebed was born in Egypt, in my sixty-fourth year, for I was renowned then in 
the midst of my brethren. 
2 And Gersam took a wife, and she bare to him Lomni and Semei. And the sons of Kohath, 
4 Ambram, Issachar, Hebron, and Ozeel. And the sons of Merari, Mooli, and Mouses. And “in the 
ninety-fourth year! Ambram took Jochebed my daughter to him to wife, for they were born in one 
5 day, he and my daughter. Eight years old was I when I went into the land of Canaan, and eighteen 
years when I slew Shechem, and at nineteen years I became priest, and at twenty-eight years I took 
6 a wife, and at forty-eight I went into Egypt. And behold, my children, ye are a third generation. 
7 In my hundred and eighteenth year Joseph died. 
, And now, my children, I command you: 
Fear the Lord your God ‘with your whole heart?, 
And walk in simplicity according to all His law. 
2 And do ye also teach your children letters, 
That they may have understanding all their life, 
Reading unceasingly the law of God. 
3. For every one that knoweth the law of the Lord shall be honoured, 
And shall not be a stranger whithersoever he goeth. 
4 Yea, many friends shall he gain more than his parents, 
And many men shall desire to serve him, 
And to hear the law from his mouth. 
5 Work righteousness, ‘therefore’, my children, upon the earth, 
That ye may have (it) as a treasure in heaven. 
6 And sow good things in your souls, 
That ye may find them in your life. 
But if ye sow evil things, 
Ye shall reap every trouble and affliction. 
» Get wisdom in the fear of God with diligence ; 
For though there be a leading into captivity, 
And cities and lands be destroyed, : 
And gold and silver and every possession perish, 
The wisdom of the wise nought can take away, 
Save the blindness of ungodliness, and the callousness (that comes) of sin. 
g ‘For if one keep oneself from these evil things’, 
Then even among his enemies shall wisdom be a glory to him, 
And in a strange country a fatherland, 
And in the midst of foes shall prove a friend. 
9 Whosoever teaches noble things and does them, 
Shall be enthroned with kings, 
As was also Joseph my brother. 


8. Jochebed . . . renowned, a play on the name in Hebrew. Cf. the Frag. 71. 


<II. 1-3. Cf. Exod. vi. 17-19. sf. 
ms Fight years. Cf. ee nee ‘eighteen’ Aram. Frag. 78: ‘nine’ Jub. xxviil. 14, xxix. 14. 
eighteen years. So Syr. Frag. and Aram. Frag., also Jub. xxx. 2 with xxvill. 14, 23. 
forty-eight: ‘forty’ text, ‘forty-eight’ Aram. Frag. 79. Cf. T. Jud. xil. 12 (note). 
7. hundred and eighteenth. For a different calculation see Jub. xxvili. 14, 24. 


XIII. 1. A poem in praise of the wise. Cf. Sir. xxxix. 9-II. 
2. teach... letters. Cf. T. R.iv.1. This verse >a. 
4. desire to serve ie Pere te 5: icine Seer ee oe 
. righteousness = alms. in Deut. vi. 25, xxiv. 13; Ps. xxiv. 5. i 
; ae (it) as a treasure emmended,.. y A : bag 5 i Sis oe oO eee en ee pas Sas 
i, PO) itive oO) : B. Bathra 112; Pss.-Sol. ix. 6, 9; : ert 
aaa ee ae ts a eee Toe Shabbath 31>; and is the measure of the righteous final reward, 
4 Ezra viii. 33; 2 Bar. xxiv. I. 
6. sow evil. Cf. Prov. xxii. 8. 
7. with diligence 8B APS: > aA’. 
nought, ovdeis, text. itt 
the blindness of ungodliness. Cf. xiv. 4. 
8. For if... things a: ‘ But if one keep these’ d: >B-dAS. 
g. teaches... anddoes. Cf. Matt. v. 19, vil. 24, 26, 
noble a: ‘these’ BA. 
BRO 


14 ; 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


a, A@ 


scorn. 


a, A@ 


3 For as the heaven is purer in 
the Lord’s sight than the earth, 
so also be ye, the lights of Israel, 
(purer) than all the Gentiles. 


4 But if ye be darkened through 
transgressions, what, therefore, 
will all the Gentiles do living 
in blindness? Yea, ye shall 
bring a curse upon our race, 
because the light of the law 
which was given for to lighten 
every man this ye desire to 
destroy by teaching command- 
ments contrary to the ordinances 


of God. 


5 The offerings of the Lord ye shall rob, and fr 
6 eating (them) contemptuously with harlots. 


XIV-XVI. The groundwork and indeed the 1 
Unquestioning obedience t 
lewdness and baseness of the priests. The ch 
God’s ordinances, profane the priesthood, and pollute the sacrifices. 


and his posterity. 


Therefore, my children, I have learnt that at 
the end of the ages ye will transgress against the 
Lord, stretching out hands to wickedness [against 
Him]; and to all the Gentiles shall ye become a 





B, AB S} 


And row my children, I have learnt from the 
writing of Enoch that in the end ye will trans- 
gress against the Lord, stretching out hands to 
all wickedness ; and your brethren shall be put 
to shame because of you, and to all the Gentiles 


shall ye become a scorn. 


2 For our father Israel is pure from the transgressions of the chief priests [who shall lay their 
hands upon the Saviour of the world]. 


BS? 
3. The heaven is purer than 
the earth, and ye, the lights of 
Israel, are fas sun and moon. 


4. What will all the Gentiles 
do, if ye be darkened through 
transgressions? Yea, ye shall 
bring a curse upon our race, 
because the light of the law 
which was given to lighten every 
man, this ye shall desire to de- 
stroy by teaching command- 
ments contrary to the ordinances 
of God. 


and they shall go into captivity, a scorn to the Gentiles. 


The date is not after A.D. 70, as the Temple prediction might seem to sugg 
in xiv. 4 and xvi. 2, disappear after that date as a party. The Pharisees, more 
after 63 B.C. when the Pharisaic Hyrcanus became 
immoral in the first century A.D. The sack of Jerusal 

The charges of gross immorality and profanatio 
priests of 200-170 B.C., and the Sadducean priests of 
See xiv. 5 (note). 
case it is later than Dan. ix. 24, which is the source 0 
in xvi. I, and later too than 1 En. Ixxxix. 54, 


XIV. 1. learnt +‘from the writing of Enoch’ 8 AS}. 


can refer only to Jannaeus. 


xci. 6, xciii. 9. See T. L. x. 5 (note). 
transgress . 


- . wickedness +‘ against Him’ 
SD 


“ stretching out hands against the Lord in all wickedness’. 


ZMPULE WOcCm CladerSs Vin i 


The chief-priests are the 


[who shall lay, &c.], a Christian addition. 


3. a gives the clearest version. 


and moon’ in 8 A8 S' also may be original, and ¢ 


Yet 8 S' and Af lead us to correct ‘sun’ into 
than all the Gentiles’ may be d 


a, a Christian addition: > ‘all’ a. 


AB 


_ 


My children, be ye pure as 3 


the heaven is (purer) than the 
earth: and ye who are the lights 
of Israel, shall be as the sun and 
moon. 


What will all the Gentiles do, 4 


if ye be darkened through trans- 
gression? Yea, curses will come 
upon your race, and the light 
which was given through the 
law to lighten you and every 
man ye shall desire to destroy, 
and teach your commandments 
contrary to the ordinances of 


God. 


om His portion shall ye steal choice portions, 
And out of covetousness ye shall teach the command- 


main narrative of the Testaments is pro-Maccabean, and exalts Levi 
o them is required. But in x, xiv-xvi words fail to denounce the 
ief priests transgress, are covetous, corrupt the law, teach contrary to 
For this reason the Temple shall be laid waste 


est, for the Sadducees, who are in view 
over, were not the subjects of persecution 
a vassal king under the Romans. 
em, if already enacted, would be more than a vague prophecy. 

n and of persecuting the righteous apply alike to the Hellenistic 
Ioo-60 B.C. But the eating of sacrifices with harlots in public 
As he died in 78 B.C., this passage cannot be much later. 


Nor were the high-priests 


In any 


i f the interpretation of Jeremiah’s seventy years as weeks of years 
which cannot be dated before 164 B.C. 


The following words do not occur in Enoch; yet cf. 1 En. 


We might render B Af S! 


Maccabean prince-priests, in particular Jannaeus. 


‘heaven’, and ‘on’ to ‘than’. ‘Sun 


ue to a’s drawing upon the next verse. 


4. The author connects sin closely with darkness of mind. Cf. T.R. ili. 8; T. L. xiii. 7, xiv. 4, xix. 1; T. Jos. vii. 5 ; 
also T. Jud. xviii. 3, 6; T. D. ii. a; T. G. iii. Be i 
the light of the law. Cf. Wisd. xviii. 4; Prov. vi. 23; T. L. xviii. 3; Ps. cxix. 105. 
light ... to lighten every man. Johni. 9. 


teaching commandments contrary. Cf. incident of Jannaeus, 
See also Pss. Sol. viii. 
See also Jub, xv. 1. 


together with Talmud, Sukka 48>, 
approach when unclean to the altar. 


5. This verse and 6 up to ‘defile and’ > A“. 
the offerings... rob. Cf. Pss. Sol. viii. 12 ra dyta tod Oeod Sujpratov. 


my Commentary, p. 57. 
steal choice portions aaf. 
bdegA8&, 


eating them contemptuously with harlots. Cf, 


victory over the Pharisees : 
6. out of covetousness. 


312 


Josephus, Azz. xiii. 13. 5 ; 
12, 13 for the Maccabean robbery of temple gifts, and 


: hh Josephus, Azz. xiii, 14. 2, 
Eori@pevos ev arénte peta tov maddakioav. 
Cf. Mic. iii. 11, ‘the priests teach for hire. Cf. 1 Pet. v. 2. 


Bell. Lud, i. 4. 3, 


For the case of Simon ben Shetach see 


‘steal: and before sacrificing to the Lord ye shall take the choice portions,’ 


of Jannaeus’ savage celebration of his 


Peete oP AMENT OF LEVI 14.°1--17 3 


ments of the Lord, wedded women shall ye pollute, ‘and the virgins of Jerusalem shall ye defile’; 
and with harlots and adulteresses shall ye be joined, and the daughters of the Gentiles shall ye take 
to wife, purifying them with an unlawful purification ; and your union shall be like unto Sodom and 
7 Gomorrah. And ye shall be puffed up because of your priesthood, lifting yourselves’ up against 


8 men, and not only so, but also against the commands of God. For ye shall contemn the holy 
15 things with jests and laughter. 
I 


Therefore the temple, which the Lord shall choose, shall be laid waste through your uncleanness, 
2 and ye shall be captives throughout all nations. And ye shall be an abomination unto them, and ye 
3 shall receive reproach and everlasting shame from the righteous judgement of God. And all who hate 
4 you shall rejoice at your destruction. And if you were not to receive mercy through Abraham, Isaac, 
and Jacob, our fathers, not one of our seed should be left upon the earth. 
16: And now I have learnt that for seventy weeks ye shall go astray, and profane the priesthood, and 
2 pollute the sacrifices. And ye shall make void the law, and set at nought the words of the prophets 
by evil perverseness. And ye shall persecute righteous men, and hate the godly ; the words of the 
3 faithful shall ye abhor. [And a man who reneweth the law in the power of the Most High, ye shall 
call a deceiver; and at last ye shall rush (upon him) to slay him, not knowing his dignity, taking 
4 innocent blood through wickedness upon your heads.]_ And your holy places shall be laid waste 
5 even to the ground because of thim. And ye shall have no place that is clean; but ye shall be 
among the Gentiles a curse and a dispersion until He shall again visit you, and in pity shall receive 
you [through faith and water]. 


171 And whereas ye have heard concerning the seventy weeks, hear also concerning the priesthood. 
2 For in each jubilee there shall be a priesthood. And in the first jubilee, the first who is anointed to 
the priesthood shall be great, and shall speak to God as to a father. And his priesthood shall be 


wedded women, &c. Cf. Pss. Sol. iv. 5, 6, 11, 12, 15, 23, for like charges against the Sadducees. 
and the virgins of Israel (Jerusalem bg) shall ye defile. $8 only. Cf. Pss. Sol. ii. 14. 
with harlots and adulteresses. Cf. Pss. Sol. iv. 23. 

_ daughters of the Gentiles... wife. The prohibition of marriage with Canaanites in Deut. vii. 3 (cf. Gen. 
xxiv. 3, &c.) was suspended in the case of captives during war, Deut. xxi. 10-13. After Ezra (Ezra ix. 1-2, x. 10-11 ; 
Neh. x. 30) the prohibition was extended to all Gentiles. Contrast 1 Macc. i. 15 (the Hellenizing Jews), and the 
reaction again in Jub. xxx. 7, 10. 

purifying ... purification 8A: >a. Lax observance of customary purifications may be meant, or it may be 
that any purification is unlawful, i.e. the prohibition is absolute. 
like unto Sodom. Cf. Jude 7. 

Waiting ys. men as AM > AP). 

XV. 1-2. I take this to be a bona fide prediction. 

1. shall be laid waste (cf. xvi. 4), as under Antiochus Epiphanes, 1 Macc. i. 39, iv. 38. 

3.hateaaefS: ‘see’ bdgA8. 

shall rejoice at your destruction a: ‘shall flee from you’ 8 AF. 

4. our seed c! A*: ‘your seed’ hc?d Af : ‘my seed’ B-d S. 

XVI. 1. I have learnt + ‘in the book of Enoch’ BA®S: ‘and...that? >A*. The seventy weeks come from 
Dan. ix. 24. Cf. the seventy shepherd periods of 1 En. Ixxxix. 59. 

profane the priesthood. Cf. Neh. xiii. 29. 
pollute the sacrifices, i.e. approach the altar when unclean. Cf. Pss. Sol. ii. 3, viii. 13, 26; Ass. Mos. vi. I. 
sacrifices. ‘altars’ a, cf. 1 Macc. iv. 38. 
2. make void the law, &c. Cf. 1 En. xcix. 2; civ. 9, 10. 
persecute righteous men. A charge against the Sadducees in 1 En. ciii. 14, 15. 

3. Is this verse a Christian interpolation, or is it recast by Christian scribes? If the latter, the Onias of Josephus, 
Ant. xiv. 2. 1, 2 may be meant, who refused to pray for Hyrcanus II against Aristobulus II. Or possibly Onias III, 
alluded to in Dan. ix. 26, xi. 22; 2 Mace. iv. 33-6. Cf. 1 En. xc. 8. 

in the power of the Most High a@S!': ‘of the Most High’ A® : > 7 NE 

a deceiver. Cf. Matt. xxvii. 63, of our Lord. ; 

rush (upon him) to slay hima. Cf. Acts vii. 57, 58. ‘slay as ye suppose * BABS: ‘ye shall slay him’ A*. 
These variants seem to point to a dittography in the Hebrew. 

dignity, dvdornya, a8 S!: ‘resurrection ’, dvdoracw AP* © 4°, 


taking innocent blood ... heads. Cf. Matt. xxvii. 24, 25. 
4. And B-bA: >bS!: ‘and I say unto you’ a. 
thim. ‘it? g. 


laid waste a A“*: ‘polluted’ 8 A8S. A hi ; 
5. [through faith and water] aB-e! AS: >e!A*. Probably a Christian addition, But baptism was already in 
use among the Jews by the Christian era, while 4 Ezra ix. 7, xiii. 23, insist on the need and value of faith. See also 
2 Bar. liv. 16, 21, lvil. 2, &c. 
XVII. This chapter is unintelligible. Verses 1-9 seem to be an intrusion, or defective. Possibly they were added 
with x, xiv-xvi, or at a later time. Levi was apparently not the speaker. 
1. There was no account of the seventy weeks in xvi: only a bare mention. __ : E 
2, jubilee, should be forty-nine or fifty years. Where the seven begin or end is uncertain, also the duration of each. 
the first who is anointed, Levi or Moses. For Weyilct. voz; vie 2a. ; a 
speak to God as to a father. Cf. xviii. 6. Moses spoke with God asa friend. Exod. xxxiii. 11. 


S18) 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


perfect with the Lord, [and in the day of his gladness shall he arise for the salvation of the world ]. 
3 In the second jubilee, he that is anointed shall be conceived in the sorrow of beloved ones; and his 
4 pricsthood shall be honoured and shall be glorified by all. And the third priest shall be taken hold 
5 of by sorrow. And the fourth shall be in pain, because unrighteousness shall gather itself against 
6 him exceedingly, and all Israel shall hate each one his neighbour. The fifth shall be taken hold of 
7 by darkness. Likewise also the sixth and the seventh. And in the seventh shall be such pollution 
8 as | cannot express before men, for they shall know it who do these things. Therefore shall they 
9 be taken captive and become a prey, and their land and their substance shall be destroyed. 
to And in the fifth week they shall return to their desolate country, and shall renew the house of the 
™ Lord. And in the seventh week shall become priests, (who are) idolaters, adulterers, lovers of money, 
proud, lawless, lascivious, abusers of children and beasts. ‘ p 
Wi And after their punishment shall have come from the Lord, the priesthoed shall fail. 
* Then shall the Lord raise up a new priest. 
And to him all the words of the Lord shall be revealed ; 
And he shall execute a righteous judgement upon the earth for a multitude of days. 
3 And his star shall arise in heaven as of a king. 
Lighting up the light of knowledge as the sun the day, 
And he shall be magnified in the world. 
4 He shall shine forth as the sun on the earth, 
And shall remove all darkness from under heaven, 
And there shall be peace in all the earth. 
® The heavens shall exult in his days, 
And the earth shall be glad, 
And the fclouds shall rejoice ; 
[And the knowledge of the Lord shall be poured forth upon the earth, as the water of the seas ;] 
And the angels of the glory of the presence of the Lord shall be glad in him. 
6 The heavens shall be opened, 
And from the temple of glory shall come upon him sanctification, 
With the Father’s voice as from Abraham to Isaac.‘ 
And the glory of the Most High shall be uttered over him, 
And the spirit of understanding and sanctification shall rest upon him [in the water]. 
8 For he shall give the majesty of the Lord to His sons in truth for evermore ; 


~I 


perfect with the Lord. Cf. 1 Kings viii. 61, &c. 
[and in the day ... arise, &c.] An intrusion. 
3. Aaron apparently, born during the oppression in Egypt. 
5. Shall gather itself against him. Restored from ‘ shall add to him’ text. Perhaps should be ‘ shall be added 
unto him’. The references are most obscure. 
10-11. Part of the original text, containing a division of some period into seven weeks. Their duration is uncertain, 
but the events referred to are clear. 
to. Return of Ezra and Nehemiah, and re-dedication of the temple, about 516 B.c. Cf. 1 En. Ixxxix. 72. 
11. The Hellenizing chief-priests who with Antiochus Epiphanes opposed Judaism. 
seventh 8B Af S: ‘seventieth’ a. 
adulterers a: ‘contentious’ 8 AéS'. 
XVIII. The new priesthood, to follow the immoral Hellenizers of the Zadokite line. 
2-15. A Messianic hymn. 
2. a new priest. Cf. viii. 14. 
3. his star. Cf. T. Jud. xxiv. 1, also derived from Num. xxiv. 17. 

in heaven. In T. Jud. xxiv. 1, same passage recurs with ‘in peace.’ 

lighting up the light of knowledge = Hos. x. 12 (LXX). Cf. Syr. and Targ. Jon. The Hebrew there reads 
‘till ye the untilled ground’. For our text cf. iv. 3 1. Be xi. 23 talsosierive 3s 

as the sun the day. So emended from texts, all corrupt. Cf. iv. 3. 

in the world +‘ until his ascension’ BAB St. 

5. And the tclouds, perhaps read ‘because of him’ and omit ‘shall be glad’, The bracketed words spoil the 
parallelism. Cf. 1 En. li. 4 (as emended). 

6. heavens shall be opened. Cf. ii. 6, v1; T. Jud. xxiv. 2; also Ezek. i.'1.. The voice from the opened heaven 
resembles Matt. iii. 16, 17, &c. 

With the Father’s voice. This seems to refer to Hyrcanus, whose receiving of a Bath Qol is mentioned by 
Josephus, Avz. xiii. 10. 3; Jer. Talmud, Sotah. ix. 12. Probably Hyrcanus had some attestation, at least in popular 
belief, such as Simon had in Ps. cx. 

as from Abraham to Isaac, i.e. as son, in a Messianic sense. 

7. spirit of understanding. Cf. Isa. xi. 2; 1 En. xlix. 3. 

[in the water] >e only. A Christian addition. 

8. For a only. 

he, probably John Hyrcanus, and not God. Hence ‘of the Lord’ and not ‘His own majesty’. On the other 
hand in vv. 10-12 ‘he’ seems to mean God. 

sons in truth = true sons, T. Jud. xxiv. a 


314 


Peete STAMENT OF LEVI 17, 2—19 5 


And there shall none succeed him for all generations for ever. 
9 And in his priesthood the Gentiles shall be multiplied in knowledge upon the earth 
And enlightened through the grace of the Lord: 
In his priesthood shall sin come to an end, 
. And the lawless shall cease to do evil. 
[And the just shall rest in him.] 
ro And he shall open the gates of paradise, 
And shall remove the threatening sword against Adam. 
11 And he shall give to the saints to eat from the tree of life, 
And the spirit of holiness shall be on them. 
12 And Beliar shall be bound by him, 
And he shall give power to His children to tread upon the evil spirits. 
13 And the Lord shall rejoice in His children, 
And be well pleased in His beloved ones for ever. 
14 Then shall Abraham and Isaac and Jacob exult, 
And I will be glad, 
And all the saints shall clothe themselves with joy. 

19: And now, my children, ye have heard all; choose, therefore, for yourselves either the light or the 
2 darkness, either the law of the Lord or the works of Beliar. And his sons answered him, saying, 
3 Before the Lord we will walk according to His law. And their father said unto them, The Lord is 

witness, and His angels are witnesses, and ye are witnesses, and I am witness, concerning the word 
4 of your mouth. And his sons said unto him: We are witnesses. And thus Levi ceased commanding 

his sons ; and he stretched out his feet ‘on the bed', and was gathered to his fathers, after he had 
5 lived a hundred and thirty-seven years. And they laid him in a coffin, and afterwards they buried 
~ him in Hebron, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. 


y 


THE TESTAMENT OF JUDAH, THE FOURTH SON OF JACOB AND LEAH. 


Sl1,2 The copy of the words of Judah, what things he spake to his sons before he died. They gathered 

3 themselves together, therefore, and came to him, and he said to them: 'Hearken, my children, to 

Judah your father'. I was the fourth son born to my father Jacob; and Leah my mother named 

4 me Judah, saying, I give thanks to the Lord, because He hath given me a fourth son ‘also’, I was 

5 swift in my youth, and obedient to my father in everything. And I honoured my mother and my 

6 mother’s sister. And it came to pass, when I became a man, that my father blessed me, saying, 
Thou shalt be a king, prospering in all things. 


none succeed him, i.e. the office is secured to him and his descendants. Cf. Ps. cx; 1 Macc. xiv. 41 ‘a priest 
for ever’, of Simon. 
9. grace of the Lord +‘ But Israel shall be minished through ignorance, and darkened through grief’, all MSS. 
except be. A Christian addition. 
sin come to an end. For a gradual renewing of heaven and earth, ethically conditioned by Israel’s conduct 
cf. Isa. Ixv. 17, xvi. 22; Jub. i, 29, iv. 26, xxiii. 26-8. Also 1-En. Ixix. 29; Pss. Sol. xvii. 29; and 1 En. xcii. 5, 
xci. 8, 14, c. § for the disappearing of sin. 
[And the just ... him] >e. An interpolation. 
10. open... paradise. If*he’ =the Messiah, this passage alone in Jewish literature ascribes the act to him. 
For the opening cf. 4 Ezra viii. 52; Sib. Or. iii. 769 ff.; also 4 Ezra vii. 36; 2 En. x.; 2 Bar. li. 11. 
Adam, or ‘man’. 
11. tree of life, in Paradise, 4 Ezra viii. 52; eaten by the righteous, 1 En. xxvi. 5,6; 4 Ezra vii. 123. Cf. Rev. xxii. 2. 
12. Beliar . .. bound. In Isa. xxiv. 22, 23 God imprisons certain of the host of heaven. In Matt. xii. 29; Luke 
x. 19 Christ binds the strong man. In Rev. xx. 2, 3 an angel binds Satan. If the Messiah here binds Beliar, cf. 
his position in 1 En. Ixii. 5 ff.; lxix. 27. m 
power ... to tread upon the evil spirits. Cf. T. S. vi. 6, also Luke x. 19, and T. Z. ix. 8 (bd g). 
His children = the righteous. 
14. joy beg A?: ‘righteousness’ aafS'. 
XIX. 1. choose, &c. Cf. Deut. xxx. 19. vil 
the light ... Beliar. Cf. T. N. ii. 6, and especially 2 Cor. vi. 14, 15 tis kowwvia port mpos oxdros; Tis de cup~ 
gevnows Xpiorov mpos BeXiap ; . 
2. his sons. Several MSS. here and in v. 3 have the Ist person, ‘we’, &c. 
4. on the bed a: > B-d AS". 


TITLE a +‘ concerning courage and love of money (> e S') and fornication’ (> fS') be f S‘, also A generally. 
I. 3. hearken ... father a: > 8-dA. 
Judah .. . give thanks to the Lord. Cf. Gen, xxix. 35 for the play on words. 
6. blessed, éwevéaro. Cf. xvii. 5. ; 
Thou shalt be a king. Cf. xxi. 5, xxii. 3; Ber. rab. Ixxxiv. 16. 
315 


i, 2 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE) PATRIAKG ES 


And the Lord showed me favour in all my works both in the field and in the house. I know that 


3 I raced a hind, and caught it, and prepared the meat for my father, and he did eat. And the roes 


I used to master in the chase, and overtake all that was in the plains. A wild mare I overtook, and 


4 caught it and tamed it. I slew a lion and plucked a kid out of its mouth. I took a bear by its paw 


le 
ro) 


and hurled it down the cliff, and it was crushed. I outran the wild boar, and seizing it ‘as I ran’, 


6 I tore it in sunder. A leopard in Hebron leaped upon my dog, and I caught it by the tail, and 
7 hurled it on the rocks, and it was broken in twain. I found a wild ox feeding in the fields, and 


31 


seizing it by the horns, and whirling it round and stunning it, I cast it from me and slew it. 
And when the two kings of the Canaanites came sheathed in armour against our flocks, and much 
people with them, single-handed I rushed upon the king of Hazor, and smote him on the greaves 


2 and dragged him down, and so I slew him. And the other, the king of Tappuah, as he sat upon his 
3 horse, [I slew, and so I scattered all his people. Achor the king] a man of giant stature ‘I found!, 


hurling javelins before and behind as he sat on horseback, and I took up a stone of sixty pounds 


4 weight, and hurled it and smote his horse, and killed it. And I fought with (this) other for two 
5 hours ; and I clave his shield in twain, and I chopped off his feet, and killed him. And as I was 
6 stripping off his breastplate, behold nine men his companions began to fight with me. And I wound 


my garment on my hand; and I slung stones at them, and killed four of them, and the rest fled. 


7 And Jacob my father slew +Beelesath, king of all the kings, a giant in strength, twelve cubits high. 
8, 9 And fear fell upon them, and they ceased warring against us. Therefore my father was free from 
10 anxiety in the wars when I was with my brethren. For he saw in a vision ‘concerning me! that an 


4; 


angel of might followed me everywhere, that I should not be overcome. 
And in the south there came upon us a greater war than that in Shechem; and I joined in battle 
array with my brethren, and pursued a thousand men, and slew of them two hundred men and 


II. 2. and he did eat > B-g S. 
3. A wild mare . . . tamed it B-ae S!: > a (defective). 


4. hurled g A: ‘let go’ aa: both = nny: « rolled’ bdef. 
and it was crushed a: ‘and it was broken in pieces on them’ d: ‘and any beast that turned on me, I rent it 
like a dog’ BA SL. 
_ 6. on the rocks and it was broken in twain a: ‘and it was broken on the coasts of Gaza’ B-d AS}. Gaza is 
37 miles from Hebron. But cf. Judges xvi. 1-3. Was there a Hebron near Gaza? For the feat ichy0. Gai: 


III-VII. These chapters contain an ancient legend which tells of Jacob’s conquest of Shechem. Cf. Gen. xlviii. 22 
which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow’. See Jub. xxxiv. 2-8, which tells of an 
attack by seven Amorite kings. Cf. also Targ. Jon. on Gen. xlviii. 22, the Midrash Wajjissau (Jellinek, Bet ha- 
Midrasch, iii. 1-3), the Chronicles of Jerahmeel xxxvi, and especially the Book of Jashar (see French trans. Dict. des 
Apocr. ii. 1173-84). 

III. Fighting near Shechem, according to Midr. Wajjis. and Book of Jashar. 

1-5. Judah’s slaughter of two kings, those of Hazor and Tappuah. ‘ Achor’, v. 3, is corrupt. 

I. > later accounts. 

Canaanites, in Jub., &c. ‘Amorites’: Jashar ‘ Canaanite and Amorite kings ’. 
against our flocks. Cf. Jub. Other authorities give as motive to exterminate Jacob’s sons. 
of Hazor. ‘the other’ a. See iv. 2 (note). This Hazor is near Shechem. 

2-6. The Midr, Wajjis. gives ‘And he slew at the outset Jashub king of Tappuah who was . . . riding on a horse 
and could hurl his javelins . . . from horseback in front and behind. When Judah saw... he took upastone... 
weighing sixty shekels and hurled it . . . he (Jashub) clave the shield in twain . . . (Judah) cut off his feet... And 
while he was stripping him of his armour there came against him nine of his companions.’ See my Commentary, 
pp. 70, 71 for full quotation. 

2-5. There were seven kings in all (Jub. xxxiv. 2; Midr. Wajjis.) = king of Hazor, iii. 1; of Tappuah, iii. 2-5; 
four kings, iv. 1; of Shilo, iv. 7. Thus Achor is one too many. Besides, ili. 1 mentions two kings, not three. The 
Midr. Wa)jjis. and Jashar (ii. 1174-75) give the details in vv, 3 and 4 and assign them to Jashub. 

2. [I slew ... people]. An addition, necessitated by the corrupt reading ‘ Achor the king’. 
3. [Achor the king], i.e. ‘the other (NX) king’ a dittography of v. 2. 

I founda: >BAS}. 

before and .. . horseback 8 A S}, Midr. Wajjis., Chron. Jer., Jashar: > a. 

smote AS: ‘have given’ aafg. 

4. >a, through hmt. 
other. Emended from ’ayop B-e, Nayop AB. 
clave his shield. The Midr. Waijis., Chron. Jer., and Jashar make Jashub cleave Judah’s shield. 
5. nine A®'S: Midr. Wajjis., Chron. Jer., and Jashar: ‘eight’ aB-g S!: ‘seven’ A-® fg, 
6. four of them ; he killed the other eight, according to the Hebrew authorities, while Levi slew the king of Gaash. 
7. Jacob... slew. The Midr. Waijjis. and Jashar say Jacob slew four other kings. 
tBeelesath e: corrupt for ‘lord of Shiloh ”, given by Hebrew authorities. 
9. I should not be overcome 8 A S!: ‘none shall touch me’ a = YI3 differently pointed. 


IV. The fighting is now near Hazor, as Midr. Wajjis. explains. 


1. and four kings BA S!; >a. Cf. Jub. xxxiv. 2-8. They are the kings of Sartan, Gaash, Beth-horon, and 
Mahanaim. The Hebrew authorities ascribe the slaughter to Jacob, and give a different list. 


316 


‘ 


eres eAMENT OF JUDAH 2)/1—7 2 


2,3 four kings. And I went up upon the wall, and I slew four mighty men. And so we captured 
Hazor, and took all the spoil. 


I On the next day we departed to Aretan, a city strong and walled and inaccessible, threatening us 

2 with death. But I and Gad approached on the east side of the city, and Reuben and Levi on the 

3 west. And they that were upon the wall, thinking that we were alone, +were drawn downy against 

4us. nd so my brothers secretly climbed up the wall on both sides by stakes, and entered the city, 

5 while the men knew it not. And we took it with the edge of the sword. And as for those who had 
taken refuge in the tower, we set fire to the tower and took both it and them. 


a pies 
6 And as we were departing the men of Tappuah And as we were departing the men of Tappuah 
seized our spoil, and seeing (this) we fought with | set upon our spoil, and delivering it up to our 
7them. And we slew them all and recovered our | sons we fought with them as far as Tappuah. 
spoil. And we slew them and burnt their city, and 
took as spoil all that was in it. 


G 1,2 And when I was at the waters of Kozeba, the men of }+Jobel came against us to battle. And we 
fought with them and routed them; ‘and their allies from Shiloh we slew!', and we did not leave 

3 them ‘power! to come in against us. And the men of +Makir came upon us the fifth day, to seize 
our spoil; and we attacked them and overcame them in fierce battle: for there was a host of mighty 
4 men amongst them, and we slew them before they had gone up the ascent. And when we came to 
5 their city their women rolled upon us stones from the brow of the hill on which the city stood. And 


I and Simeon hid ourselves behind the town, and seized upon the heights, and destroyed this 
city also. 


7x And the next day it was told us that the king of the city of Gaash with a mighty host was coming 
2against us. I, therefore, and Dan feigned ourselves to be Amorites, and as allies went into their 

3 city. And in the depth of night our brethren came and we opened to them the gates; and we 
destroyed all the men and their substance, and we took for a prey all that was theirs, and their three 


2. upon the wall. Midr. W. adds ‘ of Hazor’. 
four mighty men. So restore from the Hebrew authorities. ‘still other four kings’ A: ‘two other kings’ 
BS!: ‘their king’ (i.e. of Hazor) a. These four mighty men are distinct from the ‘four kings’ of iv. 1. See 
Midr. W., Chron. Jer. xxxvi. 6; Jashar (il. 1176). 
3. captured Hazor Midr. W.: ‘freed Hebron’ text. ‘Hebron’ is out of the context, and ‘ freed’ =WA5N for VAN. 
all the spoil +‘ of the kings’ B-d AS’. 
V. The destruction of Sartan and Tappuah. 
1. Aretan be!: Areta dA: érépav aae’f S'. Hebrew authorities give Sartan, cf. Saregan, Jub. xxxiv. 4, 7. 
walled and inaccessible B-dgAS*. Cf. Midr. W. ‘mighty’ a. 
2.1 and Gad... on the east, &c. The Midr. W., &c., give quite different dispositions. 
3-4. Not in Hebrew authorities. 
3. were drawn down afS': ‘prolonged the war’ A. Perhaps emend to ‘set themselves in array’, i.e. 137 
misread as 138. 
4. climbed >aA. 
by stakes >a. 
while the men knew it not >a. 
5. we set fire... it and them 8: ‘we burnt (them) with fire and so we took them all and all their possessions’ a, 
Midr. W. makes Judah slay 200 on the tower. Cf. Chron. Jer. xxxvi. 7; Jashar gives two towers, li. 1177. en 
6-7. a is more accurate but less full than 8 A S*. In awe have a successful raid, and a recovery of the spoil: in 
8 AS' an attempted raid, and the destruction of the city. 
seized ae. Hebrew authorities. ‘set upon’ B-ae AS. 
VI. The rout of the men of Arbela, and the destruction of Shiloh and Shakir. 
1-2. >a: while Af omits I. 
Kozeba. Cf. 1 Chron. iv. 22, and Gen. xxxviil. 5. 
the men of +Jobel b: ‘ Arbelians’, Jashar ii. 1178. Cf. ‘ Arbael’, Midr. W. 
2. their allies from Shiloh we slew 8-f. Midr. W. and Chron. Jer. xxxvi. 8. 
power = diéé0dov, a dittography, or a rendering of the Tin Midr. W. and Chron. Jer. wy 
3. tMakir. ‘ Shabir’ Midr. W.: ‘Shakir’ Chron. Jer. xxxvi. 9: “camp of Shakir’ Jub. xxxiv. 4 (Maanisakir). 
to seize our spoil >a. : 
battle B-dfA S!: ‘sword’ af. 
for there was ... amongst them >a. 
4. women, Midr. W. and Chron, Jer. mention only men. 
rolled, ‘hurled’ Midr. W. and Chron. Jer. . ' 
VII. 1. king of the city of Gaash with a mighty host ad: ‘Gaash the city of the kings with a great host ’ 
aef: ‘the cities of the two kings with a great host’ b S': ‘Gaash a city with a powerful king’ A. _ 
2. I therefore .. . allies B-de S!: ‘and I and Gad also proceeded to the Amorites and feigning ourselves to be 
their allies’ a. 
3. allthatwas...down>a 
three walls. Cf. Hebrew authorities. 


atF 


SS 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


4 walls we cast down. And we drew near to Thamna, where was all the substance of the hostile kings. 
5 Then being insulted by them, I was therefore wroth, and rushed against them to the summit ; and 
6 they kept slinging against me stones and darts. And had not Dan my brother aided me, they would 
7have slain me. We came upon them, therefore, with wrath, and they all fled ; and passing by 
8 another way, they besought my father, and he made peace with them. And we did to them no hurt, 
9 and they became tributary to us, and we restored to them their spoil. And I built Thamna, and my 
10 father built Pabael. I was twenty years old when this war befell. And the Canaanites feared me 
and my brethren. i 
81,2 And I had much cattle, and I had for chief herdsman Iram the Adullamite. And when 
I went to him I saw Parsaba, king of Adullam; ‘and he spake unto us'; and he made us a feast; 
3 and when I was heated he gave me his daughter Bathshua to wife. She bare me Er, and Onan 
and Shelah ; and two of them the Lord smote: for Shelah lived, and his children are ye. 
9: And eighteen years my father abode in peace with his brother Esau, and his sons with us, after 
2 that we came from Mesopotamia, from Laban. And when eighteen years were fulfilled, in the 
fortieth year of my life, Esau, the brother of my father, came upon us with a mighty and strong 
3 people. And Jacob smote Esau with an arrow, and he was taken up wounded on Mount Seir, and 
4 as he went he died at Anoniram. And we pursued after the sons of Esau. Now they had a city 
with walls of iron and gates of brass; and we could not enter ‘into it', and we encamped around, and 
5 besieged it. And when they opened not to us in twenty days, I set up a ladder 'in the sight of all! 
and with my shield upon my head I went up, sustaining the assault of stones, upwards of three 
6, 7 talents weight; and I slew four of their mighty men. And Reuben and Gad slew six others. Then 
they asked from us terms of peace; and having taken counsel with our father, we received them as 
8 tributaries. And they gave us five hundred cors of wheat, five hundred baths of oil, five hundred 
measures of wine, 'until the famine', when we went down into Egypt. 
10: And after these things my son Er took to wife Tamar, from Mesopotamia, a daughter of Aram. 
2 Now Er was wicked, and he twas in need concerning Tamar, because she was not of the land 
3 of Canaan. And on the third night an angel of the Lord smote him. ‘And he had not known her 
4 according to the evil craftiness of his mother, for he did not wish to have children by her. In the 


4. Thamna, i.e. Timneh. Cf. 1 Macc. ix. 50. 

substance: ‘refuge’ b g. 
5-6. These incidents are told of Gaash, not Thamna, in the Hebrew authorities. 
5. The Hebrew authorities give the occasion of the insult. 


against them to the summit = D>y YNID. Midr. W. ‘upon the wall the first’= mand pwn. 
kept slinging. Cf. Midr. W. 
6. Jacob rescues Judah in Chron. Jer. xxxvi. 11. 
7. he made peace with them 8-a f S! Midr. W.: ‘ they made peace with him’ aaf. 
8. they became tributary to usa. Cf. Midr. W.: ‘we made a truce with them’ BA S}. 
we restored. Midr. W. and Jashar make the Amorites restore the spoil to Jacob’s sons. Cf. Jub. xxxiv. 7-9. 


9. BAS*: ‘and we built also their city’ a. See Jub. xxxiv. 8 ‘Robel (i.e. Arbela, cf. 1 Macc. ix. 2) and 
Tamnatares’, also Midr. W. 


lo. twenty years. Cf. Jub. xxviii. 15, xxxiv. 1. 
VIII. 1. Iram. Cf. Gen. xxxviii. 1, 
2. he spake unto us a only. 
when I was heated. Conjectured for mapakadéoas. Cf. Isa. lvii. 5 (LXX). Cf. T. Jud. xi. 2, xiii. 5-7, xiv. 3. For 
the offence of this Canaanite marriage cf, Jub. xxxiv. 20. 
IX. 1. The war between Jacoband Esau. For fuller accounts see Jub. xxxvii-xxxviiil. 1-14; Midr. W., and Chron. 
Jer. xxvii, and a different one in Jashar, ii. 1235-6. 
2. in the fortieth year of my life. Cf. Jub. xxviii. 15, XXXVi. 21, XXXVli. 14. >a. 
3. Jacob smote Esau, &c., a. Jub. xxxviii. 2; Midr. W. and Chron. Jer.: ‘he fell by the bow of Jacob’ bg AS}. 
wounded. So I restore in accordance with Midr. W. for text = ‘dead’. But cf. Jub. xxviii. 8 slain’. 
and as he went... Anoniram >ch. 
Anoniram 8-b dA: ‘Aduram’ Jub. xxxviii. 9: ‘Arodin’ Midr. W. This is the Adora which Hyrcanus took and 
forced to accept circumcision, Josephus, Avg. xiii, 9. 1, xxii. 15. 4. 
4. with walls of iron and gates of brass 8-dA: ‘ strong: a.m Gh ven. 
5. sustaining ... stones. Midr. W. and Chron. Jer. assign this feat to Naphtali and Gad as well. 
upwards ... weight > a. 
7. as tributaries. Cf. vii. 8 and Midr. W. ras 
8. five hundred aafS!: ‘two hundred’ bde A. 
baths, ‘ephahs’ seem to be implied by aaf. 
the famine when a: > 8S}. 


X. 1. daughter of Aram, i.e. a Semite, Cf. Jub. xli. 1, and Opus Imperfectum on Matt. i. 35 
2. he was ... night >a. 


twas in need, or ‘difficulty’, perhaps corrupt in Hebrew for ‘ put to shame’. Cf. Jub. xli. 2. 
3. > A through hmt. 


for... by her > a. The Opus Imperf. says: ‘ Mater autem eius cum esset Chananaea hortaretur eum accipere 
€x genere suo: ille consilio matris usus non contigit eam, Propter quod percussit eum Deus malignantem.’ 


31 


THE TESTAMENT OF JUDAH 7. 4—13. 3 


days' of the wedding-feast I gave Onan to her in marriage; and he also in wickedness knew her not, 
5 though he spent with her a year. And when I threatened him he went in unto her, but he spilled 
the seed on the ground, according to the command of his mother, and he also died through wickedness. 
6 And I wished to give Shelah also to her, but his mother did not permit it; ‘for she wrought evil 

against Tamar!, because she was not of the daughters of Canaan, as she also herself was. 
11:1 And I knew that the race of the Canaanites was wicked, but the impulse of youth blinded my 
2mind. And when I saw her pouring out wine, owing to the intoxication of wine I was deceived, and 
3 took her although my father had not counselled (it). And while I was away she went and took for 
4 Shelah a wife from Canaan. And when I knew what she had done, I cursed her in the anguish of 

6 my soul. And she also died through her wickedness together with her sons. 
12: And after these things, while Tamar was a widow, she heard after two years that I was going up 
2 to shear my sheep, and adorned herself in bridal array, and sat in the city Enaim by the gate. 'For 
it was a law of the Amorites, that she who was about to marry should sit in fornication seven days 
3 by the gate’. Therefore being drunk with wine, I did not recognize her; and her beauty deceived 
4 me, through the fashion of her adorning. And I turned aside to her, and said: Let me go in unto 
thee. And she said: What wilt thou give me? And I gave her my staff, and my girdle, and the 
5 diadem of my kingdom ‘in pledge’. And I went in unto her,and she conceived. And not knowing 
6 what I had done, I wished to slay her ; but she privily sent my pledges, and put me to shame. And 
when I called her, I heard also the secret words which 'I spoke! when lying with her in my drunken- 
7 ness ; and I could not slay her, because it was from the Lord. For I said, Lest haply she did it in 
8 subtlety, having received the pledge from another woman. But I came not again near her while 
9 I lived, because I had done 'this! abomination in ‘all! Israel. Moreover, they who were in the city 
said there was no harlot in the gate, because she came from another place, and sat for a while in the 
to, 11 gate. And I thought that no one knew that I had gone in to her. And after this we came into 
12 Egypt ‘to Joseph', because of the famine. And I was forty and six years old, and seventy and three 
years lived I in Egypt. 

13 1° And now I command you, my children, hearken ‘to Judah your father!, and keep my sayings to 
2 perform all the ordinances of the Lord, and to obey the commands of God. And walk not after your 
lusts, nor in the imaginations of your thoughts in haughtiness of heart; and glory not in the deeds 
3 and strength of your youth, for this also is evil in the eyes of the Lord. Since I also gloried that 
in wars no comely woman’s face ever enticed me, and reproved Reuben my brother concerning 
Bilhah, the wife of my father, the spirits of jealousy and of fornication arrayed themselves against 


4. BAS}: ‘And I gave her to Aunan my second son, and behold the Lord slew him’ a. 
5. >a. 
6. his mother a: ‘my wife Bathshua’ BAS. Cf. Jub. xli. 7. 

against Tamar bdeS. 


XI. 2. pouring out wine > A S!. 
owing to the intoxication > a. 
took her a: ‘had intercourse with her’ 8 S?. 
not counselled. Cf. xiii. 3. 
3. Jub. xli. 7 only says that Bathshua stopped Shelah’s marrying. 
5. through her . .. sons a: ‘through the wickedness of her sons’ 8 A S}. 


XII. Cf. Gen. xxxvili. 12-26; Jub. xli. 8-23. 
1. adorned. Jub. xli. 9; also LXX, Syr., Onkelos of Gen. xxxviil. 14. Mass. has ‘enwrapped’. 
Enaim ce. A proper name as in Gen. xxxviii. 14 (LXX, not Targums or Syriac). 
gate +‘of the inn’ a. : 
2. about to marry 8S‘: ‘a widow’ a. Cf. the bride’s sacrifice to Mylitta, Herod. i. 199. 
seven days by the gate > a. ae 
3. +‘at the waters of Kozeba’ B-df A*#h>* «de fg S? at the beginning of verse. 
4. Staff... girdle ...diadem. Gen. xxxviii. 18 has also ‘ signet’ as a here. 
girdle > a, wrongly, see xv. 3. Cf. Jub. xlvi. 11. 
diadem, is not in Gen. 
in pledge > BAS}. 
5. wished to slay her >adg. 
but she ... shame. ‘I sent to receive the pledge’ a. 
6-10, >a, but substitutes an abbreviation of Gen, xxxvili. 20, 24-30, LXX. 
7. Explains 62. ¥ My 
g. harlot, lit. ‘temple prostitute’. Cf. Gen. xxxviii. 21, 22; Deut. xxi. 18. 
12. forty-six. ‘forty-three’ in Jub. xxviii. 15, xlv. 1. Cf. T. L. xii. 5 (Aram. Frag.). 


XII. 1. Text =a. Other ee vary. 
2. walk not BA S!: ‘be not evil’ a. i ; 

nor in the imaginations of your thoughts > aag. Cf. 1 Chron. xxviii. 9. See T. A. i. 3 (note). 
3. enticed BA: ‘met’ aS}, i.e. trqvryve for nraryce. 


Sed 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


4 me, until I lay with Bathshua the Canaanite, and Tamar, who was espoused to my sons. For I said 
to my father-in-law : I will take counsel with my father, and so will I take thy daughter. And he 
was unwilling, but he showed me a boundless store of gold in his daughter’s behalf; for he was 

5a king. And he adorned her with gold and pearls, and caused her to pour out wine for us at the 

6 feast fwith the beauty of women.} And the wine turned aside my eyes, and pleasure blinded my 

7 heart. And I became enamoured of and I lay with her, and transgressed the commandment of the 

8 Lord and the commandment of my fathers, and I took her to wife. And the Lord rewarded me 
according to the imagination of my heart, inasmuch as I had no joy in her children. 

1 And now, my children,'I say unto you!, be not drunk with wine; for wine turneth the mind away 

2 from the truth, and inspires the passion of lust, and leadeth the eyes into error. For the spirit of 
fornication hath wine as a minister to give pleasure to the mind; for these two also take away the 

3 mind of man. For if a man drink wine to drunkenness, it disturbeth the mind with filthy thoughts 
‘leading to fornication’, and heateth the body to carnal union; and if the occasion of the lust be 

4 present, he worketh the sin, and is not ashamed. Such is the inebriated man, my children ; for he 

5 who is drunken reverenceth no man. For, lo, it made me also to err, so that I was not ashamed of 
the multitude in the city, in that before the eyes of all I turned aside unto Tamar, and I wrought 

6 a great sin, and I uncovered the covering of my sons’ shame. After I had drunk wine I reverenced 

7 not the commandment of God, and I took a woman of Canaan to wife. For much discretion 
needeth the man who drinketh wine, my children ; and herein is discretion in drinking wine, a man 

8 may drink so long as he preserveth modesty. But if he go beyond this limit the spirit of deceit 
attacketh his mind, and it maketh the drunkard to talk filthily, and to transgress and not to be 
ashamed, but even to glory in his shame, and to account himself honourable. 

15: He that committeth fornication is not aware when he suffers loss, and is not ashamed when put 
2 to dishonour. For even though a man be a king and commit fornication, he is stripped of his 
3 kingship by becoming the slave of fornication, as I myself also suffered. For I gave my staff, that 

is, the stay of my tribe; and my girdle, that is, my power; and my diadem, that is, the glory of my 

4 kingdom. And indeed I repented of these things; wine and flesh I eat not until my old age, nor 

5 did I behold any joy. And the angel of God showed me that for ever do women bear rule over 

6 king and beggar alike. And from the king they take away his glory, and from the valiant man his 
might, and from the beggar even that little which is the stay of his poverty. 

16: Observe, therefore, my children, the (right) limit in wine; for there are in it four evil spirits—of 
2 lust, of hot desire, of profligacy, of filthy lucre. If ye drink wine in gladness, be ye modest in the 

fear of God. For if in (your) gladness the fear of God departeth, then drunkenness ariseth and 

3 shamelessness stealeth in. But if ye would live soberly do not touch wine at all, lest ye sin in 
words of outrage, and in fightings and slanders, and transgressions of the commandments of God, 

4 and ye perish before your time. Moreover, wine revealeth the mysteries of God and men, even as 


IT lay with, cvvéreca cis, 8B A S': cuverédeoa eis, a. 
4. he was unwilling, but > 6-d AS}, 
5. twith the beauty of woment >cA?. Read ‘with the ornaments of women’, or the words may be corrupt for 
‘in the women’s apartment’. 
7. lay with, ovvereca cis. See xi. 2, xiii. 3 (notes). 
fathers. ‘father’ a. 
XIV. 1. Isay unto you h: ‘I say’c: >BAS). 
be not drunk with wine. Cf. xvi. 1 and Eph. v. 18. 
2. mind of man a A®4; ‘might of man’ B AP b*¥edegs, 
3. The translation follows 8 AS‘. a has ‘thou drinkest . . . thy mind . . . and to fornication heateth, &c.’ 
carnal union, ‘ pleasure’ a. 
andif... present > a. 
4. the inebriated man, rdpowos, emended from movnpos, aaf: mépvos, e: otvos, bAS. 
7.much > PAS) 
a man may, ‘that a man should’ 8-dg A S!, 
8. glory in his shame. Cf. Phil. iii. 19. 
ECV 2. Ci la Reoven< 
2. stripped of + ‘and goes forth from’ B A. 
3- girdle aadf: omit next seven words through hmt. 
4. joy, ‘folly’ c. 
5. for ever > a. 
alike +‘and in them there is no advance of life’ a. 
XVI. 1. For this verse and xix. 1 cf. Col. iii. 5 ‘ covetousness is idolatry’; Eph.v.5; also Eph. v. 5 for ‘ profligacy’ 
or Sexcess’. Seé xiv, 1, xxi. 
2. For if... departeth ef A S!: ‘for if ye drink without modesty and the fear of God departeth’ b: > a, 


cs i ee would live soberly a: ‘what say 1?’ aef: ‘I tell you, if it is possible for you’ d: ‘it is a good thing 
before your time. Cf. T. R. iv. 6. 
4. God and men + ‘to aliens’ b A2b b* a, 


320 


5 

5 Ae 
2.3 
4 


5 
6 


18 x 


2 


3 


19: 


2 
3 


THE TESTAMENT OF JUDAH 138. 4—19. 3 


I also revealed the commandments of God and the mysteries of Jacob my father to the Canaanitish 
woman Bathshua, which God bade me not to reveal. And wine is a cause both of war and 
confusion. 

And now, I command you, my children, not to love money, nor to gaze upon the beauty of 
women; because for the sake of money and beauty I was led astray to Bathshua the Canaanite. 
[For I know that because of these two things shall my race fall into wickedness. For even wise 
men among my sons shall they mar, and shal] cause the kingdom of Judah to be diminished, which 
the Lord gave me because of my obedience to my father. For I never caused grief to Jacob, my 
father ; for all things whatsoever he commanded I did. And Isaac, the father of my father, blessed 


me to be king in Israel, and Jacob further blessed me in like manner. And I know that from me 
shall the kingdom be established. 


a Bas) 
And I know what evils ye will do in the last For I have also read in the books of Enoch 
days. | the righteous what evils ye will do in the last 
days. | 


; Beware, therefore, my children, of fornication, and the love of money, and hearken to Judah your 
ather. 

For these things withdraw you from the law of God, 

And blind the inclination of the soul, 

And teach arrogance, 

And suffer not a man to have compassion upon his neighbour. 

They rob his soul of all goodness, 

And oppress him with toils and troubles, 

'And drive away sleep from him’, 

And devour his flesh. 

And he hindereth the sacrifices of God ; 

‘And he remembereth not the blessing of God,' 

He hearkeneth not to a prophet when he speaketh, 

And resenteth the words of godliness. 

"For he is a slave to two contrary passions, 

And cannot obey God, 

Because they have blinded his soul, 

And he walketh in the day as in the night!. 

My children, the love of money leadeth to idolatry; because, when led astray through money, 
men name as gods those who are not gods, and it causeth him who hath it to fall into madness. 
For the sake of money I lost my children, and had not my repentance, ‘and my humiliation', and 
the prayers of my father been accepted, I should have died childless. But the God of my fathers 


5. >a 
XVII. 1. mor to gaze upon. Cf. T. R. iv. I. 


XVII. 2—XVIII. 1. Bracketed as a later addition. xviii. 2 resumes xvii. 1. 

2. wickedness 8 S?: ‘ perdition of fornication’ a: ‘fornication’ A. ; 

3. because of my obedience. See Jewish Encyc. vii. 328 for various reasons for Judah’s headship. ies 

4. caused grief to Jacob aaA?: ‘caused grief to the word of Jacob’ B-agS!. Perhaps the Hebrew original 

was ‘I disobeyed the word of J.’ ‘, 

5-6. For Judah’s kingship cf. T. S. vil. 2; T. Jud. xxi. 5, xxi. 3. , 

5. Isaac dA: ‘Abraham’ af-d S (and therefore c reads ‘ great-grandfather ’).. se, , 
blessed me to be king. Supply \¢yqr after ‘ blessed me’ and render ‘saying I should be king.’ Cf. i. 6. 
Jacob ad: ‘Isaac’ B-d AS’. A ; 

XVIII. 1. the books of Enoch, an interpolation. See T. L. x. 5 (note), and cf, T. A. vii. 2 for ‘I know’. 

2. Resumes ee be 

. blind, &c. pombe Fe “4 : 
: drive away sleep from him a: ‘put away his sleep’ B-dgS*. Sir. xlii. 9. Che Sealvence 


6. For ... obey Godaf: ‘for being a slave to the passions contrary to the commandments of God’ aeS}, 
Cf. Matt. vi. 24. bs 
walketh in the day. Cf. Rom. xiii. 13. 58, 
XIX. 1. love of money ... idolatry. Cf. Col. iii. 5 ; Eph. v. 5; Shem. rab. 121 ‘qui opes suas multiplicat per 


foenus, ille est idolatra’; cf. Philo, De fon. i. 2 and Matt. vi. 24 for Mammon as a god. 
2, my repentance a: ‘the repentance of my flesh’ B-fAS. 
my humiliation a: ‘the humiliation of my soul’ a Se 
ravers of my father. Cf. T. R.i. 7, iv. 3; T.G.v. 9. ; ; 
eb ea tovvédpapov,a: >B si: Seto A->, Probably Heb. was MY ‘ helped’, or 187 ‘ were acceptable’. 
See T. G. v. 9 (note). : 
1105-2 321 


* 


20 


21 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


4 had mercy on me, because I did it in ignorance. And the prince of deceit blinded me, and I sinned 
as a man and as flesh, being corrupted through sins; ‘and I learnt my own weakness while thinking 
myself invincible’. # ue 

1 Know, therefore, my children, that two spirits wait upon man—the spirit of truth and the spirit 

2 of deceit. And in the midst is the spirit of understanding of the mind, to which it belongeth to 


turn whithersoever it will. 
3. And the works of truth and the works of deceit are written upon the hearts of men, and each one 


of them the Lord knoweth. 

4 And there is no time at which the works of men can be hid ; for on the heart itself have they been 

5 written down ‘before the Lord'. And the-spirit of truth testifieth all things, and accuseth all; and 
the sinner is burnt up ‘by his own heart', and cannot raise his face 'to the judge’. 

1 And now, my children, I command you, love Levi, that ye may abide, and ‘exalt not yourselves 

2 against him', lest ye be utterly destroyed. ‘For to me the Lord gave the kingdom, and to him the 

3 priesthood, and He set the kingdom beneath the priesthood. To me He gave the things upon the 

4 earth; to him the things in the heavens. As the heaven is higher than the earth, so is the priesthood 
of God higher than the earthly kingdom, unless it falls away through sin from the Lord and is 

5 dominated by the earthly kingdom’. For ‘the angel of the Lord said unto me!: The Lord chose 
him rather than thee, to draw near to Him, and to eat of His table ‘and to offer Him the first-fruits' 
of the choice things of the sons of Israel; but thou shalt be king of Jacob. 

6 And thou shalt be amongst them as the sea. For as, on the sea, just and unjust are tossed about, 
‘some taken into captivity while some are enriched’, so also shall every race of men be in thee: some 
shall be impoverished, being taken captive, ‘and others grow rich by plundering the possessions of 
others! 

7 For the kings shall be as sea-monsters. 

They shall swallow men like fishes: 
The sons and daughters ‘of freemen’ shall they enslave ; 
Houses, lands, flocks, money shall they plunder : 
8 And with the flesh of many shall they ‘wrongfully! feed the ravens and the cranes ; 
‘And they shall tadvance in evil, in covetousness uplifted, ! 
9 And there shall be false prophets ‘like! tempests, 
And they shall persecute all righteous men. 


221 And the Lord shall bring upon them divisions one against another. 


3. had mercy on mea: ‘the compassionate and merciful pardoned me’ 8S}. Cf. Jub. xli. 25, and 1 Tim. i. 13 
AenOnv dre ayvodr éroinca. Cf. Pss. Sol. iii. Q, Xvii. 6. 
A as-Hesh. Chil) Zax. 7. 
XX. 1-3. Here a is without v. 1, has four words in 2, and last clause of 3. 
I. the spirit of truth. Cf. John xv. 26; also T. A. i. 4. 
2-5. A striking description of man’s attitude to good and evil. He can will either (v. 2), and the results are written 
on his heart or character, ever open to the eyes of God (3-4). 
2. The ‘understanding’ seems to mean the will: a reads ‘ conscience’. 
3. written upon the hearts. God (Jer. xxxi. 33) and man (Prov. iii. 3) can write thus on the heart. 
4. Text as B-a g AB S}, 
on the heart itself = év or7e: doréwv adrod, a Hebraism. on >a. 
5. testifieth all things and >a. Cf. John xv. 26. 
testifieth . . . accuseth. Cf. Rom. ii. 15, where the conscience is still the judge of past actions, and not the 
deciding power as to present policy. 
burnt up... heart. Cf. T.G. v. 3. 
XXI. Levi’s pre-eminence is enforced as in T. R. vi. 5-12, &c. 
I. exalt... him. Cf. T. R. vi (note). 
4. As the heaven is higher than the earth >a. Cf. T. L. MIVano: 
5. the angel... unto me >A S}. 
to eat of His table. Cf. T. L. viii. 16 (note). 
to offer Him > 8A S'. 
king of Jacob. Cf. xvii. 5-6. 
XXI. 6—XXIII. An alien section, possibly a polemic against the kings (xxi. 6-8) Aristobulus II and Hyrcanus II 
(70-40 B.C.). Cf. xxii. 1-2. But the visitations of Xxili. 3-5 suit the Babylonian or Syrian conquests of 588 and 168 B.c. 
XXI. 6. amongst aefg: ‘to’ ab. 
and unjust >aaf. 
impoverished. Text reads ‘in danger’, owing to wrong punctuation in the original Hebrew. 
the possessions of others > BAS : 
7. Cf. 1 Sam. viii, 11-17. 
8. tadvance in evil. Cf. 2 Tim. ii. LO; tates 


ios 5 raced one against another, i.e. the civil wars of Aristobulus II and Hyrcanus II, FO4AO Buc, 


322 


THe TESTAMENT OF JUDAH 19. 2—24 1 


And there shall be ‘continual! wars in Israel ; 
2 And among men of another race shall my kingdom be brought to an end 
Until the salvation of Israel shall come, 
‘Until the appearing of the God of righteousness’, 
That Jacob [and all the Gentiles] may rest in peace. 
3 And He shall guard the might of my kingdom for ever ; 
: For the Lord sware to me with an oath that He would not destroy the kingdom from my seed 
or ever. 
231 Now I have much grief, my children, because of your lewdness and witchcrafts, and idolatries 
which ye shall practise ‘against the kingdom, following them that have familiar spirits, diviners, and 
2 demons of error. Ye shall make your daughters singing girls and harlots, and ye shall mingle in 
3 the abominations of the Gentiles. For which things’ sake the Lord shall bring upon you famine and 
pestilence, death and the sword, beleaguering by enemies, and revilings of friends, the slaughter of 
children, the rape of wives, the plundering of possessions, [the burning of the temple of God,] the 
4 laying waste of the land, the enslavement of yourselves among the Gentiles. And they shall make 
some of you eunuchs for their wives. 


a BAS 
5 Until the Lord visit you, when with perfect Until ye turn unto the Lord with perfect heart 5 
heart ye repent and walk in all His command- | repenting and walking in all the commandments 
ments, and He bring you up from captivity | of God, and the Lord visit you with mercy and 
among the Gentiles. bring you up from captivity among the Gentiles. 
“B'S* yan 
Q4, And after these things shall a star arise to you And after these things shall arise the star of 1 
from Jacob in peace, peace, 
And a man shall arise [from my seed], like 
the sun of righteousness, 
Walking with the sons of men in meekness and And he shall walk with men in meekness and 
righteousness ; righteousness. 
And no sin shall be found in him. 





continual wars. From Alexander's death to Herod’s accession this holds good. 


2. my kingdom .. . end, i.e. in 40 B. C., with Herod’s accession. 
[and all the Gentiles] >A. An interpolation, as this section is not universalistic. 
3. He would not ... for ever aA (>‘from my seed’ c). The other MSS. vary much. For the idea cf. xvii. 


5-6, and Gen. xliv. Io. 

XXIII. A general denunciation of Israel as a whole and its future judgements, if ‘against the kingdom’ is an 
interpolation. 

1. them that have familiar spirits, éyyaorpipvOo, cf. Lev. xix. 31, xx. 6, 27; Isa. xix. 3. 

2. your daughters... harlots. Cf. Pss. Sol. ii. 14, 15. 

the abominations of the Gentiles. Cf. Pss. Sol. i. 8, ii. 13, 14, vill. 14. 
3. famine, &c. Cf. Jer. xiv. 12, xv. 2. 
sword A + ‘avenging’ a8. 
beleaguering by enemies. Cf. Jer. xix. 9. + kai kivas «is duaonacpdv, a B-a before éyOpav, added from Jer. xv. 
3 (LXX). 

friends + ‘destruction and blighting of the eyes’ text: >hiA: emend to ‘destruction of bribes’, or 

possibly to ‘ destruction of children’ (dittography of next phrase). Or, like kivas, &c., regard it as an intrusion. 

the rape of wives > a. 

[the burning of the temple of God], not realized in Maccabean times (cf. Ps. Ixxiv. 7 (gates only consumed) ; 
1 Macc. iv. 38) or in the first century B.C. 

enslavement ... Gentiles. Cf. the captivities of Apollonius, 1 Macc. i, 29-40; 2 Macc. v. 23-6: and of 
Pompey, Philo, De leg. ad Caium, 23; Pss. Sol. ii. 6, xvii. 14; T. Z. ix. 6: of Cassius Longinus in 49 and 43 B.C., 
Josephus, Azz. xiv. 11. 2. ' 

4. eunuchs. Cf. 2 Kings xx. 18. Herod also had some, but we are not told that the Seleucids had any. _ 

5. the Lord visit you, when... ye repent. National repentance is the condition of Israel’s restoration. Cf. 
Jub. i. 15-17, 23; Ass. Mos. i. 18; 1 Bar. iv. 28-37; 2 Bar. Ixxvili. 6, 7 5 also Dan. ix. 4-19. 

from captivity. Cf. v. 3 (note) ; 1 En. xc. 33; Sir. xxxvi. 11; Pss. Sol. xvii. 28, 50. : 

XXIV. Two Messianic fragments. Verses 1-3 speak of a Messiah, probably from Levi, as ‘from my seed’ is an 
interpolation. Cf. both for diction and matter, T. L. xviii, the hymn in honour of John Hyrcanus. Thus cf. 1* here 
with 3% there, 2 with 6, 1° with 4°, 1° with 9#, 3” with 8°. Verses 5,6 start afresh and refer directly to a Messiah from 
Judah. Verse 4 is a marginal gloss. a 

1. astar... from Jacob. Cf. Num. xxiv. 17; T. L. xvi. 3. 

in peace. Cf. T. L. xviii. 3 ‘in heaven’. : 

aman shall arise. Cf. LXX of Num. xxiv. 17 (‘a sceptre shall arise’ Hebrew). 

sun of righteousness. Mal. iv.2. Cf. T. L. xvili. 4; ANS ZA ibs Ge : i 

Walking with the sons of men. See T. Iss. vii. 7 ; T. D. v. 13; and especially 1 En, Ixii. 14. 

meekness and righteousness. Ps. xlv. 4, interpreted of the Messiah by Targum and LXX. Cf. too Zech. ix. 9 
323 Y 2 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


aes A 
2 And the heavens shall be opened unto him, And the heavens shall be opened unto him, 2 
To pour out the spirit, (even) the blessing of And the blessings of the Holy Father shall be 
the Holy Father ; poured down upon him. Ve 
3 And He shall pour out the spirit of grace upon And He will pour down upon us the spirit of 3 
ou; grace. ; 
: And ye shall be unto Him sons in truth, And ye shall be His true children by adoption, 
And ye shall walk in His commandments first And ye shall walk in His commandments first 
and last. and last. 
4 [This Branch of God Most High, [Then a branch shall go forth from me.] 4 


And this Fountain giving life unto all.] ; : 
5 _ Then shall the sceptre of my kingdom shine And the sceptre of my kingdom shall shine 5 





forth ; forth ; 
And from your root shall arise a stem ; And from your root shall arise a stem ; 
6 And from it shall grow a rod of righteousness And from it shall grow up the rod of righteous- 6 
to the Gentiles, ness unto the Gentiles, 
To judge and to save all that call upon the To judge and to save all that call upon the 
Lord. Lord. 


251 And after these things shall Abraham and Isaac and Jacob arise unto life, and I and my brethren 
shall be chiefs of the tribes ‘of Israel’: Levi first, I the second, Joseph third, Benjamin fourth, 
2 Simeon fifth, Issachar sixth, and so all in order. And the Lord blessed Levi, and the Angel of the 
Presence, me; the powers of glory, Simeon; the heaven, Reuben; the earth, Issachar ; the sea, 
Zebulun ; the mountains, Joseph ; thetabernacle, Benjamin ; the luminaries, Dan; Eden, Naphtali ; 
the sun, Gad ; the moon, Asher. 
3 4AAnd ye shall be the people of the Lord, and have one tongue ; 
And there shall be there no spirit of deceit of "Beliar’, 
For he shall be cast into the fire for ever. 
4 And they who have died in grief shall arise ‘in joy’, 
And they who were poor for the Lord’s sake shall be made rich', 
And they who are put to death for the Lord’s sake shall awake to life. 
5 And the harts of Jacob shall run "in joyfulness', 
And the eagles of Israel shall fly “in gladness! ; 
And all the people shall glorify the Lord for ever. 
261 Observe, therefore, my children, all the law of the Lord, for there is hope for all them who hold 
2 fast unto His ways. And ‘he said to them: Behold", I die before your eyes this day, a hundred and 


‘ Thy king cometh to thee, righteous and lowly’, and Zeph. ii. 3. Meekness is not an attribute of the Messiah in 
Jewish literature 200 B.C.—a.D. 100. See T. D. vi. 9. 
2. See T. L. xviii. 6 (note). 
And the heavens. Cf. 1 En. xi. 1, 
3. pour... grace. Cf. Ps. xlv. 2. 
And ye shall be .. . walk. ‘in truth’ a. 
sons in truth. Cf. T. L. xviii. 8, 
first and last. Cf. e.g. 1 Chron. xxix, 29. 
4. A marginal gloss. 
This Branch. Cf. Isa. xi. 1; Jer. xxiii. 5, XXxill. 15, 
this Fountain, &c.a(8S1): > A. Cf John iv. 14. Cf. Prov. xiii. 14, &c. 
5-6. A new Messianic fragment, added by the inserter of xxi. 6-xxiii. 
5. a stem. ‘a fountain’ a, corruptly. Cf. Isa. xi. 1. 
6. rod of righteousness. Cf. Ps, xly. 6. 


XXV. A Resurrection to a renewed life on the present earth. 
I. tribes, oxymrpor, i.e. DOW. Cf. Matt. xix. 28 ‘In the regeneration 
. Eden. Text 4 rpudy = TW. Cf. Gen. ii. 15 (LXX). 


2 

3- one tongue, i.e. Hebrew. Ber. rabba 18; Shabb, 12°; Jub. iii. 28 (note), 
be there a: ‘be no more’ 8 S'; ‘be among you’ A. 

4. rich +‘and they who have been in want shall be filled 


- + . judging the twelve tribes of Israel’. 


ae, , and tal who have been weak shall be strong’ abafS}, 
5. JacobabgA St: ‘Joseph’ adef. 
And the eagles... gladness aS!: ‘And the heifers of Israel shall leap’ A +‘ But the ungodly shall 


lament and the sinners shall weep’ a8 S1. 


XXVI. 1. hold fast unto a: ‘direct’ 6S}, i.e. DW) for OD, 
2. Behold > 8 AS}, 


before your eyes > a. 


32.4 


ee Phot AMENT OF ISSACHAR'T. 12.5 

3 nineteen years old. Let no one bury me ‘in costly apparel’, nor tear open my bowels, for thi 
‘ ’ : this 

4 shall they who are kings do'; and carry me up to Hebron with you. Aga faaath when he had said 


these things, fell asleep ; and his sons did according to all whatsoever h m 
oer ee , ; gS ‘ ded them, 
they buried him in Hebron, with his fathers. ‘i excommandod (eH 


THE TESTAMENT OF ISSACHAR, THE FIFTH SON OF JACOB AND LEAH. 


1: The copy ofthe words of Issachar. For he called his sons and said to them: 
Hearken, my children, to Issachar your father ; 
Give ear to the words of him who is beloved of the Lord. 
253 ela Wwas born the ‘fifth son to Jacob!, by way of hire for the mandrakes. For Reuben ‘my brother! 
4 brought in mandrakes from the field, and Rachel met him and took them. And Reuben wept, and 
B at his voice Leah my mother came forth. Now these (mandrakes) were ‘sweet-smelling! apples 
6 which were produced in the land of Haran below a ravine of water. And Rachel said: I will not 
give them to thee, but they shall be to me instead of children. ‘For the Lord hath despised me, 
7 and I have not borne children to Jacob'. Now there were two apples ; and Leah said 'to Rachel!: 
8 Let it oe thee that thou hast taken my husband: wilt thou take these also? And Rachel said 
9 ‘to her : Thou shalt have Jacob this night for the mandrakes 'of thy son'. And Leah said to her : 
10 Jacob is mine, for I am the wife of his youth. But Rachel said: Boast not, and vaunt not thyself; 
for he espoused me before thee, and for my sake he served our father fourteen years. 


a (ewe gre: 
ir And had not craft increased on the earth and What shall I do to thee? for the craft and 
the wickedness of men prospered, thou wouldst | the subtlety of men are increased, and craft pros- 
not now see the face of Jacob. pereth on the earth—if it were not so, thou 
wouldst not now see the face of Jacob. 


12,13 For thou art not his wife, but in craft wert taken to him in my stead. And my father deceived 

me, ‘and removed me on that night’, and did not suffer 'Jacob to see me; for' had I been 

14 there, this had not happened ‘to him'. Nevertheless, for the mandrakes I am hiring Jacob to thee 

15 for one night. And Jacob knew Leah, and she ‘conceived and’ bare me, and on account of the hire 

I was called Issachar. 

2,1 Then appeared to Jacob an angel of the Lord, saying : Two children shall Rachel bear, inasmuch 

2 as she hath refused company with her husband, and hath chosen continency. And had not Leah 

my mother paid the two apples for the sake of his company, she would have borne eight sons ; 

for this reason she bare six, and Rachel bare the two: for on account of the mandrakes the Lord 

3 visited her. For He knew that for the sake of children she wished to company with Jacob, and 

4 not for lust of pleasure. For on the morrow also she again gave up Jacob. Because of the man- 

5 drakes, therefore, the Lord hearkened to Rachel. For though she desired them, she eat them not, 

but offered them in the house of the Lord, presenting them to the priest of the Most High who 
was at that time. 


nineteen 6 A S!: ‘ eighteen’ a, wrongly. 
3. nor tear open .. . kings do >a. 
with you. ‘where are my fathers also’ a. 


I. 1. TITLE a: +‘concerning simplicity’ bf S': ‘concerning goodness’ e. 

the words of him who is beloved ciaefA: ‘the words beloved’ hdS?: * (my) words, ye beloved’ bg. 
2-14. Cf. Gen. xxx. 14-18. bad 
3. my brother > BA S'. 


5. which were . . . Haran a (‘Canaan’hi): ‘which the land of Aram produced on a height’ 8 S*: ‘and they 
were produced in the wood in Aram’ A. 
6. For the Lord ... to Jacoba: >BAS'. 


7. to Rachel > 8 AS'. 

8. to her > BAS". Met 

g. Jacob is mine, for Ia: ‘ Boast not nor vaunt thyself ; for Jacob is mine, and I’ BAS). 

10. Boast ... thyself: ‘ How so?’ BAS}. 

11. BAS version is due to citeonraD ay 

13. Jacobaonly. to him a only. 

eh fe tiie ene eed kon a: ‘And Rachel said: Take one mandrake and for the other’ 6-dgS?: 
BA S! mention the second mandrake in ii. 4; d after i. 15: Leah gave Rachel both, ii. 2. 


Il. 1. Two bA#»*¢4S!; >aaef: d omits the clause: g omits the entire chapter. 
4. Jacob + ‘in order that she might receive the other (‘still another’ A ab*eadf) mandrake’ Bdg A%>* edt S}. 
5, priest of the Most High 8 A ab*cdfS1 +6God? AP: ‘priest’ a. 


325 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE 'PATRIARCHS 


3:1 WwW hen, therefore, I grew up, my children, I walked in uprightness of heart, and I became 
a husbandman for my father and my brethren, and I brought in fruits from the field according to 
2, 3 their season. ‘And my father blessed me, for he saw that I walked in rectitude before him’. And 
4 I was not a busybody in my doings, "nor envious and malicious against my neighbour. I never 
slandered any one, nor did I censure the life of any man, walking as I did in singleness of eye’. 
5 Therefore, when I was thirty-five! years old, I took to myself a wife, for my labour wore away my 
strength, and I never thought upon pleasure with women ; ‘but owing to my toil, sleep overcame me, 
6 And my father ‘always’ rejoiced in my rectitude, ‘because I offered through the priest to the Lord 
7 all first-fruits; then to my father also, And the Lord increased ten thousandfold His benefits in my 
8 hands ; and also Jacob, my father, knew that God aided my singleness. For on all the poor and 
oppressed I bestowed the good things of the earth in the singleness of my heart’. 
1 And now, hearken to me, my children, 
And walk in singleness of your heart’, 
For I have seen in it ‘all’ that is well-pleasing to the Lord. 
2 ‘The single-(minded) man coveteth not gold, 
He overreacheth not his neighbour, 
He longeth not after manifold dainties, 
He delighteth not in varied apparel. 
3 He doth not desire to live a long life, 
But only waiteth for the will of God’. 
4 And the spirits of deceit have no power against him, 
For he looketh not on the beauty of women, 
‘Lest he should pollute his mind with corruption’. 
5 There is no envy in his thoughts, 
[No malicious person maketh his soul to pine away, | 
Nor worry with insatiable desire in his mind. 
6 For he walketh in singleness "of soul’, 
And beholdeth all things in uprightness ‘of heart’, 
Shunning eyes (made) evil through the error of the world, 
Lest he should see the perversion of any of the commandments of the Lord. 
51 Keep, therefore, my children, the law of God, 
And get singleness, 


_ II-VI. Issachar is here held up as the single-hearted husbandman (ili. I, v. 3, 5) who scorns luxuries and wealth 
(iv. 2), is free from envy, malice, and greed (ili. 3, iv. 5), shuns lust (iv. 4), offers freely to God and his father (iii. 6) 
and to the poor (iii. 8). Cf. LX X of Gen. xlix. 15 éyevnOn dvnp yeapyds, ‘he bowed his shoulder to bear, and became 
a servant under taskwork ’ (Heb.)._ The Targums interpret this labour as in the law ; cf. Chron. xii. 32. 


Ty 4s uprightness, evdvrnt., Ww’. As this work was translated into Greek between the completion of the LXX 
we A.D. 50 it geek pe frequently than the LXX the late Greek word dmAdrns = OM The MSS. waver between 
the two at times, probably because am\édrns was not yet s i 
Pe ee maps a tne yet so popular a term as it later became. See my Commentary, 

according to their season >aaf. 

2. >A. 

rectitude, da\érys = wholeness, integrity. Cf. Eph. vi. c- Col. iii 

Bs busybody. Cir Dim.iv.03. ¢ aati 

4. singleness of eye. Cf. Matt. vi. 22; T. Iss. iv. 6 (note). 

5. five >bdgA. 

sleep. Perhaps read ‘old age’. Cf. T. Z. x. 6. 
6. because, ‘for on whatsoever I laboured’ Bish 
all first-fruits + ‘all the choicest fruit and all the firstfruits ’ BS}. 

7. ten thousandfold a: ‘twofold’ BS}. 

8. bestowed .. . singleness of heart. Cf. Rom. xii. 8 i isi ity’ i 
Gor xi. 8. Hence the meaning ‘disinterested generosity’ in 


IV. 1. heart cg: ‘soul’ hiaef, 
init bdgA: ‘in you’ aaefS'. 
2. coveteth not .. . neighbour bdegS!: ‘gaineth not gold wronefully’ 
? 4 1 tb S': “gain tg gtully’ aaf. 
3: eae ao ees . ae S!: ov« émuypdder roo Gy a B S?, ice. nBND, perhaps corrupt for Tdnid 
4. looketh not on the beauty, od ydp efdey endéEac ba (emidé€acba fe A: 1) Ka rhap i 
graphy in the original Hebrew ind ana = emdéEaoOar ae or ee a Mat a 
5. IS... ina: ‘can... invade’ BS. 
[Ne malicious petnOe, oc An interpolation > A: ‘malice... not? bdgS 
or worry .. . his mind, emended from ode TEeploTacpoy ev amd ia éwoel a B St ’ Vv vol 
c : a noreia evvoeLaBS' to... Dee i 
6. eoeencss - a eas On. | soul A: BS read ‘ uprightness of soul’ and so pene bethouet i helaws tae 
yes ... evil. Cf. Matt. vi.22, 23 ‘eye... single; eye... evil’, i.e. ethically unsound. In Matt. xx, 15 =‘envious.’ 


326 


4 


iit FESTAMENT OF ISSACHAR 3. 1—7. 5 


‘And walk in guilelessness, 

Not playing the busybody with the business of your neighbour, 

But love the Lord and your neighbour, 

Have compassion on the poor and weak. 

Bow down your back unto husbandry, 

And toil in labours ‘in all manner of husbandry, 

Offering gifts to the Lord with thanksgiving |. 

For with the first-fruits of the earth will the Lord bless you, ‘even as He blessed all the saints 


5 from Abel even until now'. For no other portion is given to you ‘than of the fatness of the earth, 
6 whose fruits are raised by toil’. For our father Jacob blessed me with blessings of the earth and of 
4 first-fruits. And Levi and Judah were glorified by the Lord even among the sons of Jacob; for the 


Lord gave them an inheritance, and to Levi He gave the priesthood, and to Judah the kingdom. 


8 And do ye therefore obey them, and walk in the singleness of your father; [for unto Gad hath it 


6 1 


3 


been given to destroy the troops that are coming upon Israel]. 


Know ye therefore, my children, that in the last times 
Your sons will forsake singleness, 

‘And will cleave unto insatiable desire ; 

And! leaving ‘guilelessness, will draw near to malice ; 
And forsaking the commandments of the Lord, 

They will cleave unto Beliar. 

And leaving! husbandry, 

They will follow after their own ‘wicked’ devices, 
And they shall be dispersed among the Gentiles, 

And shall serve ‘their enemies. 

And do you therefore give these commands to your children, that, if they sin, they may the more 


4 quickly return to the Lord; For He is merciful, and will deliver them, even to bring them back into 


71 


2 


3 
4 


5 


their land. 


a pAS! 
Behold, therefore, as ye see, I am a hundred I am a hundred and twenty-two years old, and ! 


and twenty-six years old and am not conscious of | I am not conscious of having committed any sin 
committing any sin. Tunto death. 


Except my wife I have not known any woman'. I never committed fornication by the uplifting 


of my ‘eyes’. 


I drank not wine, to be led astray thereby ; 

I coveted not any desirable thing that was my neighbour's. 
Guile arose not in my heart ; 

A lie passed not through my lips. 

If any man were in distress I joined my sighs with his, 


V. 1. busybody with +‘the commands of God and’ 6S’. 
3. Bow... husbandry. Gen. xlix. 15 (Heb.). 
labours a + ‘of the earth’ 8 AS’. 
5. to yougA: ‘tothee’ B-agS: ‘tous’a: >a. : 
whose fruits are raised by toil bgS': ‘through the toils of fruits’ aae RE Sal. 
6-7. A is defective and confused. 
7. to Levi. ..to Judah c: ‘to the one... to the other’ h8. ee 
8. [for (G@AS': ‘and’ a) unto Gad... Israel.] Probably out of place, and belonged to T. Gad originally, 


preceded by a phrase like ‘and she called his name Gad’. Cf. Gen. xlix. 19. 


VI. 1. in the last times. Cf. T. L. x. 2,xiv.1; T. G. viii. 2 (8 AS); T. Z.ix.5 (bdg); T.D.v. 4; T. Jos. 


xix. 10 (cS); also T. Z. viii. 2, ix. 9, The phrase = the close of the present age—present, that is, from the writer’s 
standpoint. 


2. dispersed. Cf. T. L. xvi. 5: T. A. vii. 2, 6: T. Jos. xix. 2. 
serve their enemies. Cf. T. Jud. xxiii. 3: T. N. iv. 2. 
4. bring them back. Cf. T. D.v. 9; T. A. vil. 7. 


VII. hundred and twenty-two BAS = Midrash Tadshe. See T. R. i. 1 (note). 
am not conscious, &c. Cf. 1 Cor. ix. 4; T. Z.1. 4. af Z 
sin unto death BAS. Cf. Num. xviii. 22; Jub. xxi. 22, Xxxvill. 18 ; I John v. 16. 

_a omits ov« éyvov through hmt. It reads ‘ woman except my wife’. : 
the uplifting, pereopiopds . Cf. T. B. vi. 35 Sir. xxill. 4, XXVL. 9 5 Prov. vi. 25. 

. A has ‘And guile arose not through my lips, and I lied not to my neighbour’. 

. Cf&. Sir. vii. 34; Rom. xii. 15. 

327 


to 


unr B. 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


And I shared my bread with the poor. 
I wrought godliness, all my days I kept truth. 


BS? 

a 

6 I loved the Lord ; 'The Lord I loved with all my strength: 6 
Likewise also every man with all my heart. Likewise also every man I loved more than my 


own children, 

7 So do you also these things, my children, 

And every spirit of Beliar shall flee from you, 

And no deed of wicked men shall rule over you; 

And every wild beast shall ye subdue, 

Since you have with you the God of heaven and earth 

(And) walk with men in singleness of heart". 
8 And having said these things, he commanded his sons that they should carry him up to Hebron, 
9 and bury him there in the cave ‘with his fathers’. And he stretched out his feet and died, at a good 

old age ; with every limb sound, and with strength unabated, he slept the eternal sleep. 


THE TESTAMENT OF ZEBULUN, THE SIXTH SON OF JACOB AND LEAH. 


1: The copy of the words of Zebulun, which he enjoined on his sons ‘before he died! in the 
2 hundred and fourteenth year of his life, two years after the death of Joseph. And he said to them: 
3 Hearken to me, ye sons of Zebulun, attend to the words of your father. I, Zebulun, was born a good 
gift to my parents. For when I was born my father was increased very exceedingly, both in flocks 
4 and herds, when with the straked rods he had his portion. I am not conscious that I have sinned 
5 all my days, ‘save in thought'. Nor yet do I remember that I have done any iniquity, except the 
sin of ignorance which I committed against Joseph ; for I covenanted with my brethren not to tell 
6 my father what had been done. But I wept ‘in secret! many days on account of Joseph, for I feared my 
brethren, "because they had all agreed that if any one should declare the secret, he should be slain|. 

7 But when they wished to kill him, I adjured them much ‘with tears’ not to be guilty of this sin. 
1,2 For Simeon and Gad came against Joseph ‘to kill him', and he said unto them with tears: Pity 
me, my brethren, have mercy upon the bowels of Jacob our father: lay not upon me your hands 
3 ‘to shed innocent blood!, for I have not sinned against you. And if indeed I have sinned, with 
' chastening chastise me, ‘my brethren’, but lay not upon me your hand, for the sake of Jacob our 
4 father. And as he spoke these words, © wailing as he did so', I was unable to bear his lamentations, 
and ‘began to weep!, and my liver was poured out, and all the substance of my bowels was floosened. 


shared my bread. Cf. Prov. xxii. 9. 
with the poor + ‘I never eat alone, I moved no landmark ’ 8 S!. 
kept truth a: ‘did truth’ B-beS?: ‘and I walked in holiness’ A + ‘I loved godliness’ c. 
7- Shall flee. Cf. T. N. viii. 4. 
walk with men ... heart hief (‘his heart’ h i): ‘walking with men in the singleness of His heart’ c 
(= Messiah, cf. T. Jud. xxiv. 1): walking with men of (or ‘in’) singleness of heart’ B-ef. 
8. in the cave >uag. 
g. and died ... sleep. ‘and slept ata good old age the eternal sleep’ a. 
the eternal sleep. This does not preclude Resurrection. TA OLS Rig ih IT, Bs ses Ge 
TITLE a +‘ compassion and mercy’ (< almsgiving ’ dg) B-a S}, 
I. 1. before he died cd. 
fourteenth h i B-a S}, cf. Jashar ii. 1248: ‘fourth’ c: ‘fiftieth’ a: ‘ twenty-fourth’ A. 
two years. See Jub. xxviii. 11-24 (notes). 
3. Zebulun, a good gift. Gen. xxx. 20. 
straked rods. Cf. Gen. xxx. 37 ff. 
he had: ‘I had’ ad. 
4. am not conscious, &c. Cf. T. Iss. vii. 1. 
5. sin of ignorance. Cf. T. R.i.6; T. L. iii. 55 be J udeexixe os 
which I committed > a. 
covenanted with = 'n43 emended from ‘mp5 ‘ concealed for’ bgA: ‘confirmed to’ a 8-b gS 
7- I adjured: ‘I summoned’ hi: c omits rest of verse and ji. 14 to ‘kill him’ through hmt. 


II. 1. Simeon +‘ and Dan’h. Cf. iii. 2. 

against Joseph: ‘with anger’ g. +‘with anger’ de S} 

and he said . . . tears: ‘and falling on his face Joseph said to them’ P-afS}. 
2. upon me > a, 


3- upon me: ‘to slay your brother’ a, 
4. wailing as he did so > BA S}, 
Iwas ... lamentations a: ‘I pitied him’ BS, 
poured outdg. Cf. Lam. ii. 11: ‘melted’ a B-d g S}, 
was tloosened a + ‘within my soul’ 8 A S}. Perhaps emend to ‘was troubled aS LAM. 17 20, His 11. 


328 


8, 


Pest AMEN T OF ZEBULUN' 1. 1—4. 9 


5 “And I wept with Joseph, and my heart sounded, ‘and the joints of my body trembled', and I was 
6 not able to stand. And when ‘Joseph! saw me weeping with him, and them coming against him to 
7 slay him, he fled behind me, beseeching them. But meanwhile Reuben arose and said: “Come! my 
brethren, let us not slay him, but let us cast him into one of these dry pits, which our fathers digged 
8 and found no water. For for this cause the Lord forbade that water should rise up in them, in order 
that Joseph should be preserved. And they did so, until they sold him to the Ishmaelites. 
2 For in his price I had no share, my children. But Simeon and Gad and six other of our brethren 
took the price of Joseph, and bought sandals for themselves, and their wives, ‘and their children’, 
3 saying: We will not eat of it, for it is the price of our brother’s blood, but we will assuredly tread 
it under foot, because he said that he would be king over us, ‘and so let us see what will become of 
4his dreams'. Therefore it is written in the writing of the law of Moses, that whosoever will not raise 
5 up seed to his brother, his sandal should be unloosed, and they should spit in his face. And the 
brethren of Joseph wished not that their brother should live, and the Lord loosed from them the 
6 sandal which they wore.against 'Joseph their brother! For when they came into Egypt ‘they were 
unloosed by the servants of Joseph outside the gate, and so they made obeisance to Joseph after the 
7 fashion of King Pharaoh. And! not only did they make obeisance to him, but ‘were spit upon also, 
8 falling down before him forthwith, and so! they were put to shame before the Egyptians. For after 
this the Egyptians heard all the evils that they had done to Joseph. 


a Bios 
1 And after he was fsold my brothers sat down And after they had cast him into the pit ‘my 1 
2 to eat and drink. But I, through pity for Joseph, | brethren! sat down to eat. ‘For I through two 2 


did not eat, but watched the pit, since Judah 
feared lest Simeon, Dan, and Gad should rush 

3 off and slay him. But when they saw that I did 
not eat, they set me to watch him, till he was 

5 sold to the Ishmaelites. And when Reuben came 
and heard that while he was away (Joseph) had 
been sold, he rent his garments, (and) mourning, 
said: How shall I look on the face of my father 

6 Jacob? And he took the money and ran after 
the merchants, but as he failed to find them he 
returned grieving. But the merchants had left 
the broad road and marched through the Tro- 
glodytes by a short cut. 


days and two nights eat nothing, through pity 
for Joseph', And Judah eat not with them, but 
watched 'the pit!; for he feared lest Simeon and 
Gad should run off and slay him. And when 3 
they saw that I also eat not, they set me to 
watch him until he was sold. And he spent in 4 
the pit three days and three nights, and so was 
sold famishing. And when Reuben heard that 5 
while he was away (Joseph) had been sold, he 
rent his clothes, and mourned, saying: How shall 
I look in the face of Jacob my father? And he 6 
took the money and ran after the merchants, and 
found no one; for they had left the main road, 


and journeyed through the Troglodytes by a 
short cut. 





7 ‘But Reuben was grieved’, and eat no food that day. Dan therefore came to him and said: 
9 Weep not, neither grieve; for we have found what we can say to our father Jacob. Let us slay 


5. my heart sounded. Cf. Jer. iv. 19. 
joints of my body, &c. Cf. Dan. v. 6. 
6. beseeching them: ‘ beseeching (me) to help him’ a. 
7. Cf. Gen. xxxvii. 22. 
found no water. See Jub. xxiv. 25 (note). 
g. they did soadgA: ‘the Lord did so’ B-dg S’. 


Ill. 2. Gad... brethren: ‘ Dan and Gad and their children’ a. : 
bought sandals. Cf. Ps.-Jon. on Gen. xxxvii. 28; Pirke R. El. xxxviil; also Amos 1. 6. 
3. the price of .. . blood. Cf. Matt. xxvii. 6. 
let us see, &c. Gen. xxxvii. 20. 
4-7. An attempt to explain certain customs of the Levirate Law. 
4. law of Moses a: ‘ law of Enoch’ BS’. : 
whosoever will not, &c. Cf. Deut. xxxv. 10; Ruth iv. 4. 
7. forthwith, rapaxpjpa, bdfS: mapa oxnpa, aaeg. 
before B-dAS!: ‘by’ ad. : 
8S): ‘for they heard the evils that they had done unto him’ a. 


1V. 1. 1sold a: mpadjva corrupt for BAnOijvac. 
sat down ad only. Cf. Gen. xxxvii. 25. 
. Dan (a). See ii. 1. Y "i 
. to the Ishmaelites (a). Cf. T. S.ii9; T. Z. i. 9. 
. >a, possibly through hmt. ‘ 
’ How shall Ilook .. . Jacob? So Ps.-Jon. and Targ. Jer. on Gen. xxxvii. 30. 
. Troglodytes: ‘Indokolpitae’ in T. Jos. xi. 2. See LXX of 2 Chron. xii. 3. 
slay bd A + ‘with the sword’ a8-bd Ss 


O AUAWD 


379 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWEEVE“PA TRIAS. 


10 a kid of the goats, and dip in it the coat of Joseph; and let us send it to Jacob, saying : Know, is 

11 this the coat of thy son? And they did so. ‘For they stripped off from Joseph his coat when they 
were selling him, and put upon him the garment of a slave'. Now Simeon took the coat, and would 
not give it up, ‘for he wished to rend it with his sword’, as he was angry that Joseph lived and that 

12 he had not slain him. Then we ‘all’ rose up and said unto him: If thou givest not up the coat, we 

13 will say ‘to our father’ that thou alone didst this evil thing in Israel. And so he gave it unto them, 
and they did even as Dan had said. 


51 And now, my children, I bid you to keep the commands of the Lord, "and to show mercy to your 


4 


~ 


neighbours, and to have compassion towards all, not towards men only, but also towards beasts. 
2 For all this thing’s sake the Lord blessed me’, and when all my brethren were sick, I escaped with- 
3 out sickness, for the Lord knoweth the purposes of each. Have, therefore, compassion in your hearts, 

my children, because even as a man doeth to his neighbour, even so also will the Lord do to him. 
4 For the sons of my brethren were sickening and were dying on account of Joseph, "because they 
5 showed not mercy in their hearts'; but my sons were preserved without sickness, as ye know. And 

when I was in the land of Canaan, by the sea-coast, I made a catch of fish for Jacob my father; and 

when many were choked in the sea, I continued unhurt. 
1 I was the first to make a boat to sail upon the sea, for the Lord gave me understanding ‘and 
2 wisdom therein’. And I let down a rudder behind it, and I stretched 4 sail upon another upright 

piece of wood in the midst. And I sailed therein along the shores, catching fish for the house of my 
" father until we came to Egypt. 

Verses 4-6 found only in bdg. 


5 [And through compassion I shared my catch with every stranger. And if a man were a stranger, 
or sick, or aged, I boiled the fish, and dressed them well, and offered them to all men. as every man 
6 had need, grieving with and having compassion upon them. Wherefore also the Lord satisfied me 
with abundance of fish when catching fish; for he that shareth with his neighbour receiveth manifold 
7 more from the Lord.] For five years I caught fish [and gave thereof to every man whom I saw, 
8 and sufficed for all the house of my father]. And in the summer I caught fish, and in the winter 
I kept sheep with my brethren. 
vii-viii. 3 found only in bdg. 


7, . [Now I will declare unto you what I did. I saw a man in distress through nakedness in winter- 


time, and had compassion upon him, and stole away a garment secretly from my father’s house, and 
2 gave it to him who was in distress. Do you, therefore, my children, from that which God bestoweth 
upon you, show compassion and mercy without hesitation to all men, and give to every man with 
3 a good heart. And if ye have not the wherewithal to give to him that needeth, have compassion for 
4 him in bowels of mercy. I know that my hand found not the wherewithal to give to him that 
needed, and I walked with him weeping for seven furlongs, and my bowels yearned towards him in 
compassion. 
1_ Have, therefore, yourselves also, my children, compassion towards every man with mercy, that the 
2 Lord also may have compassion and mercy upon you. Because also in the last days God will send 
3 His compassion on the earth, and wheresoever He findeth bowels of mercy He dwelleth inhim. For 
in the degree in which a man hath compassion upon his neighbours, in the same degree hath the 


let us send . . . saying a: ‘and we will say’ BAS), 
10. his coat a: ‘the coat of our father’ 8-d gS}. 
Il. Joseph lived and > a. 
12. to our father ag. 
in Israel. a only. 
V. 3. even asa man, &c. Cf. viii. 3; Judges i. 7; Matt. vii. 2. 
4. in their hearts 8 S!: ‘to them’ c. 
VI. 1. the first to make a boat. Cf. Gen. xlix. 13. 
2. rudder, lit. ‘a piece of wood’. 
3. catching fish g: ‘and I caught fish’ bd A: ‘in’ af: >a. 
4-6. The sections peculiar to b dg, i.e. vi. 4-6, 7”, vii-viii, go back probably to a Hebrew original. viii. 3, though 
a saying attributed to Gamaliel II or Gamaliel of Jabneh (80-105 A.D.), is virtually the same as v. Be 
6. satisfied, évémrnoe, d: émoinae, bg, wrongly. 
neighbour + ‘with all willingness’ d. 
7. [and gave . . . father] bd g only. 
whom I saw bg: ‘what sufficed’ d. 
VII. 1. my father’s house d: ‘my house’ b g. 
2. show . .. mercy without hesitation. Cf. Jude 22, if un is restored before Svaxpivdpevor there. 
3. needeth, or ‘asketh’, ypytovrt. Cf. Matt. v. 42. 
VIII. 2. last days. See T. Iss. vi. 1 (note). 
3. See v. 3 (note) and vi. 4-6 (note). Cf. Sifre, Deut. 96; Shabb. 151. 


ao? 


4, 5 Lord also upon him.] And when we went down into Eo 


6 


I 
2 


3> 4 


5 


7 


8 


THE TESTAMENT OF ZEBULUN 4, 9—9. 8 


whom taking heed, do ye also, my children, 


earth, and other things. 
and they vanish away. 


gypt, Joseph bore no malice against us. To 


CAME Ait : ; 
approve yourselves without malice, and’ love one 
another ; and do not set down in account, each one of 


unity and divideth ‘all kindred, and troubleth the sou 
Observe, ‘therefore’, the waters, and know when they 


you, evil against his brother. For this breaketh 
l', and weareth away the countenance. 
flow together, they sweep along stones, trees, 


But if they are divided into many streams, the earth swalloweth them up, 
So shall ye also be if ye be divided. Be not ye, therefore, divided 


into two heads, for everything which the Lord made hath but one head, and two shoulders, two 


hands, two feet, and all the remaining members. 
Ye shall be divided in Israel, 
And ye shall follow two kings, 
And shall work every abomination. 
And your enemies shall lead you captive, 


For I have learnt in the writing of my fathers, that 


And ye shall be evil entreated among the Gentiles, 


With many infirmities and tribulations. 


a 
And after these things ye shall remember the 
Lord and repent, 
And He shall have mercy upon you, for He 
is merciful and compassionate. 
And He setteth not down in account evil 
against the sons of men, 


Because they are flesh, and are deceived through 
their own wicked deeds. 


aaefA S!} 


And after these things shall there arise "unto 
you' the Lord Himself, the light of righteousness, 


4. Resumes vi. 3. 








paws: 

And after these things ye shall remember the 7 
Lord, and repent, 

[And He shall cause you to return]; for He 
is merciful and compassionate. 

And He setteth not down in account evil to 
the sons of men, because they are flesh, 

And the spirits of deceit deceive them in all 
their deeds. 


bdg 

And after these things there shall arise unto 
you the Lord Himself, the light of righteousness, 

[And healing and compassion shall be in His 
wings. 

He shall redeem all the captivity of the sons 
of men from Beliar ; 

And every spirit of deceit shall be trodden 
down | ; 

And he shall bring back all the Gentiles into 
zeal for Him. 


And when. bdg read ‘for when’, which supports the originality of vii—vili. 2. 
against us +‘ but when he saw me he had compassion’ b g. 


5. approve ... malice and >aaefA. ‘e 
set not down in account, &c. Cf. 1 Cor. xii. 5. 
evil against c A: ‘the evil of’ B S'. 


6. and weareth away the countenance (‘possessions’ aefA(?)S') a: ‘for he who beareth malice hath no 


bowels of mercy’ bd g. 


IX. Written at a time of national divisions, e.g. Hyrcanus II’s struggles with Aristobulus II. 


I. and other things a: ‘sand’ B-bd A. 


2. vanish away. So I emend with Perles; the text has ‘become of no account’, i.e. }ON13) corrupt for 101’. See 


I Sam. xv. 9. f 
4, 5. two heads = Hyrcanus II and Aristobulus II. 
5. writing of my fathers. See T. L. x. 5 (note). 

kings: ‘kingdoms’ aaefS’. . 
abomination + ‘and worship every idol’ hifS’. 
6. be evil entreated: ‘dwell’ cbd. 
tribulations + ‘and anguish of soul’ bdg. 
. Tepent : emuorpéwere a: 
d ghia pues, tO ether BAS: is 
setteth not down in account. Cf. Ps. xxxii. 2. 
Because ... flesh. Cf. Gen. vi. 3; T. Jud. xix. 4. 
8. bdg appear 
righteousness’, 8° 


+ ‘that in the last days ye will depart from the Lord and’ bdg. 
eravonaete 8B AS}: both = IDWN. f whe 
A Or émuotpéyer may be rendered ‘ return’ if we omit twas. Cf. T. D. v. 9%. 


to be a Jewish expansion of aaefAS'. Thus 8» comes from Mal. iv. 2, suggested by ‘light of 
= TD. v. 11°, 81=T. L. xviii. 12 or T. S. vi. 6. 


ee 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PA Tier 


aaefAS! bdg 
And ye shall return unto your land. And ye shall see [God in the fashion of a man] 
And ye shall see Him in Jerusalem, ‘for His | (the place) which the Lord shall choose, Jerusalem 
name’s sake. is its name. 


g And again ‘through the wickedness of your works! shall ye provoke Him to anger, 
And ye shall be cast away 'by Him! unto the time of consummation. ‘ 

10: And now, my children, grieve not that I am dying, nor be cast down in that I am coming to my 
2end. For I shall rise again in the midst of you, 'as a ruler in the midst of his sons'; and I shall 

rejoice in the midst of my tribe, as many as shall keep the law of the Lord, 'and the commandments 
3 of Zebulun their father'. But upon the ungodly shall the Lord bring eternal fire, and destroy them 
5 throughout all generations. But I am now hastening away to my rest, as did also my fathers. But 
6 do ye fear the Lord ‘our God with all your strength all the days of your life’. And when he had 
7 said these things he fell asleep, ‘at a good old age!. And his sons laid him in a ‘wooden’ coffin. And 

afterwards they carried him up and buried him in Hebron, with his fathers. 


4 


THE TESTAMENT OF DAN, THE SEVENTH SON OF JACOB AND BILHAH. 


1: The copy of the words of Dan, which he spake to his sons in his last days, in the hundred and 
2 twenty-fifth year of his life. For he called together his family, and said: Hearken to my words, ye 
3 sons of Dan; and give heed to the words ‘of your father. I have proved in my heart, and in my 
whole life, that truth with just dealing is good and well pleasing to God, and that lying and anger 
4 are evil, because they teach man all wickedness. I confess, therefore, this day to you, my children, 
5 that in my heart I resolved on the death of Joseph ‘my brother', the true and good man. { And 
6 I rejoiced that he was sold, because his father loved him more than us.] For the spirit of jealousy 
7 and vainglory said to me: Thou thyself also art his son. And one of the spirits of Beliar stirred me 
up, saying: Take this sword, and ‘with it'slay Joseph: so shall thy father love thee when he is dead. 

8 Now this is the spirit of anger that persuaded me to crush Joseph as a leopard crusheth a kid. 


Q BAS! 
9 But the God of my fathers did not suffer him But the God of Jacob our father did not deliver 9 
to fall into my hands, so that I should find him | him into my hands that I should find him alone, 


alone and slay him, and cause a second tribe to | nor suffer me to work this iniquity, lest two tribes 
be destroyed in Israel. should be destroyed in Israel. 


2: And now, my children, behold I am dying, and I tell you ofa truth, that unless ye keep yourselves 
from the spirit of lying and of anger, and love truth and longsuffering, ye shall perish. 


Cc 1G) Ue 
2 Jor anger is blindness, and does not suffer one There is blindness in anger, my children, and 2 
to see the face of any man with truth. no angry man seeth the face with truth. 


3 For though it be a father or a mother, ‘he behaveth towards them as enemies'; though it be 
a brother, he knoweth him not; though it be a prophet of the Lord, he disobeyeth him; though 


see Him a: ‘see the Lord’ ae fA S!. 
(the place) . . . its name b: ‘whom the Lord shall choose in Jerusalem for His name’s sake’ g: ‘and His name 
shall be called the angel of great counsel’ d. 
9. by Him a: >8S!: ‘among the Gentiles’ A. 
X. 1. be cast down, cupminrere. Cf. T. Jos. vii. 1. 
2. Ch Ty Qudsaxve heel Bs x 7: 
35 Chybs, xin6: 
throughout all generations: ‘from the children of Israel’ A. 
6. good old age: ‘good sleep’ text. 2° was misread for MDW. Cf. T. Iss. vil. 93 Ty Di vil kee 
woodena: >BAS!. Cf. T. S. vii. 2. : ( 


TITLE a: + ‘concerning anger (‘ wrath’ dg) and lying’ bdefg S': + ‘concerning arrogancy and hatred’ A, 
I. 3. just dealing. We expect longsuffering here, as in ii. i, vi. 8. 
4. resolved a: rejoiced 8 (A) S!: i.e. *NNDY for NY. For Dan’s design, see T. Z. ii. 1. 
5. Bracketed, as it breaks the connexion of 4 and 6. 
FeCt LT Zeaits Vciito 
stirred me up= y’. Text = ‘helped me’ = “Y". 
8. to crush ... a kid B-adfA: a has the order different. 
crush = /'¥: emended from ‘suck’ =/¥9. 
9. Why ‘a second tribe’? 8A S} seems to have the better reading. 
I]. 2, angry man: >‘angry’ aefAS}, 


333 


Vibe vEStAMENT OF DAN 1.. 1—5, 2 


4a righteous man, he regardeth him not; ‘though a friend, he doth not acknowledge him'. For the 
spirit of anger encompasseth him with the net of deceit, and blindeth his eyes, and through lying 
5 darkeneth his mind, and giveth him its own peculiar vision. And wherewith encompasseth it his 
eyes? With hatred of heart, so as to be envious of his brother. 


a B-aA Ss} 
31 For anger is an evil thing, my children, for it For anger is an evil thing, my children, for it 1 
troubleth even the soul itself. becomes a soul to the soul itself. 


2 And the body of the angry man it maketh its own, and over his soul it getteth the mastery, and 
3 it bestoweth upon the body ‘power that it may work all! iniquity. And when the body does all 
4 these things, the soul justifieth what is done, since it seeth not aright. Therefore he that is wrathful 
if he be a mighty man; hath a threefold power in his anger: one by the help of his servants ; and 
a second by his wealth, whereby he persuadeth and overcometh wrongfully ; and thirdly, having his 
5 own natural power he worketh thereby the evil. And though the wrathful man be weak, yet hath 
6 he a power twofold of that which is by nature; for wrath ever aideth such in lawlessness. This 
spirit goeth always with lying ‘at the right hand of Satan, that with cruelty and lying! his works 
may be wrought. 
Understand ye, therefore, the power of wrath, that it is vain. For it first of all giveth provocation 
by word ; then by deeds it {strengtheneth him who is angry, and with sharp losses disturbeth his 
3 mind, and so stirreth up with great wrath his soul. Therefore, when any one speaketh against you, 
be not ye moved to anger, [and if any man praiseth you as holy men, be not uplifted: be not moved 
4 either to delight or to disgust]. For first tit pleaseth the hearing}, and so maketh the mind keen 
to perceive the grounds for provocation ; and then being enraged, he thinketh that he is justly angry. 
5 If ye fall into any loss or ruin, my children, be not afflicted'; for this very spirit maketh (a man) 
6 desire that which is perishable, in order that he may be enraged through the affliction. And if ye 
suffer loss voluntarily, or involuntarily, be not vexed ; for from vexation ariseth wrath ‘with lying’. 
7 Moreover, a twofold mischief is wrath with lying; and they assist one another in order to disturb the 
heart ; and when the soul is continually disturbed, the Lord departeth from it, and Beliar ruleth 
over it. 
51 Observe, therefore, my children, the commandments of the Lord, 
And keep His law ; 
Depart from wrath, 
And hate lying, 
That the Lord may dwell among you, 
And Beliar may flee from you. 
2 Speak truth each one with his neighbour. 
So shall ye not fall into wrath and confusion ; 
But ye shall be in peace, having the God of peace, 
So shall no war prevail over you. 


4:2 


4. spirit of anger .. . deceit : ‘ spirit of deceit . . . nets of luxury’ A. 
5. And... hiseyes. A reads ‘And then it encompasses (him) with its own eye, and surrounds . 
with hatred ... brother a: ‘with hatred of heart and it giveth him its own heart (‘a heart hostile’ A: 


‘a heart’ S!) so as to be envious of his brother’ be AS'. Cf. df. 


III. 1. it troubleth even a: ‘it becometh a soul to’ B-ag S’, perhaps better. 
2. power ag: ‘its own power’ B-gS'. 
3. when the body ... aright a: ‘ when it doeth aught, the soul justifieth .. . seeth not’ BAS". 
4. a mighty man + ‘in body’ a. 
having . .. evil: ‘having the natural power of his body and of his own agency working’ BA SZ 
5. yet hath he... by nature 8 AS!: ‘the passion of anger springeth up in him with twofold power’ «. 
6. Bracketed words >aA. 


IV. 1. tvain. Read ‘a destroyer’. 
2. giveth provocation : ‘is provoked’ aaef. 
+strengtheneth. Read ‘ embittereth’ or ‘ inciteth’. 
3. The bracketed words are out of the context. hee ; 
4. tit pleaseth the hearingt. Read ‘the thing said giveth provocation aM, 
the grounds for provocation, reading ro épebiaay for 76 épebic bev a B-d g Si. pest 
5. This spirit deceives in order to irritate. But A reads, ‘the spirit of error desired to do this thing, and to 
accomplish the ruin.’ 
affliction, rdOovs, a. ‘longing ’, 7é6ov, BS}. 
7. Moreover. . . lying: >afg through hmt. 
V. 2. Speak truth, &c.: from Zech, viii. 16. Cf. T. R. vi. 95 Eph. iv. 25. 
God of peace. Cf. 1 Thess. v. 23; Rom. xv. 33; Phil. iv.9. 
war. Perles suggests ‘ enemy’ mod¢puos for mdeuos. Cf. Jer. 1. 193 x20, 


333 


3 


5 


6 


7 


Io 


i 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


Love the Lord through all your life, 

And one another with a true heart. 

I know that in the last days ye shall depart from the Lord, 

And ye shall provoke Levi unto anger, 

And fight against Judah ; 

But ye shall not prevail against them, 

For an angel of the Lord shall guide them both; 

For by them shall Israel stand. po 

And whensoever ye depart from the Lord, ye shall walk in all evil and work the abominations of 
the Gentiles, going a-whoring after women of the lawless ones, while with all wickedness the spirits 
of wickedness work ‘in you'. [For I have read in the’ book of Enoch, the righteous, that your prince 
is Satan, and that all the spirits of wickedness and pride will conspire to attend constantly on the 
sons of Levi, to cause them to sin before the Lord. 

And my sons will draw near to Levi, 

And sin with them in all things ; 

And the sons of Judah will be covetous, 

Plundering other men’s goods like lions. 

Therefore shall ye be led away [with them] into captivity, 

And there shall ye receive all the plagues of Egypt, 

And all the evils of the Gentiles. 

And so when ye return to the Lord ye shall obtain mercy, 

And He shall bring you into His sanctuary, 

And He shall give you peace. 

And there shall arise unto you from the tribe of [Judah and of] Levi the salvation of the Lord ; 

And he shall make war against Beliar. 

And execute an everlasting vengeance on our enemies ; 

And the captivity shall he take from Beliar [the souls of the saints |, 

And turn disobedient hearts unto the Lord; 

And give to them that call upon him eternal peace. 

And the saints shall rest in Eden, 

And in the New Jerusalem shall the righteous rejoice, 


3. Earliest literary authority for conjoining love to God and love to one’s neighbour, Cf. Matt. xxii. 37, 39. 
through all your life : ‘with all your soul’ hd. Cf. T. Iss. vii. 6; Sir. vii. 29, 30. 
4. Levi... Judah, &c. Cf. T. R. vi. 5-12; T.S. v. 5. 
5. spirits of wickedness af: ‘spirits of fornication’ be A S*, le. wopvetas for movnpias. Cf. v. 6. 
6-7. Contradict v. 4, where Dan opposes Levi and Judah, who are led of God. These two verses refer to the 
demoralization under the later Maccabees, like T. L. x, xiv—xvi > T. Jud. xxi. 6-xxxili ; T. Z. ix. 
6. The earliest authority we have for the connexion of Dan and the Antichrist. D 


Judges xviii. 30; 1 Kings xii. 29; according to Ps.-Jon. on Deut. xxv. 18 Dan was th 
referred to in that verse ; while Jer. viii. 16 is inte 


Rev. vii. 5-8). Cf. Ber. rab. xliii on Jer. viii. 16, 
book of Enoch. See T. L. x. 5 (note). 
righteous +‘and I have known’ (‘found ’ hi) chi. 
isaB: ‘will be’? AS}, 
all > af. . 
conspire = }qwp', emended from \wp = ‘obey’ in the text. 

- Sin with them. Levi was to lead Israel astray, T. L. x. 2. 
sons of Judah, &c. Cf. T. Jud. xxi. 657% 

- led away. Cf. T. L.x. 4; T. Z. ix. 6. 

[with them], added by interpolator of 6-7. 
evils of the Gentiles. Cf. T. Z. ix. Oi) DN sia 2) 
9. when ye return ... mercy. Cf. T. Z. ix. Fie 
He shall bring you, &c. Cf. T. Jud. xxiii. 5; T. Iss. vi. 3; T. A. vii. iis 
give you peace. Cf. Haggai ii. 95 Tem ixxist 7. 
Io. arise . . . salvation of the Lord. Cf. T. L. xviii. 3; T. Jud. xxiv. 1; T. Z. ix. Mca 
the tribe of [Judah and of] Levi: The singular, ‘tribe,’ necessitates one name only. Only T. G. viii. 1 


(corrupt) puts Judah before Levi, and only T. Jud. xxiv. 5-6 (first century B.c.) and T. N. viii. 2 (corrupt) derive the 
Messiah from Judah. 


wat against Beliar. Cf. T. L. xviii. 12. 
everlasting. So I emend text = ‘of victory’, which is due to a wrong rendering of my3 in Hebrew. 
our enemies = 9919", So I emend from text = ‘our fathers’ — NIN. 

II. the captivity =‘ disobedient hearts’ enslaved through sin. Brackets show a Christian addition. 


turn disobedient, &c. Cf. Luke i. 17; and T. Z. ix. 8 (bdg), 
12. Eden. Cf. T. L. xviii, ro. 


the New Jerusalem bg A S!: 


an in the O.T. was idolatrous, 
e ‘hindmost’ and ‘feeblest ie 
rpreted by Irenaeus v. 30. 2 of the Antichrist (and so Dan is omitted 


(aay SS 


‘the kingdom of J.’, c; ‘the new Holy J.’ ht 
334 


This is the earliest occurrence of 


hd 


THETTESTAMENT ‘OF DAN 5. 347, 3 


And it shall be unto the glory of God for ever. 
13 And no longer shall Jerusalem endure desolation, 
Nor Israel be led captive ; 

For the Lord shall be in the midst of it [living amongst men], 

And the Holy One of Israel shall reign over it [in humility and in poverty ; and he who believeth 
on Him shall reign amongst men in truth]. 

And now, fear the Lord, my children, and beware of Satan and his spirits. Draw near unto God 
and unto the angel that intercedeth for you, for he is a mediator between God and man, and for the 
3 peace of Israel he shall stand up against the kingdom of the enemy. Therefore is the enemy eager 
4 to destroy all that call upon the Lord. For he knoweth that upon the day on which Israel shall 
5 repent, the kingdom of the enemy shall be brought to an end. For the very angel of peace shall 
6 strengthen Israel, that it fall not into the extremity of evil. And it shall be in the time of the law- 

lessness of Israel, that the Lord will not depart from them, but will transform them into a nation 
7 that doeth His will, for none of the angels will be equal unto him. And His name shall be in every 
place in israel, 'and among the Gentiles'. 
8 Keep, therefore, yourselves, my children, from every evil work, 
And cast away wrath and all lying, 
And love truth and long-suffering. 


And the things which ye have heard from your father, do ye ‘also! impart to your children [that 

the Saviour of the Gentiles may receive you; for he is true and long-suffering, meek and lowly, and 

ro teacheth by his works the law of God]. Depart, therefore, from all unrighteousness, and cleave unto 
the righteousness of God, and your race will be saved for ever. And bury me near my fathers. 

71,2 And when he had said these things he kissed them, and fell asleep at a good old age. And his 

sons buried him, And after that they carried up “his bones', and placed them near Abraham, and 

3 Isaac, and Jacob. [Nevertheless, 'Dan' prophesied unto them that they should forget their God, 


and should be alienated from the land of their inheritance ‘and from the race of Israel', and from the 
family of '{their seed.}"] 


6 1,2 


THE TESTAMENT OF NAPHTALI, THE EIGHTH SON OF JACOB AND BILHAH. 


1x The copy of the testament of Naphtali, which he ordained at the time of his death in the hundred 
2and thirtieth year of his life. When his sons were gathered together in the seventh month, on the 
3 first day of the month, while still in good health, he made them a feast of food and wine. And after 


the expression in Jewish literature. Cf. 1 En. xc. 29; also Ezek. xl, xlviii; Isa. liv. 11, 12, Ix. 1; Rev. iii. 12, xxi. 2. 
Here it is Jerusalem rebuilt, v. 13. 
and it shall be unto: ‘which is’ «. 

13. Brackets indicate Christian additions, though for the Messiah’s humility cf. T. Jud. xxiv. 1 (note). 

Vi. 1-7. A section complete in itself. Israel is between the opposing spiritual forces of God and of Satan. The 
reign of evil will end when Israel repents, therefore Satan seeks to destroy those who call upon God. Even in Israel’s 
lawlessness, the angel of peace is with them, to transform them into a nation doing the will of God. 

2. intercedeth for you: ‘followeth with you’ c: ‘followeth us’ hi. Cf. T. L. v. 6 (note). 

mediator between God and man. Cf. 1 Tim. ii. 5. Here of Michael cf. Jub. i. 29; Apoc. Mos. (ed. 
Tischendorf, p. 1); Jellinek, Bet ha-Midrasch, vi. 75; Jalk. Chad., f. 120. Later, about the time of Christ, Moses 
was regarded as mediator, Ass. Mos. i. 14, ili. 12. 
stand up. Cf. Dan. xii. 1. 
against the kingdom of the enemy bg(A)S!: ‘ before the kingdom of God’ adef. 
4. repent a: ‘believe’ 8(A) S'. If all Israel repent, redemption will come, Pesikt. 163”, &c. Seemy Comm., p. 132. 
5. angel of peace. Cf. T. A. vi.6; T. B. vi. 1; 1 En. xl. 8, lii. 5. See T. L. v. 6 (note). 
strengthen: ‘convert and strengthen’ c. 
that it fall not, &c. Cf. T. L. v. 6. 

6. Two corrections have been made: i. ‘not’ restored before ‘depart’; ii. ‘ will go over to’ (= 75n) intransitive) 

emended to ‘ will transform them into’ = 75M) (transitive). 
doeth: ‘seeketh’ c. 

7. Gentiles + ‘Saviour’ 8S. 

Svoa ble a. bee - b ’ : 

g. that the Saviour . . . receive you. A Christian addition. The rest may be Jewish. Cf. T. Jud. xxiv. 1. 

10. the righteousness of + ‘the law of’ 6S’. 

and your race >b. 
VII. 1. old age: ‘sleep’c. See T. Z.x.6. For ‘eternal sleep’ BAS’, cf. T. Iss. vil. 9. 
3. A later addition. 
their God a S': ‘the law of their God’ bd A. 
+their seedt a: ‘and so it came to pass’ f. 
a: +‘concerning natural goodness’ b de f A? *. 

Pca and thirtieth Wee fAS!: ‘hundredth’ cg; ‘hundred and thirty-second’ bd. Cf. T. R. i. 1 
Jub. xxviii. 11-24 (note in large edition). 

2. while ... health >a. 

and wine >a. 


335 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


4 he was awake in the morning, he said to them, I am dying; and they believed him not. And as he 
5 glorified the Lord, he grew strong and said that after yesterday’s feast he should die. And he began 
6 then to say: Hear, my children, ye sons of Naphtali, hear the words of your father. I was born from 
Bilhah, "and’ because Rachel dealt craftily, and gave Bilhah in place of herself to Jacob, and she 
4 conceived and bare me upon Rachel’s knees, ‘therefore she called my name Naphtali. For Rachel 
loved me very much because I was born upon her lap’; and when I was still young she was wont 
8 to kiss me, and say: May I have a brother of thine from mine own womb, like unto thee. Whence 
9 also Joseph was like unto me ‘in all things’, according to the prayers of Rachel. Now my mother 
was Bilhah, daughter of Rotheus the brother of Deborah, Rebecca’s nurse, who was born on one and 
10 the self-same day with Rachel. And Rotheus was of the family of Abraham, a Chaldean, God- 
11 fearing, free-born, and noble. And he was taken captive and was bought by Laban; and he gave 
him Euna his handmaid to wife, and she bore a daughter, and called her name Zilpah, after the name 
12 of the village in which he had been taken captive. And next she bore Bilhah, saying: My daughter 
hastens after what is new, for immediately that she was born she seized the breast and hastened to 
suck it. 
2, And I was swift ‘on my feet! like the deer, and my father Jacob appointed me for all messages, 
2 and as a deer did he give me his blessing. For as the potter knoweth the vessel, how much it is to 
contain, and bringeth clay accordingly, so also doth the Lord make the body after the likeness of 
3 the spirit, and according to the capacity of the body doth He implant the spirit. And the one does 
not fall short of the other bya third part of a hair; for by weight, and measure, and rule was all the 
4 creation made. And as the potter knoweth the use of each vessel, what it is meet for, so also doth 
the Lord know the body, how far it will persist in goodness, and when it beginneth in evil. For 
5 there is no inclination or thought which the Lord knoweth not, for He created every man after His 
own image. 
a B-agA 
6 For asa man’s strength, so also is his work ; As a man’s strength, so also is his work; and 6 
as his feye, so also is his sleep; as his soul, so | as his mind, so also is his skill; ‘and as his 
also is his word either in the law of the Lord or | purpose, so also is his achievement; and as his 
in the law of Beliar. heart, so also is his mouth ;' as his teye, so also 
is his sleep ; as his soul, so also is his word, either 
in the law of the Lord or in the works of Beliar. 





7 And as there is a division between light and darkness, between seeing and hearing, so also is there 
a division between man and man, and between woman and woman ; and it is not to be said that the 
8 one is like the other either in face or in mind. ‘For’ God made all things good in their order, the 
five senses in the head, and He joined on the neck to the head, adding to it the hair also for 
comeliness and glory, then the heart for understanding, the belly for excrement, and the stomach for 


4. grew strong a: ‘ affirmed’ 8 S!. 
that . .. he should die 8 S!: ‘after . . . my body died’ a. 
5. >s. 
6. For the play on the words cf. Gen. xxx. 8. 
conceived and >BS'. 
7. May Ihave A: ‘ may I see’ B-g S!: a is corrupt. 
prayers bdA: ‘blessings’ aaefS'. 
g-11. The aim is to show that Bilhah was of Semitic descent. Cf. e.g. Ps.-Jon. on Gen. xxix. 24, 29. 
11. Zilpah, here a sister of Bilhah, as in Jub. xxviii. 9, and Ps.-Jon., &c. 


12. Bilhah .. . hastens, i.e. nbnas nba. 
for... tosuckit >aadg. 


II. 1. asadeer... blessing. See Gen. xlix. 21. 
2. accordingly haef: ‘unto it’ cd. 
3. was all the creation made a: ‘was every creature of the Most High’ b A: ‘was every creature exalted’ def. 
a ee oe and measuring of all, cf. Job xxviii. 25; Isa. xl. 12; 1 En. xliii.2; 4 Ezra iv. 36; also Wisd. xi Boye 
ss. Sol. v. 6. ‘ if 
4. beginneth bd A: ‘cometh’ aef, 
5. inclination, mhdgya = 1¥). See T. A. i. 3 (note). 
created ... after His ownimage. Cf. Sir. xvii. 3. Earliest quotation (with Sirach) of Gen. i. 26, 27. 
6. as his teye, so also is his sleep. Something is wrong. Perhaps for ‘eye’ read ‘maw *, as in Berach 61» 
8. a is senses. See T. R. ii. 3—iii. 1 (note). Sal 
and He joined . . . head >aS'. Compare the lists of man’s powers and faculties in (1) Berach. 612? d 
(3) Othioth of *R. Akiba’ (ed. Jellinek, Bet ha-Midrasch, iii. 42, 43), (4) Hebrew T. Naph. x. 2 least akin to Notas 
heart for understanding, in (1) (2) (3) and practically (4). ; 
belly for excrement, in (2). I read S:axdpnow for dudxpiow. Perles neatly suggests that the Heb. was wraps = 


‘for excrement ’, which the translator took for = WB) = eis Sidkpuowv. 


336 


Pa TESTAMENT OP NAPHTALI 1. °4—5. 1 


(grinding), the windpipe for taking in (the breath), the liver for wrath, the gall for bitterness, the 
spleen for laughter, the reins ‘for prudence, the muscles of the loins’ for power, the lungs for drawing 
9 in, the loins for strength, and so forth. So ‘then’, my children, let all your works be done in order 
10 with good intent in the fear of God, and do nothing disorderly in scorn or out of its due season. For 
: reas bid the eye to hear, it cannot; so neither while ye are in darkness can ye do the works of 
ight. 
t Be ye, therefore, not eager to corrupt your doings through covetousness or with vain words to 
beguile your souls; because if ye keep silence in purity of heart, ye shall understand how to hold 
2 fast the will of God, and to cast away the will of Beliar. Sun and moon and stars change not their 
3 order ; so do ye also change not the law of God in the disorderliness of your doings. The Gentiles 
went astray, and forsook the Lord, and changed their order, and obeyed stocks and stones, spirits of 
4 deceit. But ye shall not be so, my children, recognizing in the firmament, in the earth, and in the 
sea, and in all created things, the Lord who made all things, that ye become not as Sodom, which 
5 changed the order of nature. In like manner the Watchers also changed the order of their nature, 
whom the Lord cursed at the flood, on whose account He made the earth without inhabitants and 
fruitless. 
1 These things I say unto you, my children, for I have read in the writing of Enoch that ye your- 
selves also shall depart from the Lord, walking according to all the lawlessness of the Gentiles, and 
2 ye shall do according to all the wickedness of Sodom. And the Lord shall bring captivity upon 
you, and ‘there! shall ye serve your enemies, and ye shall be bowed down with every affliction and 
3 tribulation, until the Lord have consumed you all. And after ye have become minished and made 
few, ye shall return and acknowledge the Lord your God; and He shall bring you back into your 
4 land, according to His abundant mercy. And it shall be, that after that they come into the land of 
5 their fathers, they shall again forget the Lord and become ungodly. And the Lord shall scatter 
them upon the face of all the earth, until the compassion of the Lord shall come, a man working 
righteousness and working mercy unto all them that are afar off, and to them that are near. 
1 For in the fortieth year of my life, I saw a vision on the Mount of Olives, on the east of Jerusalem, 


stomach for (grinding) (‘ grinding’ supplied from (2)) = (1) (2) (3). ; 

windpipe for taking in (text, = ‘reed for health’, corrupt) = (2) (3). Cf. (1) (4), ‘sending out.’ 

liver for wrath (1) (2) (3) (4). Cf. T. R. iii. 4. ae ae 

gall for bitterness > (2) (4): (1) (3) ‘the gall sprinkles on it a drop and quiets it. 

spleen for laughter (1) (2) (3) (4). 

cae for shes ae ae as Prov. i. 4, viii. 5, LXX): ‘reins for counsel’ (2). Cf. (1) (3) (4). (1) and (2) 
tell us that the reins give both good and bad counsel. Cf. Eccles. x. 2. 

muscles of the loins for power. No parallel; a dittography. a) TER ’ aoe 

lungs for drawing in (2). Cf. (1) (3) (4). But our text is corrupt. mAevpay eis ro kabevdew az mAevpay eis 


Onxnv B-g S}. Read mAevdpova, aixwd nN". 
loins for strength. Cf. Deut. xxx. 11. 
g. while in darkness .. . light. Cf. John iil. 9. 
works of light. Cf. Eph. v. 9, ‘fruits of light.’ 


Ill. 1. with vain words to beguile. Cf. Eph. v. 6. 

Beliar ad: ‘the devil’ B—-d A». Ps ‘ss 
2. Cf. Sir. xvi. 26-8, xliii. 6 ff.; 1 En. ii. 1; Pss. Sol. xvill. 11-14. 

S!® ‘hide? a: ‘hinder’ A: “ 

3 eal + ‘having followed after’ 8AS'. a regards the stocks and stones as spirits of deceit. 
rn as Sodom. Cf.iv.1; T. B. ix.1; Jude 7; 2 Pet. ii.6. Jude6 speaks of the angels who kept not 17v eavra@y apxny. 
5. the Watchers. Cf. 1 En. vi ff. S 

without inhabitants. 1 En. ix. 2 (not Gk.), xvii. 2, Ixxxiv. 5. 


- B.C. age like Zeb. ix. The reference to Enoch and v. 4 support this view. 

a ae See alst: have known’ aaef. Soa did not at first mention Enoch. See T. L. x. § (note). 
2. there. Cf. T. Dan. v. 8: >dAS'. 

be bowed down A: ‘be covered’ bgS: ‘dwell’ aa det. yé 

affliction and tribulation. Cf. T. Z. ix.6; T. D. v. 8; Ps. cv. 39. 
3. become minished a ahs eae 

i back. Cf. 2 Chron. vi. 25; I. 2. 1x. 7. 5 J i: 

Ee torest CLUES Zs 1x29; Renewed apostasy under Seleucids or tater Maccapess: ifr” 

- the compassion of the Lord: ‘the Lord’ Ab (+ with compassion’ AP*¢4), Cf. T. 2. 1x. 7. 
“a man working righteousness, the Messiah, not a Maccabee. 
afar off. Isa. lvii. 19. 
is f Samaria. 

V-VII. The hatred of Joseph here reflects Jewish hatred of Sai 
V. 1-5. This vision is hardly intelligible. Cf. Heb. T. Naph. ii. 
1. a vision >f AS’. 


1105-2 337 Z, 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


2 that the sun and the moon were standing’ still. And behold Isaac, the father of my father, said to 
us; Run and lay hold of them, each one according to his strength ; ‘and to him that seizeth them 

3 will the sun and moon belong.' And we all of us ran together, and Levi laid hold of the sun, and 
Judah outstripped the others and seized the moon, and they were both of them lifted up with them. 

4 And when Levi became as a sun, ‘lo’, a certain young man gave to him twelve branches of palm ; 

5 and Judah was bright as the moon, and under their feet were twelve rays. [And the two, Levi and 

6 Judah, ran, and laid hold of them.] And lo, a bull upon the earth, with two great horns, and an 

7 eagle’s wings upon its back; and we wished to seize him, but could not. But Joseph came, and 

g seized him, and ascended up with him on high. And I saw, for I was there, and behold a holy 
writing appeared to us, saying: Assyrians, Medes, Persians, [Chaldeans,] Syrians, shall possess in 
captivity the twelve tribes of Israel. 

1 And again, after seven days, I saw our father Jacob standing by the sea of Jamnia, and we were 

2 with him. And behold, there came a ship sailing by, without sailors or pilot; and there was written 

3 upon the ship, The Ship of Jacob. And our father said to us: Come, let us embark on our ship. 

4 And when he had gone on board, there arose a vehement storm, and a mighty tempest of wind; and 

5 our father, who was holding the helm, departed from us. And we, being tost with the tempest, were 
borne along over the sea; and the ship was filled with water, (and was) pounded by mighty waves, 

6 until it was broken up. And Joseph fled away upon a little boat, "and we were all divided upon nine 

7 planks’, and Levi and Judah were together. And we were all scattered unto the ends of the earth. 

, 9 Then Levi, girt about with sackcloth, prayed for us all unto the Lord. And when the storm ceased, 
the ship reached the land ‘as it were’ in peace. And, lo, our father came, and we all rejoiced with 
one accord. 

1 These two dreams I told to my father; and he said to me: These things must be fulfilled in their 
season, after that Israel hath endured many things. 

2 then my father saith unto me: I believe God that Joseph liveth, for I see ‘always! that the Lord 
numbereth him with you. 

3 And he said, weeping: Ah me, my son Joseph, thou livest, though I behold thee not, and thou 
seest not Jacob that begat thee. 

4 _ He caused me also, therefore, to weep by these words, and I burned in my heart to declare that 
‘Joseph! had been sold, but I feared my brethren. 

1 And lo! my children, I have shown unto you the last times, how everything shall come to pass in 

2 Israel. Do ye also, ‘therefore’, charge your children that they be united to Levi and to Judah; 

For through them shall salvation arise unto Israel, 
And in them shall Jacob be blessed. 


2-3. Cf. Heb. T. Naph. ii. 2-4, which adds ‘ nine stars’. Cf. Gen. xxxvii. 9. 
4. This obscure verse is given differently in Heb. T. Naph. ii. 4-6. 
5. Dittography of 32°, 6A S! read ‘ran to each other and laid hold of each other’. 
6-8. In the Heb, T. Naph. Joseph holds aloof (ii), but finally (iii) mounts a great bull and rides for four hours (the 
400 years until the division of the kingdoms). In the end a storm disperses the tribes (the captivity). Our text in 
v. 8 goes on to the Syrian (Seleucid) rule. 
6. a bull, &c. Cf. Deut. xxxiii. D7. 
eagle’s wings: like a stork’s, according to Heb. T. Naph. iii. 1. 

7. came and seized a: ‘got ahead and took’ B. 

8. for I was there a8-dS!: ‘for we were (‘that he was’ A) in paradise’ d A. 
Persians + ‘Elamites, Gelachians’ (* Chelkaeans’ ae f) B. 
[Chaldeans]. In the wrong order. It should be before ‘Medes’. 

VI. 1. days a: ‘months’ 8 A#>S}, 

s sailing by + ‘full of salt fish’ BA =o'mbp xdn, a corrupt dittography in Heb. of ond xbq — ‘without 
sailors ’. 

4. departed a B-b gS!: ‘ flew away’ b g A: ‘was hidden’ Heb. T. Naph. vi. 1. 


See - ++ waves B-dfAS!: ‘borne along’ a: ‘and the waves of the sea smote it to the rock’ Heb. T. 
iNapn. Vv. 5. 


until: text has ‘so that’. 
6. Joseph = Samaria. 

nine a: ‘ten’ BS). 
7. of the earth > B-d S}. 
8. for us all > a: ‘for us’ A. 


VII. 1. The repeated dream showed the matter was established, Gen. xli. 32: ii, I- 
Pukn ee » Gen. xl, 32; Heb. T. Naph. vii. 1 5. 
4. me: ‘us’ BAS}, 

Joseph > BAS}. 


VIII. 2. united to Levi and to Judah. Cf. Heb. T. Naph.i. 8 Cf. T. D. v.10 (note). 


through them ... in them: text = ‘ through udah... in him’, B i { i 
eis see ee bab gh J m'. But salvation comes through Levi and 
338 


PAE te SPaMENT OF NAPHTALI 5, 2—9: 


Go 


3 For through their tribes shall God appear [dwelling among men] on earth, 
To save the race of Israel, : 
And to gather together the righteous from amongst the Gentiles. 
4 If ye work that which is good, my children, 
"Both! men and angels shall bless you; 
And God shall be glorified among the Gentiles through you, 
And the devil shall flee from you, 
‘And the wild beasts shall fear you’, 
And the Lord shall love you, 
[And the angels shall cleave to you]. 
5 Asa man who has trained a child well is kept in kindly remembrance ; 
So also for a good work there is a good remembrance before God. 
6 But him that doeth not that which is good, 
‘Both’ angels and men shall curse, 
And God shall be dishonoured among the Gentiles through him, 
And the devil shall make him as his own peculiar instrument, 
And every wild beast shall master him, 
And the Lord shall hate him. 
7 For the commandments of the law are twofold, 
‘And! through prudence must they be fulfilled. 
8 For there is a season for a man to embrace his wife, 
And a season to abstain therefrom for his prayer. 
9 So, then, there are two commandments; and, unless they be done in due order, they bring ‘very 
to great'sin ‘upon men!. So also is it with the other commandments. Be ye therefore wise in God, 
‘my children!, and prudent, understanding the order of His commandments, and the laws of every 
word, that the Lord may love you. 

91 And when he had charged them with many such words, he exhorted them that they should 
2 remove his bones to Hebron, and that they should bury him with his fathers. And when he had 
3 eaten and drunken with a merry heart, he covered his face and died. And his sons did according to 

all that Naphtali their father had commanded them. 


THE TESTAMENT OF GAD, THE NINTH SON OF JACOB AND ZILPAH. 


1: The copy of the testament of Gad, what things he spake unto his sons, in the hundred and twenty- 
2 fifth year of his life, saying unto them: '‘Hearken, my children’, I was the ninth son born to Jacob, 

3 and I was valiant in keeping the flocks. Accordingly I guarded ‘at night! the flock; and whenever 
the lion came, for the wolf’, or any wild beast against the fold, I pursued it, and ‘overtaking (it) 

4 I seized its foot with my hand and hurled it about a stone’s throw, and so killed it. Now Joseph 
'my brother’ was feeding the flock with us for upwards of thirty days, and being young, he fell sick 


3. their tribes: text = ‘his tribe’, a Christian alteration. 
God appear. Cf. T. S. vi. 4; T. Z. ix. 8. 
[dwelling among men]: a Christian interpolation? _ ee ) Lat &, 
the righteous from amongst the Gentiles, or ‘ the righteous of the Gentiles’, i.e. conversion of the Gentiles. 
C1 Ens2i, xe 19-10,110, 30.5 see LB. ix. 2 (note): 
4-6. Verses 4 and 6 are antithetic, so bracket 48. 
4. Both >aA. 
: : ie i . . . 
ees Lord Bias. sous eg AbtedefS: >aabdf. But cf. 6", while 4€ looks like a dittography in 
the Hebrew. 
6. And God .. . through him > a. 
8. Cf. Eccles. iii. 5 and 1 Cor. vii. 5—‘a season . . . unto prayer’. 
g. there are two commandments: ‘the two (commandments) of God are’ ae ff 
very... mena: ‘sin’BAS*. 


TITLE a: + concerning hatred’ B-ad(A)S. y 
I. I. hundred and twenty-fifth. So Midrash Tadshe; Shemoth rab. i. 5 ; Jashar (ii. 1246). 
3. Cf. Judah’s feats, T. Jud. ii. 
Accordingly a: >8S. 
came +‘ or leopard or bear’ be g AS}. 
or any wild beast ges Br phn FNS 
oe ed Se neh Sine ooind i stunned it, and having hurled it over two furlongs’ 8-d S*. For 
Gad’s strength cf. Ber. rabba xcv. 4. 
4. young a S!: ‘delicate’ BA. pa 
339 Z 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


5 by reason of the heat. And he returned to Hebron to our father, who made him lie down near him, 
6 because he loved him greatly. And Joseph told our father that the sons of 'Zilpah and’ Bilhah 
were slaying the best ‘of the flock’ and eating them against the judgement of Reuben and Judah. 
7 For he saw that I had delivered a lamb out of the mouth of a bear, and put the bear to death ; but 
8 had slain the lamb, being grieved concerning it that it could not live, and that we had eaten it. And 
9 regarding this matter I was wroth with Joseph ‘until the day that he was sold. And the spirit of hatred 
was in me’, and I wished not either to hear of Joseph with the ears, or see him with the eyes, 
because he rebuked us to our faces ‘saying’ that we were eating of the flock without Judah. For 
whatsoever things he told our father, he believed him. 
t Iconfess now my sin, my children, that oftentimes I wished to kill him, because I hated him from 
2 my heart. Moreover, I hated him yet more for his dreams ; and I wished to lick him out of the land ~ 
of the living, even as an ox licketh up the grass of the field. 


a BAS} 
3 And Judah sold him secretly to the Ishmael- Therefore I and Simeon sold him to the Ish- 3 
ites, maelites [for thirty pieces of gold, and ten of them 


we hid, and showed the twenty to our brethren]. 
And thus through covetousness we were bent 4 

| on slaying him. 

5 _ Thus the God of our fathers delivered him | And the God of my fathers delivered him from 5 
from our hands, that we should not work great | my hands, that I should not work lawlessness in 
lawlessness in Israel. Israel. 





1 And now, my children, hearken to the words of truth to work righteousness, and all the law of the 
Most High, and go not astray through the spirit of hatred, for it is evil in all the doings of 
2men. Whatsoever a man doeth the hater abominateth him: and though a man worketh the law of 
the Lord, he praiseth him not; though a man feareth the Lord, and taketh pleasure in that which is 
3 righteous, he loveth him not. He dispraiseth the truth, he envieth him that prospereth, he welcometh 
evil-speaking, he loveth arrogance, for hatred blindeth his soul ; as I talso "then' looked} on Joseph. 
t Beware, therefore, my children of hatred; for it worketh lawlessness “even? against the Lord Him- 
2 self. For it will not hear 'the words of! His commandments concerning the loving of one’s neigh- 
3 bour, ‘and’ it sinneth against God. 'For if a brother stumble’, it delighteth immediately to proclaim 
it to all men, and is urgent that he should be judged for it, and be punished and be put to death. 
4 “nd if it be a servant it stirreth him up against his master, and with every affliction it deviseth against 
5 him, if possibly he can be put to death. For hatred worketh with envy also against them that 
prosper: so long as it heareth of or seeth their success, it always languisheth. 
6 For as love would quicken ‘even’ the dead, and would call back them that are condemned to 
die, so hatred would slay the living, and those that had sinned venially it would not suffer to live. 
7 For the spirit of hatred worketh together with Satan, through hastiness of spirit, in all things to 


men’s death ; but the spirit of love worketh together with the law of God in long-suffering unto the 
salvation of men. i 


_ 6. Ps.-Jon. on Gen. xxxvii. 2 says Joseph reported that Zilpah and Bilhah’s sons were eating flesh cut from the 
living animal. 


7. eaten it + ‘and he told our (‘his’ A») father’ b A®, 
g. to hear. A only. 


II. 1. from my heart aA: fas Wuyis B-g S). 
Pe (SEAN ID Tey 48 ez 
to lick. Cf. Num. xxii. 4 and T. D.i. 8: ‘to blot out’ dA (ag). 
3-5. BAS* show Christian influence, e.g. the thirty pieces. Gen. xxxvii. 28 gives ‘ twenty pieces of silver’. 


3. Simeon B-bAS*. Cf. T. Z. iii. 2 and T. S.iv.2. ‘Judah’ abSl Cf 405 Spits Os CXXVil 
3 5 uda ; 5 abs, Sy al: : ; 
of gold: LXX of Gen. alone. J Mi einer SoS 


4. we were B-bgS!: ‘I was’ bg A. 
haadeliveredamiCiade SiS: 


III. 2. Whatsoever a man doeth ... him B-f¢S: ‘Whatsoever the hater doeth is ; ing d 
3. envieth. Contrast 1 Cor. xiii. 4. : Mabie ta tic O. 


prospereth, or ‘ doeth right ’. 
I talso looked ont. Read perhaps ‘it blinded me also in regard to’, 
IV.33.. For... .stumble6S, sCh Galwy 1) eee 
delighteth 8 A S!: ‘hasteneth’ a. 
4. stirreth ... up against a8S?: ‘slandereth’ A. 
it deviseth against b S!: ‘it rejoiceth over’ a B-b. Perhaps omit ‘ with’ before ‘ 
53 also against, or ‘and with regard to’; connecting with following words. 
7. hastiness of spirit. Cf. LXX on Exod. vi. OS SPSs..SOl. exvibenle 


340 


every affliction ’. 


THE TESTAMENT OF GAD 1. s—6, 4 


51 ‘Hatred, therefore, is evil’, for it constantly mateth with lying 

maketh small things to be great, and causeth the light to be darkness, and calleth the sweet 

bitter, and teacheth slander, and ‘kindleth’ wrath, and ‘stirreth? up war, and violence and all covet- 

2 ousness ; it filleth the heart with evils and devilish poison. These things, ‘therefore’ 

from experience, my children, that ye may drive forth hatred, which is of the devil 

3 the love of God. Righteousness casteth out hatred, humility destroyeth envy. For 

and humble is ashamed to do what is unjust, "being reproved not of another’, but of his own heart, 

4 because the Lord looketh on his inclination. He speaketh not against a holy man, because the fear 

5 of God overcometh hatred. For fearing lest he should offend the Lord, he will not do wrong to any 

» 7 man, even in thought. These things I learnt at last, after I had repented concerning Joseph. For 

true repentance after a godly sort [destroyeth ignorance, and] driveth away the darkness, and 

8 enlighteneth the eyes, and giveth knowledge to the soul, and leadeth the mind to salvation. And 

g those things which it hath not learnt from man, it knoweth through repentance. For God brought 

upon me a disease of the liver ; and had not the prayers of Jacob my father succoured me, it had 

10 hardly failed but my spirit had departed. For by what things a man transgresseth, by the same also 

t1is he punished. Since, ‘therefore’, my liver was set mercilessly against Joseph, in my liver too 

I suffered mercilessly, and was judged for eleven months, for so long a time as I had been angry 
against Joseph. 

And now, my children, 'I exhort you', love ye each one his brother, and put away hatred from 

2 your hearts, love one another in deed, and in word, and in the inclination of the soul. For in the 


presence of my father I spake peaceably to Joseph ; and when I had gone out, the spirit of hatred 
darkened my mind, and stirred up my soul to slay him. . 


a BAS! 

3 Love ye one another from the heart ; and if Love ye, therefore, one another from the heart ; 
aman sin against thee, speak peaceably to him, | and if a man sin against thee, cast forth the 
and in thy soul hold not guile; and if he repent | poison of hate and speak peaceably to him, and 
and confess, forgive him. in thy soul hold not guile; and if he confess and 

repent, forgive him. 


, speaking against the truth; and it 


, 1 say to you 
, and cleave to 
he that is just 


¥ 


4 But if he deny it, do not get into a passion with him, lest catching the poison from thee he take 


V. 1. mateth withlying. Cf. Sir. xx. 25. 
causeth ... darkness. Cf. Isa. v. 20. 
kindleth: ‘disturbeth’a: >BAS). 
stirreth up > BAS?. 
2. God cid A: ‘the Lord’ hB-dS. 
3. envy agA”*:“hatred’abeA*Pedets, 
the Lord looketh on. Cf. 1 Sam. xvi. 7. 
his inclination 8-dA S!: ‘his soul’ a.- 
4. God cB-be: ‘ Most High’ bAS?. he om 
overcometh hatred 8 A S!: ‘dwelleth in him’ a, by corruption in the Hebrew original. 
5. wrong... evenin thought. Cf. T. Jos. ix.2; Matt. v. 21, 27. _ “ns 
7. repentance after a godly sort... salvation. Cf. 2 Cor. vii. lo; Sir. iv. 22. Bracketed words are a 
2 x eh St‘ and it hath not learnt this from man, but it knoweth how to receive those who return through 
repentance’ a. For ‘it . . . repentance’ A reads ‘repentance knoweth’. 
QO. fh. TERe 6,7, iv. 45° 0. Jud. xix. 2. 
of Jacob >a. : 
Pa eecied me, €BonOnody por,aA: > B-aS: ép6aoay a. Cf. T. Jud. xix. 2 (note). 
to. Cf. Jub. iv. 31, 32. For the popularity of the doctrine of retaliation in the second century B.C. cf. 2 Mace. v. Io, 
KVa132539. Ch Col. it. 25. wh3-—-7]: /6 
also >a. ee 
II. eleven months 6 AS; ‘ten periods’ a. 
Joseph + ‘until he was sold’ BAS. 


VI. 1. in the inclination of the soul. Cf. 1 Chron. XxiX. 18. ; . Ce 
3-7. A unique passage in ancient literature on the subject of forgiveness. It shows remarkable insight, and the 
diction and thought are closely parallel to Luke xvil. 3; Matt. xvill. 15. Forgiveness is perfect when we gain our 
offending brother, and restore him to communion with ourselves. But we can at least cast out our own anger, 
° . 
even if he is not reconciled. ss _ ; < 
3. ifa mansin. Cf. Matt. xviii. 15 ; Luke xvii. 3. On the duty of rebuke, cf. Lev. xix. 17. 
the poison BAS*. Cf. v. 4. ; 
peaceably .. . not guile. Contrast Jer. ix. 7. 
i ... repent, forgive. Cf. Luke xvii. 3. : é ; 
4 sy isis ie patdomarcim thee, in text follows ‘intent’ in v. 5, 1.e. was separated from its context by the 
i. > 
interpolation, v. 5. 


341 


Ww 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


5 to swearing and so thou sin doubly. [Let not another man hear thy secrets when engaged in legal 
strife, lest he come to hate thee and become thy enemy, and commit a great sin against thee; for 
6 ofttimes he addresseth thee guilefully or busieth himself about thee with wicked intent.] And 
though he deny it and yet have a sense of shame when reproved, give over reproving him. For he 
who denieth may repent so as not again to wrong thee; yea, he may also honour thee, and [fear 
7 and] be at peace with thee. And if he be shameless and persist in his wrong-doing, even so 
forgive him from the heart, and leave 'to God the avenging. 
71 Ifaman prospereth more than you, do not be vexed, but pray also for him’, that he may Ta 
2 perfect prosperity. For so it is expedient for you. And if he be further exalted, be not envious ‘of 
him', remembering that all flesh shall die; and offer praise to God, who giveth things good and 
3 profitable to all men. Seek out the judgements of the Lord, and thy mind will rest and be at peace. 
4 And though a man become rich by evil means, even as Esau, the brother of my father, be not jeal- 
5 ous; ‘but! wait for the end of the Lord. For if he taketh away (from a man) wealth gotten by evil 
6 means He forgiveth him if he repent, but the unrepentant is reserved for eternal punishment. For 
the poor man, if free from envy he pleaseth the Lord in all things, is blessed beyond all men, because 
7 he hath not the travail of vain men. Put away, therefore, jealousy from your souls, and love one 
another with uprightness of heart. 
81 Do ye also therefore tell these things to your children, that they honour }Judah and Levit, for from 
2 them shall the Lord raise up salvation to Israel. [For I know that at the last your children shall 
depart from Him, and shall walk in all wickedness, and affliction and corruption before the Lord.] - 
3 And when he had rested for a little while, he said again; My children, obey your father, and bury 
5 me near to my fathers. And he drew up his feet, and fell asleep in peace. And after five years 
they carried him up to Hebron, and laid him with his fathers. 


4 


. 


THE TESTAMENT OF ASHER, THE TENTH SON OF JACOB AND ZILPAH. 


1: The copy of the Testament of Asher, what things he spake to his sons in the hundred and 
2 twenty-fifth year of his life. ‘For’ while he was still in health, he said to them: Hearken, ye chil- 
dren of Asher, to your father, and I will declare to you all that is upright in the sight of the Lord. 


5. Cf. Prov. xxv. 8-10; Sir. xix. 8-0. 
addresseth abfg: ‘slayeth’deAS. 
6. reproving a: ‘bringing forth’ 8 (S'). 
repent... Ci, Biv: 
soasnot... wrong: ‘of having wronged’ a. 
yea ... at peace: ‘and he may [fear and] be at peace’ a. 
[fear and]. ‘fear’ = 15M a corrupt dittograph of 177° = ‘honour ’. 
7. leave to God the avenging. Cf. Rom. xii. 19. A is here defective. 
leave, lit. ‘ give’. 


VII. 1-7. High ethical teaching like vi. 3-7. We must banish envy, when a rival prospers. 
I. have perfect prosperity : ‘be perfected’ af. 
3. rest, emended : ‘shine’ a: ‘not (>bf) leave’ B-a. 
5. wealth A: ‘them’ other texts, corruptly. 
wealth gotten by evil means. Cf. Prov. xiii. 11 (Peshitto, Targum, and LXX). 
is reserved a(A): ‘he reserveth’ bdef gS}. 
for eternal punishment dA: ‘for ever the punishment’ abefg, which requires ‘for the unrepentant 
as in bdefgS}. 
6. the poor man if free a: ‘ the man who is poor and free’ B-a AS}, 
pleaseth a: ‘giveth thanks to’ B-a AS. 
blessed = WN: texts have ‘rich? = "WY. Cf. Pirge Aboth iv. 3. 
travail of vain men, a: ‘evil travail of men’ BAS". Cf. Eccles. i. LS 1VeeOevenlss 
7. jealousy: ‘hatred’ text. 
uprightness. See T. Iss. iii. 1 (note). 


VIII. 1. tJudah and Levit. Read ‘Levi and Judah’. See T. R. vi. 5-12 (note); T. D. v. 10; T. B. xi. 2. 
Lord raise up salvation (+ ‘unto you’ hi) higA: ‘Lord the Saviour arise unto you’ adef: ‘Lord raise 
up a Saviour’ bS: ‘Lord, salvation, arise unto us’ c. 
2. First century B.C. addition. 
Iknow. Cf. T. Iss. vi. 1; T. A. vii. 2. 
at the last >a. 
before: ‘from’ a. 

4. drew up his feet a8: ‘kissed his sons’ A. 

5. five years. If Gad lived 125 years (i. 1), and was born 2131 A.M. (Jub. xxviii. 20), he died in 2256, and was 
buried 2261 a.M. But Benjamin was buried in the gist year after Israel went down into Egypt (T. B. xii. 3) in 2172 
A.M. (Jub. xlv. 1), i.e. in 2263, which is also the date of the war between Egypt and Canaan (Jub. xlvi.g; T. S. viii. ae 
T. B. xii. 3). Is b then right, in T. G. i. 1, in reading 127 years? 


TITLE a: + ‘concerning the two faces of vice (‘duplicity’ A) and virtue’ bdefAS* 
I. 2. upright, a play in Hebrew on 1 and WR. 


342 


a TEOtAMENT OF ASHER 1. 1—2. 8 


3 Two ways hath God given to the sons of men, and two inclinations, "and two kinds of action, and 
4 two modes (of action)’, and ‘two! issues. Therefore all things are by twos, one over against the 
5 other. ‘For! there are two ways of good and evil, and }with these are the two inclinations in our 
6 breasts discriminating them}. Therefore if the soul take pleasure in the good (inclination), all its 
7 actions are in righteousness ; and if it sin it straightway repenteth. For, having its thoughts set 
upon righteousness, and casting away wickedness, it straightway overthroweth the evil, and uprooteth 
8 the sin. But if it incline to the evil inclination, all its actions are in wickedness, and it driveth 
away the good, and cleaveth to the evil, and is ruled by Beliar; even though it work what is good, 
9 he perverteth it to evil. For whenever it beginneth to do good, he forceth the issue of the action 
into evil for him, seeing that the treasure of the inclination is filled with an evil spirit. 
tA person then may with words help the good for the sake of the evil, yet the issue of the action 
2 leadeth to mischief. There is a man who showeth no compassion upon him who serveth his turn in 
3 evil; and this thing hath two aspects, but the whole is evil. And there is a man that loveth him 
that worketh evil, because he would prefer ‘even! to die in evil for his sake ; and concerning this it 
is clear that it hath two aspects, but the whole is an evil work. 


a BS 
4 Though indeed he have love, yet is he wicked Though indeed there is love, yet it is wicked 4 
who concealeth what is evil for the sake of the | as it concealeth what is evil; now this thing 


good name}, but the end of the action tendeth | seemeth good in name, but the end of the action 
unto evil. : tendeth unto evil. 


5 Another stealeth, doeth unjustly, plundereth, defraudeth, and withal pitieth the poor: this ‘too’ 
6 hath a twofold aspect, but the whole is evil. He who defraudeth his neighbour provoketh God, and 
sweareth falsely against the Most High, and yet pitieth the poor: the Lord who commandeth the 
7 law he setteth at nought and provoketh, and yet he refresheth the poor. He ‘defileth the soul, and" 
maketh gay the body; he killeth many, and pitieth a few: this, too, hath a twofold aspect, but the 
8 whole is evil. Another committeth adultery and fornication, and abstaineth from meats, and when 
he fasteth he doeth evil, and by the power of his wealth overwhelmeth many ; and notwithstanding 


3. Two ways. Earliest occurrence of this phrase in Jewish literature. Cf. Jer. xxi. 8 and 2 En. xxx. 15 (my note). 
two inclinations. The oldest reference to the good yeser. See my Commentary zz J/oc., also my ed. 
2 Bar. 92-93. For theevil yeser cf. Hebrew Sir. xv. 14, Sir. xxi. 11, xxvii. 5-6. The good impulse is free from Beliar’s 
power (T. B. vi. 1), admits no evil desire (T. R. iv. 9), receives no glory from men (T. B. vi. 4). God knows 
(T. N. ii. 5) and tries it (T. Jos. ii. 6), rewards according to it (T. Jud. xiii. 8). The yeser is blinded by fornication 
(T. Jud. xviii. 3), and the evil yeser blinds the mind (T. Jud. xi. 1). 
4. all things are by twos. Cf. v.13 Sir. xxxvi. 15, xlii. 24; Eccles. vil. 14. 
5. twith these are ... discriminating themt, perhaps a Hebraism for ‘and these . . . discriminate.’ 
6. The right of choice belongs to the soul, as to the ‘spirit of the understanding of the mind’ in T. Jud. xx. 1. 
in the good 8AS': ‘to walk in goodness’ a. 
all its actions are: ‘it does all its actions’ a. 
7. The modes of the good yeser’s action. b 
8. if it incline to the evil inclination: ‘if the inclination incline to evil’ text. But the subject here should be 
‘the soul’ as in v. 6. So ‘its’ (actions) = atrijs, not avrov. 
cleaveth to ch: ‘receiveth’ BAS!. ’ , 
ruled by Beliar. The evil tendency is identified with Satan in Baba Bathra 16°, and is a strange god, Shab- 
bath 105%. 
g. to do: ‘as though to do’ BAS? 
into evil for him a: ‘ into evil doing’ B-bAS'. 
treasure of the inclination, a play on words, i.e. T8* WIN. Cf. Matt. xii. 35 ‘evilman.. . evil treasure’, 
is filled with: ‘is born from’ g. Wet ; iu: 
an evil spirit: ‘the poison of the evil spirit ?B-dg: ‘evil poison of the wickedness of the spirit’ A. 


II. 1. help. So I emend for various corrupt readings, e.g. apirtéaa, a. 

the issue . . . leadeth, or ‘it (the soul) leadeth the issue’. 
2. him... evil: ‘those who serve his turn’ a. c ; : as, 
3. worketh evil: +‘which thing is wickedness’ a: + “since he also (‘likewise he’ beg) is in wickedness’ 

bdefgAS'. 

for his sake >a A. 
4. A has ‘ Though they love, yet are they evil’, &c. 

concealeth : read ‘loveth’, unless a sentence has been lost before 4. 
6. the law >a. 
7. but the whole is evil c B-b A: >hb. : 
8. adultery ... abstaineth from meats. Contrast T. Jos. 1x. 2. 
_ and fornication > hi. : : ; 

the power of his wealth: ‘his power and his wealth’ bdg A. 

notwithstanding : texts read ‘after’. 

343 


delle TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE! PATRIOik 


his excessive wickedness he doeth ‘the! commandments: this, too, hath a twofold aspect, but the 
9 whole is evil. Such men are hares; clean,—like those that divide the hoof, but in very deed are 
TOunclean. For God in the tables of the commandments hath thus declared. 
31 But do not ye, my children, wear two faces like unto them, of goodness and of wickedness ; but 
2 cleave unto goodness only, for God hath his habitation therein, and men desire it. But from wicked- 
ness flee away, destroying the (evil) inclination by your good works ; for they that are double-faced 
serve not God, but their own lusts, so that they may please Beliar and men like unto themselves. 
1 For good men, even they that are of single face, though they be thought by them that are double- 
2 faced to sin, are just before God. For many in killing the wicked do two works, of good and evil ; 
3 but the whole is good, because he hath uprooted and destroyed that which is evil. _ One man hateth 
the merciful and unjust man, and the man who committeth adultery and fasteth : this, too, hath a two- 
fold aspect, but the ‘whole' work is good, because he followeth the Lord’s example, in that he 
4 accepteth not the seeming good as the genuine good. Another desireth not to see a good day with 
them that riot, lest he defile his body and pollute his soul : this, too, is double-faced, but the whole is 
5 good. For such men are like to stags and to hinds, because in the manner of wild animals they seem 
to be unclean, but they are altogether clean ; because ‘they walk! in zeal for the Lord and abstain 
from what God also hateth and forbiddeth by His commandments, warding off the evil from the 
good. 
Bi” Ye see, my children, how that there are two ‘in all things', one against the other, and the one is 
hidden by the other: ‘in wealth (is hidden) covetousness, in conviviality drunkenness, in laughter 
2 grief, in wedlock profligacy'. Death succeedeth to life, "dishonour to glory', night to day, and 
darkness to light ; [and all things are under the day, just things under life, ‘unjust things under 
3 death';| wherefore also eternal life tawaiteth death. Nor may it be said that truth is a lie, nor 
4 right wrong ; for all truth is under the light, ‘even as all things are under God!. All these things, 
therefore, I proved in my life, and I wandered not from the truth of the Lord, and I searched out 
the commandments of the Most High, walking according to all my strength with singleness of face 
unto that which is good. 
6: Take heed, therefore, ye also, my children, to the commandments of the Lord, following the truth 
2 with singleness of face. For they that are double-faced are guilty of a twofold sin ; ‘for they both 
do the evil thing and they have pleasure in them that do it}, following the example of the spirits of 
3 deceit, and striving against mankind. Do ye, ‘therefore, my children,' keep the law of the Lord, and 
give not heed unto evil as unto good ; but look unto the thing that is really good, and keep it in all 


9. areharesaS'. Cf. Lev. xi.6; Deut. xiv. 7. ‘are like swine’ bd gA(+‘hares’ bdg). 
clean like those that divide the hoof. Texts read ér €€ jpuocias xaOapoi. Here ére €€ jyureias = DIDDY 5 
corrupt for D‘DTHD2. Cf. Ber. rab. xxii. 13. Cf. Perles, who, however, wrongly rejects xaapoi. 
1o. tables of the commandments: ‘ heavenly tablets’ 8A S!. Cf. T. L. v. Ay TAs vil § (8A :S)). 


III. 1. God: ‘Lord God’ a. 

2. destroying . . . by your good works. Master the evil tendency by obedience to the law. Cf. Sir. xxi. 11. 
the (evil) inclination. See notes on i. 3-9, and cf. T. Jud. xi. 1. ‘the devil? 8 AS. See Sir. xxi. 27. 
serve not God, but: ‘are not Gods, but serve’ a. 


IVemGmSCeuins \. Se 
this, too, hath a twofold aspect: ‘he also is double-faced’ ad g. 
accepteth : ‘ expecteth’ a. 
as the genuine good, emended from ‘ with the genuine good’ (‘ evil’ 8) aA», 
4. Asceticism is bad in itself. 
a good day. Cf. Esther viii. 17: ‘good days’ c: Pss. xxxiv. 12 (LXX), 
5. Seems corrupt. 
Lord a: ‘God’ BAS}, 
what God . . . commandments h B-g S!: ‘what God hateth’ c: ‘what God also ordereth them through His 
commandments to hate’ A. 
warding ef: ‘and they ward’ bd S!: ‘and to ward’? A: ca omit this and the following words : hg defective. 


V. 1. See i. 4 (note). 
in wealth . . . covetousness > a. 
profligacy a: ‘intemperance’ aeS!: >f, 
2. Brackets indicate intrusions. 
eternal life. Cf. Dan. xii. 1; 1 En. xxxvii. Ax eO SOLE: 
tawaiteth, we expect ‘followeth on’. 
4. with singleness . . . good >a. 


VI. 2. are guilty of a twofold sin: ‘are chastened doubly’ text. Cf. 1 En. v. 9. 
for they both do... it > bg A. Rom.i. 22. Cf. T. A. ii. SHA oy 
following .. . striving: ‘evil spirits hate ye which (‘because they’ d) strive’ bd gaA. 
of deceit and striving a: ‘of evil which strive’ a ef S1. 


344 


Pe PhS AMEN T OF ASHER 2. 9—8. 2 


4 commandments of the Lord, having your conversation therein, and resting therein. For the latter 
ends of men do show their righteousness (or unrighteousness), when they meet the angels of the 

5 Lord and of Satan. For when the soul departs troubled, it is tormented by the evil spirit which 
also it served in lusts and evil works. 


a (oy Role 
6 But if he is peaceful with joy he meeteth the But if peacefully ‘with joy', he hath met the 6 


angel of peace, and he leadeth him into eternal | angel of peace, he }comforteth him with life. 
life. 


71 Become not, my children, as Sodom, which sinned against the angels of the Lord, and perished for 
2 ever. For I know that ye shall sin, and be delivered into the hands of your enemies ; ‘and! your 
land shall be made desolate, and your holy places destroyed, and ye shall be scattered unto the four 
3 corners of the earth. And ye shall be set at nought in the dispersion vanishing away as water. Until 
the Most High shall visit the earth, coming Himself |as man, with men eating and drinking], and break- 
ing the head of the dragon in the water. He shall save Israel and all the Gentiles |God speaking in 
4 the person of man]. [Therefore do ye also, my children’, tell these things to your children, that they 
5 disobey Him not. For I have known that ye shall assuredly be disobedient, and assuredly act 
ungodly, not giving heed to the law of God, but to the commandments of men, being corrupted 
6 through wickedness. And therefore shall ye be scattered as Gad and Dan my brethren, and ye shall 
z know not your lands, tribe, and tongue. But the Lord will gather you together in faith through His 
tender mercy, ‘and! for the sake of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.]’ 
81 And when he had said these things unto them, he commanded them, saying: Bury me in Hebron. 
2 And he fell asleep and died at a good old age. And his sons did as he had commanded them, and 
they carried him up to Hebron, and buried him with his fathers. 


4-6. A man’s latter end reveals his true character. The idea that good or evil angels meet the soul at death as it 
leaves the body occurs here first in Jewish literature. Cf. Kethuboth, 104%, and see my Comm. 168, 169. 
4. when they meet = 17)": text corrupt. ‘and are known to’ = WO a (cf. T. A. vii. 1): ‘and they know’ = 1) 
Ie, (Gite She 
the angels: ‘the law’ A. 
Satan: ‘ Beliar’ a. 
5. troubled BA S!: ‘evil’ a. ’ 
6. with joy > AS. Possibly a corruption for ‘departs’, or else read with following words. 
meeteth: ‘shall know’ a: ‘knew’ BAS. 
angel of peace. Cf. T. D. vi. 5. 
leadeth a. Cf. T. B. vi. 1. A 
+comforteth 8 A, corrupt for ‘leadeth’. Cf. 1 Sam. xxii. 4; isa. Ivii. 18. 


VII. i. sinned against. The LXX uses dyvoeiv to translate DUN, YW, Taw. (Perles.) : 
2. For like predictions see T. S. v. 3 ff.; T. L. x, xiv-xvi; T. Jud. xxii; T. Iss. vi. 1, 2; AVA SOS TIDE, OE 
ieaGevintj2- ; 
delivered ... enemies. Cf. T. Iss. vi. 2; T. Z. ix. 6. 
holy places destroyed. Cf. T. L. x. 3, &c. 
scattered: T. A. vil.6; T.L. x. 4, &c. ; 
vanishing away as water. Text is ds vdwp dxpnotov = D’DND3 ODD corrupt for D'DD3 OMS. Cf. T. Z. ix. 2. 
So Perles. i 
3. A Theophany followed by the destruction of the primeval foe, the dragon. Cf. Ps. Ixxiv. 13. 
breaking c: ‘in peace breaking’ hB AS’. 
in gAcfs: ‘through’ a : ) . t 
all the Gentiles. oor es universalism cf. T. B. ix. 2 (note); Jer. iv. 2, &c.; Isa. il. 2-4, &C.3) Ps, tie sie 
Ixv. 2. 
4-7. First century B.C. addition. Cf. T. G. viii. 2. : 
5. known: ‘read’ bd gA+‘in the heavenly tablets’ BAS’. Cf. il. Io. 
disobedient c + ‘unto him’ hifAS’. 
ungodly + ‘towards him’ BAS* — ; q 
being .. . wickedness >ab: ‘being carried away by sheer wickedness’ deg. 
6. as Gad and Dan. See T.G. viii. 2; T. D.v. 8, vil. 3. 
and ye a: ‘who’ B. 
7. the Lord B-e A S': ‘He’ ae. 
through + ‘the hope of’ BAS'. 


Pedic d old age: ‘good sleep’ text. See T. Z. x. 6 (note). 
ae Hebron si BAS, At end aA chor the tenth son of Jacob, the second son of Zilpah, and he lived 126 


years’ £S! (g). 


345 


Be 8 3 TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


THE TESTAMENT OF JOSEPH, THE ELEVENTH SON OF JACOB AND RACHEL. 


1: The copy of the Testament of Joseph. When he was about to die he called his sons and his 
brethren together, and said to them :— 
2. My brethren and my children, 
Hearken to Joseph the beloved of Israel ; 
Give ear, my sons, unto your father. 
3 T have seen in my life envy and death, 
Yet I went not astray, "but persevered! in the truth of the Lord. 
4 These my brethren hated me, but the Lord loved me: 
They wished to slay me, but the God of my fathers guarded me: 
They let me down into a pit, and the Most High brought me up again. 
I was sold into slavery, and the Lord of all made me free: 
I was taken into captivity, and His strong hand succoured me. 
I was beset with hunger, and the Lord Himself nourished me. 
6 Twas alone, and God comforted me: 
I was sick, and the Lord visited me: 
I was in prison, and my God showed favour unto me ; 
In bonds, and He released me ; 
7 Slandered, and He pleaded my cause ; 
Bitterly spoken against by the Egyptians, and He delivered me; 
Envied by my fellow-slaves, and He exalted me. 
2 1,2 And this chief captain of Pharaoh entrusted to me his house. And I struggled against a shame- 
less woman, urging me to transgress with her; but the God of Israel my father delivered me from 
3 the burning flame. I was cast into prison, I was beaten, "lI was mocked’; but the Lord granted me 
to find mercy in the sight of the keeper of the prison. 
4 For the Lord doth not forsake them that fear Him, 
Neither in darkness, nor in bonds, nor in tribulations, nor in necessities. 
5 For God is not put to shame as a man, 
Nor as the son of man is he afraid, 
Nor as one that is earth-born is He [weak or] affrighted. 


a BAS! 
6 But inall those things doth He give protection, But in all places He is at hand, 6 


oO 


And in divers ways doth He comfort, 
(Though) for a little space He departeth to try the inclination of the soul. 


TITLE a: + ‘concerning sobriety’ befS!: + ¢ concerning envy’ APhefg, 

I—X. 4. In this Testament there appear to be two independent writings, i—x. 4 and x. 5—xviii. Yet in historical 
sequence x. §—xvi should be read after i. In i—x. 4 the theme is chastity ; in x. 5——xviii it is brotherly love. In 
i—x. 4 Potiphar is called ‘the Egyptian man’ (iv. 5), but Pentephri(s) in x. 5—xviii (e.g. xii, 1; xiii. 1; xv. 6). In 
i—x. 4 his wife is called the Egyptian woman (and B-d wrongly in xvi. 1), while in x. 5—xviii she is known as the 
Memphian woman (so, too, the conflate reading in iii. 6). We find also recurring phrases like “Joseph the son of 
a mighty man’ (x. 6) and ‘I held my peace lest I should put to shame’ (x. 6, &c.) in the later section. Joseph also 
transgresses the Testament’s rule of truthfulness in it. 

I. 2. my sons .. . father: ‘the words of my mouth’ a. 

3. but persevered >be A. 

5. into slavery aA: ‘to bea slave’ BS. 

captivity, hunger. Cf. Matt. xxv. 35, 36 for this and the next verse. The resemblance to our Lord’s words is 
very striking. 

6. and God ... prison >ch. 

Lord aef: ‘Most High’ bdgS: ‘God’ A. 

my God A>*cdfg: ‘Tord’ S!: ‘the Saviour’ aps’ 

In bonds and He released me >d. Without it Stanzas 4-7 are symmetrical. Yoma 35» says Joseph used the 
words to Potiphar’s wife. ; 

7. by the Egyptians : ‘for (my) dreams’ a. 

Envied ... slaves: ‘a slave’a: >Acdefg, 


Il. 1. this chief captain of Pharaoh: ‘the eunuch of Pharaoh’ B-b: ‘so Petaphres’ (‘ iphar’ Abcdf 
2. Israel my father befg: ‘ my father’ h Ab* cdfg: «my father Jacob’ ad: ‘ Bt eee eet e ®) a 
3- gtanted me... mercy, &c. Cf. Dan. i. 9. 
4. doth ad A: ‘will’ B-dS. 
s. Cf. Num. xxiii. 19; 1 Sam. xv. 29. 
[weak or]. An addition. 
affrighted a: ‘rejected’ 8 AS}, corruptly. 
6. doth He give protection, mpoicrara, a: ‘He is at hand ’, mapiorara, 8 S!; is’ A, 
departeth a: ‘departing’ 8 A. Isa. liv. ae i 


346 


Pete STAMENT* OF JOSEPH 1. 1-—5, 2 


, In ten temptations He showed me approved, 
And in all of them I endured ; 
For endurance is a mighty charm, 
And patience giveth many good things. 
31 How often did the Egyptian woman threaten me with death! How often did she give me over 
to punishment, and then call me back and threaten me, and when I was unwilling to company with 
2 her, she said to me: Thou shalt be lord of me, and all that is in my house, if thou wilt give thyself 
3 unto me, and thou shalt be as our master. But I remembered the words of my father, and going 
4 into my chamber, I ‘wept and! prayed unto the Lord. And I fasted in those seven years, and I appeared 
to the Egyptians as one living delicately, for they that fast for God’s sake receive beauty of face. 
5 And if my lord were away from home, I drank no wine; nor for three days did I take my food, but 
6 I gave it to the poor and sick. And I sought the Lord early, and I wept for the Egyptian woman of 


Memphis, for very unceasingly did she trouble me, for also at night she came to me under pretence 
of visiting me. 


a BAS 
7 And because she had no male child she pre- And because she had no male child she pre- 
tended to regard me as a son. tended to regard me as a son, and so I prayed to 


the Lord, and she bare a male child. 


8 And for a time she embraced me as a son, and I knew it not; }but later, she sought to draw me 

g into fornication. And when I perceived it I sorrowed unto death; and when she had gone out, 

I came to myself, and lamented for her many days, because I recognized her guile and her deceit. 

ro And I declared unto her the words of the Most High, if haply she would turn from her evil lust. 

4, Often, therefore, did she flatter me with words as a holy man, and guilefully in her talk praise my 

2 Chastity before her husband, while desiring to ensnare me when we were alone. ‘For’ she lauded me 

_ openly as chaste, and in secret she said unto me: Fear not my husband; for he is persuaded con- 

3 cerning thy chastity: for even should one tell him concerning us, he would not believe. Owing to 

all these things I lay upon the ground, and besought God that the Lord would deliver me from her 

4 deceit. And when she had prevailed nothing ‘thereby’, she came ‘again' to me under the plea of 

5 instruction, that she might learn the word of God. And she said unto me: If thou willest that 

I should leave my idols, lie with me, and I will persuade my husband to depart from his idols, and 

6 we will walk in the law of thy Lord. And I said unto her: The Lord willeth not that those who 

reverence Him should be in uncleanness, nor doth He take pleasure in them that commit adultery, 

7 "but in those that approach Him with a pure heart and undefiled lips’. But she held her peace, 

8 longing to accomplish her evil desire. And I gave myself yet more to fasting and prayer, that the 
Lord might deliver me from her. 

1 ‘And? again, at another time she said unto me: If thou wilt not commit adultery, I will kill my 

2 husband by poison; and take thee to be my husband. I therefore, when I heard this, rent my 


7. ten BA: ‘eleven’ a. See Jub. xvii. 17; xix. 8. 
patience: ‘to those who endure’ A. 


Ill. 1. and when ... her, she a: ‘when. ., her! And she’ B-a A?S'. 
2. in my house a: ‘mine’8AS!. 
3. father c (+ ‘Jacob’ dgA). Cf. Jub. xxxix. 6: ‘fathers’ haefS': ‘fathers of my father Jacob’ b. 
4. seven: ‘ten’ in Jub. xlvi. 3. 

Egyptians c: ‘ Egyptian’ rest of MSS. 

fast ... beauty of face. Dan.i. 15. 
5. Cf. Luke xii. 45. Cf. for Joseph, Zeb. 118°. 

lord a(A?): >BS'. 
6. Egyptian woman of Memphis, conflate text. 
7, and so... child 8 AS’, disturbs the context. 
8. knew it not. Cf. xiv. 4. 

+but later a: ‘that’ a: ‘finally’ beS!: ‘later’ f: ‘and after this’ A. 
g. came to myself. Cf. Luke xv. 17. 


IV. 1. Often therefore a: ‘ how often’ B-a AS? 
3. ground + ‘in sackcloth (+ ‘and ashes’ A) BAS', 
her deceit a: ‘the Egyptian woman’ B-a AS’. 
4. God a: ‘the Lord’ BAS? ; 
5. my husband a A: ‘the Egyptian’ 8S! (+ ‘Potiphar’ Se 
in the law of 8 AS!: ‘before’ c: ‘in the name of’ h. 
6. but in those a only. 
7. held her peace bg A: ‘ was angry’ a B-bg. 
V. 1. my husband a: ‘the Egyptian’ 8 AS}. Cloiv. Se.) vie 
by poison and a: ‘and so lawfully’ 8 A S}, by corruption in Hebrew. 


347 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


garments, and said unto her: Woman, reverence God, and do not this evil deed, lest thou be 
3 destroyed ; for know indeed that I will declare this thy device unto all men. She therefore, being 
4 afraid, besought that I would not declare this device. And she departed soothing me with gifts, and 
sending to me every delight of the sons of men. . 


6 1.2 . And ‘afterwards! she sent me food mingled with enchantments. And when the eunuch who 


brought it came, I looked up and beheld a terrible man giving me with the see a sword, and 
3 I perceived that (her) scheme was to beguile me. And ‘when he had gone out! I wept, nor did 
4 I taste that or any other of her food. So then after one day she came to me and observed the food, 
5 and said unto me: Why is it that thou hast not eaten of the food? And I said unto her: It is 
because thou hast filled it with ‘deadly! enchantments ; and how saidst thou: I come not near to 
6 idols, but to the Lord ‘alone’. Now therefore know that the God of my father hath revealed unto 
me by His angel thy wickedness, and I have kept it to convict thee, if haply thou mayst see 
and repent. 
a Bass 
7 But that thou mayst learn that the wickedness But that thou mayst learn that the wickedness 7 
of the ungodly hath no power over them that | of the ungodly hath no power over them that 
worship God with chastity, behold I will take of | worship God in chastity, I took of it and ate 
it and eat before thee. And having so said, I | before her, saying: The God of my fathers and 
prayed thus: The God of my fathers and the | the angel of Abraham shall be with me. 
angel of Abraham, be with me; and ate. 





8 And ‘when she saw this! she fell upon her face at my feet, weeping; and I raised her up and 
admonished her. And she promised to do this iniquity no more. 


a BAS? 
7 But her heart was still set upon evil, and she But (d A ‘nevertheless’) her heart was still set 
looked around how to ensnare me, and sighing | upon me with a view to lewdness, and sighing 


deeply she became downcast, though she was | she became downcast. 
not sick. 


2 “And when her husband saw her, he said unto her: Why is thy countenance fallen? And 
she said ‘unto him’: I havea pain at my heart, and the groanings of my spirit oppress me; and so 
3 he comforted her who was not sick. Then, accordingly seizing an opportunity, she rushed unto me 
while her husband was yet without, and said unto me: I will hang myself, or cast myself over a cliff, 
4 if thou wilt not lie with me. And when I saw the spirit of Beliar was troubling her, I prayed unto 
5 the Lord, and said unto her: Why, ‘wretched woman’, art thou troubled and disturbed, blinded 
through sins? Remember that if thou kill thyself, Asteho, the concubine of thy husband, thy rival, 
6 will beat thy children, and thou wilt destroy thy memorial from off the earth. And she said unto 
me: Lo, then thou lovest me; let this suffice me: only strive for my life ‘and my children’, and 
7 I expect that I shall enjoy my desire ‘also’. But she knew not that because of my lord I spake 


= 


2. unto her >$-dA S'. 
God af: ‘the Lord’ B-fAS}. 


know . . . device a: ‘I will declare thy ungodly device’ 8 A S, i.e. 99 ‘wicked’ for Y3 ‘know’. 
3. this device a: ‘ to any one her wickedness’ B-g AS. 
4. sending . . . men 8-d AS!: ‘every delight’ a. 
VI. 2. (her) scheme . . . beguile me a: ‘this (‘ her? b) scheme . . . beguile (+‘the soul’ b)? B-d A@Ph SI: «it 


was a scheme of Satan and to beguile (my) soul ’ d. 
5. deadly enchantments a: ‘death’ 8A S}, 
6. His angel aA: ‘an angel’ B-dg. 
7. angel of Abraham. Is this Michael or the angel of peace? 


VII. 1. deeply, cvvréues, a, corrupt for cuvréves. 
became downcast, ouvémmre, cf. T. Z.x. 1: +*in countenance’ d (cf. v. 2): + ‘in spirit’ A. 
set upon me .. . lewdness bdgA: ‘set upon lewdness’ aef S$! (cf. a). 

2. her husband a A~>f 8; ‘the Egyptian man’ 6 AP fg S}, 
who was not sick : ‘in words’ a, corruptly. 


ACERS - Opportunity a: ‘then’ 8-dS?: ‘one day’ d: ‘and when I was passing ’ A®®: ‘and on the second 


over a cliffaaefS*: ‘into a well’ A» (+°or over a cliff? b (d)g Ab* ca), 
5. Asteho a: ‘Asitho’ ef A>*€: *Setho’ b. 
thou wilt a 8-b g S!: ‘she will’ bg (A). 


f eee this suffice me: only strive for a: ‘this (> B-d S*) alone (> A) suffices me that (> af ) thou strivest for’ 


andIa: >f-adgS!: ‘if I’ a: ‘I therefore’ dgA. 
7. my lord: ‘God’ b dS’, against context. 


348 


Phe SeAMENT. OF JOSEPH: 5. 210, 2 


8 oat and ee because of her. For if a man hath fallen before the passion of a wicked desire and 
ecome enslaved by it, even as she, whatever good thing he may hear with regard to that : 

he receiveth it with a view to his wicked desire. oer Oe ee 

1 I declare, therefore, unto you, my children, that it was about the sixth hour when she departed 

from me ; and T knelt before the Lord all day, and all the night ; and about dawn I rose up, weeping 


2 the while and praying for a release from her. At last, then, she laid hold of my garments, forcibly 
dragging me to have connexion with her. 


aA BS 
3 When, ‘therefore’, I saw that in her madness When, therefore, I saw that in her madness 
she was holding fast to my garment, I left it | she was holding fast by force to my garment, 
behind, and fled away naked. I fled away naked. | 
a. B-d AS! 


4 And holding fast to the garment she falsely And she falsely accused me to her husband, 4 
accused me, and when her husband came he cast | and the Egyptian cast me into prison in his 
me into prison in his house; and on the morrow | house, and on the morrow he scourged me and 
he scourged me and sent me into Pharaoh’s | sent me into Pharaoh’s prison. 
prison. 

a B-d AS! 

5 And when I was in bonds, the Egyptian And when I was in fetters, the Egyptian was 5 
woman was oppressed with grief, and she came | sick with grief, and she heard how I sang praises 
and heard how I gave thanks unto the Lord and | unto the Lord in the house of darkness, and with 
sang praises in the abode of darkness, and with | glad voice rejoicing, glorified God only that I was 
glad voice rejoiced, glorifying my God that I was | delivered from the lustful desire of the Egyptian 
delivered from the lustful desire of the Egyptian | woman. 
woman. 


9: And often hath she sent unto me saying: Consent to ‘fulfil my desire’, and I will release thee 
2 from thy bonds, ‘and I will free thee from the darkness. And not even in thought did I incline unto 
her. For God loveth him who in a dén of wickedness combines fasting with chastity, rather than 
3 the man who in kings’ chambers combines luxury with licence. And if a man liveth in chastity, 
and desireth also glory, and the Most High knoweth that it is expedient for him, He bestoweth this 
4 also upon me. How often’, though she were sick, did she come down ‘to me! at unlooked for times, 
5 and listened to my voice as I prayed! And when I heard her groanings I held my peace. ‘For! 
when I was in her house she was wont to bare her arms, and breasts, and legs, ‘that I might lie with 
her; for she was! very beautiful, "splendidly adorned!’ in order to beguile me. And the Lord guarded 

me from her devices. 
101,2 Ye see, therefore, my children, how great things patience worketh, and prayer with fasting. So 


8. that passion a: ‘the passion by which (> ‘by which’ A) he is vanquished’ B-a g A S'. 
to his aA: ‘to the’ BS. 


VIII. 1. and all a: ‘together with all’ 8 A S?. 
her a: ‘the Egyptian woman’ B-dA S?. 
2-4. Cf. Gen. xxxix. 12-14, 16. 
3. garment, xirova, a: ipdria, B. 
left it behind + ‘and shook it off? a: > A'S. 
by force B-aefgS. 
5. was sick, jo0éver, B-d A S*: ‘was oppressed’, TuvELXETO, a. wit r 
from the lustful desire = m}1NnD. So I emend ‘through a pretext’ = FINNS aS: ‘from the pretexts’ A. For 
a like corruption cf. Prov. xviii. 1. 
IX. A omits much in ix. : 


2. fasting with chastity. Contrast T. A. 11. 8. 
fasting B-afS?: ‘believing’ af: ‘faithfulness’ a. 


the man... chambers 8-bd S?: ‘the king (‘ man’ b) who in chambers’ bcd. 
~2> d. 
: and if a man (‘but he’ cbS') .. . chastity aef(g): >h. 


and ®° > a: ‘and if’ b. 

5. and breasts > a. i 
lie with = cupréow. See T. Jud. xiii. 3 (note). 
adorned. Cf. Yoma 35”. 


X. A new section begins. ee 
I. prayer with fasting. Cf. ill. 4, iv. 8. 
349 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE VAA tikka 


ye too, 'if ye follow after chastity and purity with patience and prayer, with fasting in humility of 
3 heart, the Lord will dwell among you, because He loveth chastity. And wheresoever the Most High 
dwelleth, even though envy, or slavery, or slander befalleth (a man), the Lord who dwelleth in him, 
for the sake of his chastity not only’ delivereth him from evil, "but also exalteth him even as me. 
4, 5 For in every way the man! is lifted up, whether in deed, or in word, or in thought. My brethren knew 
how my father loved me, and yet I did not exalt myself ‘in my mind': although I was a child, 
6 ‘I had the fear of God in my heart'; for I knew that all things would pass away. And I did not 
raise myself (against them) with evil intent, but I honoured my brethren; and out of respect for 
them, even when I was being sold, I refrained from telling the Ishmaelites that I was a son of Jacob, 
a great man and a mighty. 

1 Do ye also, my children, "have the fear of God in all your works before your eyes, and’? honour 
2 your brethren. For every one who doeth the law of the Lord shall be loved by Him. And when 
I came to the Indocolpitae with the Ishmaelites, they asked me, saying: Art thou a slave? And 
3 I said that I was a home-born slave, that I might not put my brethren to shame. And the eldest 
of them said unto me: Thou art not a slave, for even thy appearance doth make it manifest. But 
4 I said that I was ‘their’ slave. Now when we came into Egypt they strove concerning me, which of 
5 them should buy me and take me. Therefore it seemed good to all that I should remain in Egypt 
6 with the merchant of their trade, until they should return bringing merchandise. And the Lord 
7 gave me favour in the eyes of the merchant, and he entrusted unto me his house. And God blessed 
8 him by my means, and increased him in gold and silver "and in household servants'!. And I was 

with him three months and five days. 
12: And about that time the Memphian woman, the wife of Pentephri, came down ‘in a chariot’, "with 
2 great pomp, because she had heard from her eunuchs concerning me’. And she told her husband 
that the merchant had become rich by means of a young Hebrew, and they say that he had assuredly 
3 been stolen out of the land of Canaan. Now, therefore, render justice unto him, and take away the 
youth to thy house; so shall the God of the Hebrews bless thee, for grace from heaven is upon him. 
131° And Pentephris was persuaded by her words, and commanded the merchant to be brought, and 
said unto him: What is this that I hear ‘concerning thee’, that thou stealest persons out of the land 
2 of Canaan, and sellest them for slaves? But the merchant fell at his feet, and besought him, saying: 
3 I beseech thee, my lord, I know not what thou sayest. And Pentephris said unto him: Whence, then, 


2. prayer with fasting > 8 S). 

3. envy .. . befalleth (a man) a: ‘a man fall into envy . .. slander or darkness’ 8S". For ver. cf. i. 7. 

4. Text = 8-b g St: with cuveraipera (d) for ouvépxerat, aef: cvvéxerat, b gS: (mdvras yap dvOparous) cuvépxerat, a. 
But d transposes v. 4 after ‘mind’ in v. 5. 

5. Thad ... heart >A. Cf. xi. 1. 

6. I did not . . . intent c (? ‘not’): ‘I measured myself? 8AS?. Perhaps read ‘I did not exalt myself’ = wv, 5. 
If the ‘not’ is omitted we may conjecture the original Hebrew word was ‘MDD as in Ps. cxxxi. 2 ‘I kept myself 
quiet’, which LXX reads as ‘N17. 

event Aro. 

telling +‘my race’ BAS} 

Jacob >cA@b*cdg, 

michty 8 AUS s Gust a. Cf 31), Prov. xvii. 7 = Sikavos LXX, 


XI. 1. before your eyes > hb. 
2. came .. . Ishmaelites B-d S': ‘was coming with the Ish.’ a: ‘came with them to the Indocolpitae’ A. 


_Saying ...slavea: +‘or a freeman’ A: > BS}, Jashar (ii. 1187) says his brethren sold Joseph as being 
their slave. 


a home-born aaf: ‘their home-born’ bdeA Sl}. 
I might not put... shame. Cf. x. 6, &c. 
3. manifest + ‘concerning thee. And he threatened me unto death,’ BAS} 
4. which of them, &c. a 8 S}. 
6. gave me favour. Gen. xxxix. 21. 
7- God aaf: ‘the Lord’ B-afA S}, 
and in household servants: ‘and in work’ a: > BAS. épyor is a mistranslation of 772y, 
five days >a. ee 


XII. 1. came down a: ‘passed’ 8 A S}, 
in a chariot > bg A S1. 
with ... me: ‘she looked and saw me’ A. 
she . . . eunuchs a: ‘her eunuchs had told her’ Biss 
2. that the merchant a: ‘concerning the merchant that he’ 8 A S}. 
3. to thy house aefS!: ‘to our house’ a: ‘to be thy steward ’ bd g (A). 


XIII. 1. to be brought bdgS!: ‘to come’ aaef: ‘to bring ’ AP. 
OP. jetihe Oly & at his feet ag: ‘therefore (‘ and? A)... on his face’ B-d g AS}. 
3. And... hima: ‘but he said’ (>‘said’aef) BAS4 


50° 


14 


15 


4 


16 


THE TESTAMENT OF JOSEPH 10. 2—16, 3 


is the Hebrew slave? And he said: The Ishmaelites entrusted him unto me until they should return. 
4 But he believed him not, but commanded him to be stripped and beaten. And when he persisted 
5 in this statement, Pentephris said: Let the youth be brought. And when I was brought in. I did 
6 obeisance to Pentephris (for he was third in rank of the officers of Pharaoh). And he took me apart 
7 from him, and said unto me: Art thou a slave or free? And I said: A slave. And he said: 
8 Whose? And I said: The Ishmaelites’. And he said: How didst thou become their slave? And 
9I said: They bought me out of the land of Canaan. And he said unto me: ‘Truly! thou liest ; and 
‘straightway' he commanded me to be stripped and beaten. 
1 Now the Memphian woman was looking through a window ‘at me while I was being beaten, for 
her house was near, and she sent unto him saying': Thy judgement is unjust; for thou dost punish 
2a 'free' man who hath been stolen, as though he were a transgressor. And when I made no change 
in my statement, ‘though I was beaten’, he ordered me to be imprisoned, until, he said, the owners 
3 of the boy should come. And the woman said unto her husband: Wherefore dost thou detain the 
4 captive and well-born lad in bonds, who ought rather to be set at liberty, and be waited upon? For 
5 she wished to see me out of a desire ‘of sin, but I was ignorant concerning all these things. And 
he said to her: It is not the custom of the Egyptians to take that which belongeth to others before 
6 proof is given. This, therefore, he said concerning the merchant; but as for the lad, he must be 
imprisoned. 
Now after four and twenty days came the Ishmaelites; for they had heard that Jacob “my father! 
2 was mourning ‘much! concerning me. And they cameand said unto me: How is it that thou saidst 
that thou wast a slave ? and lo, we have learnt that thou art the son of a mighty man in the land of 
3 Canaan, and thy father ‘still’ mourneth for thee in sackcloth "and ashes’. ‘When I heard this my 
bowels were dissolved and my heart melted’, and I desired greatly to weep, but I restrained myself, 
that I should not put my brethren to shame. ‘And I said unto them, I know not, I am a slave’. 
5 Then, ‘therefore’, they took counsel to sell me, that I should not be found in their hands. For they 
feared my father, lest he [should come and] execute upon them a grievous vengeance. For they had 
6 heard that he was mighty with God and with men. Then said the merchant unto them: Release 
7 me from the judgement of Pentiphri. And they came and requested me, saying: ‘Say! that thou 
wast bought by us with money, and he will set us free. 
I Now the Memphian woman said to her husband: Buy the youth ; for I hear, said she, that they 
are selling him. 


I 


Cc Bebsst 
2 And straightway she sent a eunuch to the And she sent a eunuch to the Ishmaelites and 2 
3 Ishmaelites, and asked them to sell me. But | asked them tosell me. The chief captain, there- 


is a: ‘hast thou’ 6-fAS'. 
4. be brought abdg: ‘answer’ aefS', 2 
s. Pentephris a: ‘the chief of the eunuchs’ 8S’: ‘him’ A. ipetl é 
third ... Pharaoha. Cf. Dan.v. 7. ‘his rank was second to P.’ A: ‘third in rank with P., (as) officer of all 
the eunuchs, having wives and concubines and chiidren’ 8. : 
6. And I said >a to ‘and I said’ in v. 8. 
g. Truly a only. 
straightway ag. 


XIV. 1. at me >bef. 
for... near >BAS'. 
him a: ‘her husband’ 6 S?. 
Thiy-+* the’ B—b As >* o4¢ts. ; 
thou dost punish ... as... transgressor: ‘to punish unjustly’ a, corruptly. 
2. me: ‘us’ defg. ; 
owners of the boy: ‘his (‘my’ dA»‘8) owners’ dg A. 
3. her husband a: ‘him’ BAS’. 
~ in bonds > 6 AS’. : ; 
be waited upon a: ‘wait upon thee’ BAS'. 


4. Cf. iii. 8. : ; HS 
5. her c: ‘the Memphite woman’ f-ad IAD 
XV. 1. for... heard a: ‘and having heard’ BA S!: + ‘when they were in the land of Canaan’ d A. 


3. When . . . melted a only. 
5. my father a: ‘Jacob’ BA Sr: 

grievous = Ee ee 

: ‘the Lord’ B- fo ae 
he a fe ES aan us: ee he set us’ bd g: ‘and the merchant set’ (+ ‘us A®bh) A, 
XVI. 1. said... youth a: ‘instructed (‘sent to’ A) her husband to buy me’ 8-dAS?: h omits from ‘buy’ to 
the end of the Testament of Benjamin. 
2. The chief... sell me >cbdsg. ea 
5 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


c 
since the eunuch would not agree to buy me (at 
their price) he returned, having made trial of 
them, and he made known to his mistress that 
they asked a large price for their slave. 





4 
spare ‘the gold'; only buy the boy, and bring him 
c 


The eunuch therefore went and gave them 
eighty pieces of gold, and} he received me} ; 
but to the Egyptian woman he said: I have 
given a hundred. 


5 


6 
17 
2 shame. 
3 faults! 
4 pleasure in love. 


5 money unto them, and upbraided them not, and comforted them. 


father I loved them ‘more abundantly', and all 


BAS 
fore, called the Ishmaelites and asked them to 
sell me. ‘And since he did not agree (to their 3 
price) he departed’. But the eunuch, ‘when he 
had made trial of them', made known to his 
mistress.that they asked a large price "for their 
slave!. 


"And she sent another eunuch!, saying: Even though they demand two minas, ‘give them’, do not 


to me. 
B-d AS! 
And he gave them eighty pieces of gold for 5 


me, and told the Egyptian woman that a 
hundred pieces had been given. 


And though I knew (this) I held my peace, lest the eunuch should be put to shame. 

Ye see, therefore, my children, what great things I endured that I should not put my brethren to 
Do ye also, ‘therefore’, love one another, ‘and with long-suffering hide ye one another’s 
For God delighteth ‘in the unity of brethren, and’ in the purpose of a heart that takes 
And when my brethren came into Egypt they learnt that I had returned their 


And after the death of Jacob my 
things whatsoever he commanded I did ‘very 


6 abundantly! for them. And I suffered them not to be afflicted in the smallest matter; and all that 
7 was in my hand I gave unto them. ‘And’ their children were my children, and my children as their 
servants ; and their life was my life, and all their suffering was my suffering, ‘and all their sickness 


8 was my infirmity’. My land was their land, and 


myself among them ‘in arrogance’ because of my ‘worldly’ glory, 


the least!. 


18: 


their counsel my counsel. And I exalted not 
‘but I was among them as one of 


If ye also, therefore, walk in the commandments of the Lord, my children, He will exalt you there, 


2 and will bless you with good things for ever and ever. ‘And if any one seeketh to do evil unto you, 


3 do well unto him, and pray for him, and ye shall be redeemed of the Lord from all evill. 
behold, ye see that ‘out of my humility and long-suffering? I took 
And a hundred talents of gold were given me with her, and the Lord made 

And He gave me also beauty as a flower beyond the beautiful ones of Israel ; 


priest of Heliopolis. 
4 them to serve me. 


and He preserved me ‘unto old age in strength and" in beauty, 


Jacob. 


3. since he .. . But the eunuch . . 
4. minas c + ‘of gold’ BAS}, 
give them cad: ‘take care’ befg. 
to mec: >BAS} 
5. treceived met, corrupt for ‘ for me’. 
6. put to shame c: ‘be tortured’ aefAS'. 
XVII. 3. a heart 8A S!: ‘a good heart’ c. 
love 6-a: ‘the good’ caAbb* cdg, 
4. Egypt + ‘when’ BAS} 
5. my father > 8-dg AP fg, 


. made known be gS': ‘since the eunuch... 


[For], 
unto wife the daughter of the 


because I was like in all things to 


and made known’ af. 


Read perhaps ‘ brotherliness’. 


he (‘they’ A) commanded 8-ad AS; ‘they wished’ ca, 


7, their... = my 6S’ < “my... their? cA. 
My... land >caef. 
their... mycdg: ‘my... their’ befS}. 

8. Twas... least. Cf. Luke xxii. 27. 

XVIII, 1. A has ‘walk ye also, therefore, in the same 
Shaddai’ A>* ¢4¢f8) will glorify you and exalt you for ever.’ 
He . . . bless you: ‘God (>a f) will exalt you’ caf. 
Cf. T. G. vi-vii; Ahikar. 
Ay a. 
my humility andc: >,S'. 
priest of Heliopolis c. Cf. Jub. xl. 10 (note). 
talents. Cf. Jashar (ii. 1211). 

4. A has ‘And (+ ‘Asenath my wife’ 


2. 
a 
ey) 


A>) was beautiful 


path, my children (+ ‘with me’ A>) and God (‘Israel 


Syr. Frag. I. 20 ‘if thy enemy meet thee with evil, meet thou him with good’. 


“of my masters '(8-a A S!), 


as a flower, and (+ ‘I was’ A?) beautiful beyond (‘all’ 


A”) the chosen ones of Israel (+ ‘and temperate and humble’ A>), beyond Levi and Judah and Naphtalj 
preserved me in beauty (‘I was more beautiful than they’ A>) because I aa like Tecate i dun ea ner ee 


as a flower >c. 
like .. 


- to Jacob. See Gen. rabba Ixxxiv. 6 ; Num. r. xiv. 16, 


35% 


THE TESTAMENT OF JOSEPH 16. 3—19. 10 


ees! A 
19: And hear ye, my children, also the vision Hear ye, therefore, the vision which I saw. 1 
2 which I saw. There were twelve harts feeding: | I saw twelve harts feeding. And nine of them 2 
and the nine were (first) dispersed over all the | were dispersed. Now the three were preserved 
earth, and likewise also the three. but on the following day they also were dis- 


persed. And I saw that the three harts became 3 
three lambs, and they cried to the Lord, and He 
brought them forth into a flourishing and well- 
watered place, yea He brought them out of 
darkness into light. 

And there they cried unto the Lord until 4 
there gathered together unto them the nine harts, 
and they became as twelve sheep, and after a 
little time they increased and became many 
flocks. And after these things I saw and behold, 5 
twelve bulls were sucking one cow, which pro- 
duced a sea of milk, and there drank thereof the 
twelve flocks and innumerable herds. 

And the horns of the {fourth bull went up 6 
unto heaven and became as a wall for the flocks, 
and in the midst of the ‘two! horns there grew 
another horn. And I saw a bull calf which 7 
surrounded them twelve times, and it became a 
help to the bulls wholly. 

8 And I saw that [from Judah was born] a And I saw in the midst of the horns a {virgin 8 
Tvirgin [wearing a linen garment, and from her] | [wearing a many-coloured garment, and from 
was born a lamb, [without spot]; and on his | her] went forth a lamb; and on his right (was 
left hand there was as it were a lion; and all the | as it were a lion; and) all the beasts and all the 
beasts rushed against him, and the lamb over- | reptiles rushed (against him), and the lamb over- 
came them, and destroyed them and trod them | came them and destroyed them. And the bulls 9 

g under foot. And because of him the angels and | rejoiced because of him, and the cow [and the 

ro men rejoiced, and all the land. And these things | harts| exulted together with them. And these ro 
shall come to pass in their season, in the last | things must come to pass in their season. And 11 


XIX. Here the Armenian version comes to our aid. It alone has 3-7, and 8 and 11 in it are fairly pure. 
I. saw B: ‘know’ c. Ue 
2-4. A vision concerning the nine tribes and the three, their captivity and return. The nine are regarded as back 
in Palestine. ; 
2. harts. See note in Commentary, p. 191. Used of the princes of Judah, Lam. i. 6. 
feeding + ‘in a place’ c. 
all >bS'. 
were preserved A®>* cdfg: ‘fed with each other’ A>. 
3. three harts. Cf. ‘three sheep’, 1 En. Ixxxix, 72. For their change into lambs, cf. 1 En. xc. 38, where the 
sheep become oxen. 
and He: ‘andthe Lord’ A-P}, : 3 : 
out of darkness into light. Cf. Ps. cvii.14; Isa. ix. 2, xlii. 16, lvili. 10. Cf. 1 Pet. ii. 9, Io. i 
4. the nine. Cf. ‘nine tribes’, Ethiopic version, 4 Ezra xiii. 40. For nine and a half tribes cf. 2 Bar. Ixii. 5 (note). 
5-9. This second vision introduces the person of the Messiah. The date is the second century B. C.,as the Twelve 
Tribes are regarded as in Palestine. So ‘in the midst of the horns’ implies that the Messiah is to arise from the 
Maccabees (cf. v. 11 Levi and Judah). Judah was to help—the lion on the left hand in v. 8. 
6. tfourth, i.e. tribe = Judah. Is this a Christian alteration of ‘ third’ = Levi? 
Se ao Perhaps Mattathi 
other horn. Perhaps Mattathias. 
gions the bull-calf the ie as the lamb of v. 8? If so, Judas would be both; if not, the lamb is Hyrcanus. 
7, abuil... times: ‘twelve oxen which surrounded them’ A>*4, For ‘surrounded’ read perhaps ‘ protected ’. 
(. CE Dan. xi. 345 “little help.’ onl 
8 see Judah was borne A Christian addition. A omits it, and a definite name is here out of place. A 
‘virgin’ also clashes with the animal symbolism. So read ‘And I saw that in the midst of the horns a bull-calf 
became a lamb’. For ‘ wearing’ cf. Rev. xii. 1. 
a lion = Judah. : 
ts, i.e. the Gentiles. Cf. 1 En. xc. 12, 16. 
9 Be etc intetprets ‘cow’ aright as = Palestine ; but the “bulls ’ are the tribes, not ‘angels and men’. 
; the Greek texts. They have no place in this vision. 
gto Spee Ab*edg:; ‘the descendants of the three harts’ A#»: ‘two of the three harts’ A®. 


1105-2 353 Aa 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


CBS 

11 days. Do ye therefore, my children, observe 
the commandments of the Lord, and honour 
Levi and Judah ; for from them shall arise "unto 
you' [the Lamb of God, who taketh away the 
sin of the world] one who saveth [all the Gentiles 
and | Israel. 

12 For His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, 
which shall not pass away; but my kingdom 
among you shall come to an end as a watcher’s 
hammock, which after the summer disappeareth. 


20: 


Tel 


do ye, my children, honour Levi and Judah, for 
from them shall arise the salvation of Israel. 


For my kingdom which is among you shall 12 
come to an end as a watcher’s hammock, which 
will not appear after the summer. 


'For' I know that after my death the Egyptians will afflict you, but God will avenge you, and will 
2 bring you into that which He promised to your fathers. 


But ye shall carry up my bones with you; 


‘for when my bones are being taken up thither, the Lord shall be with you in light, and Beliar shall 


be in darkness with the Egyptians’. 
Com b*edg 


3 And carry ye up Asenath your mother ‘to the 
Hippodrome’, and near Rachel your mother 
bury her. 


4,5 


(e: 


6 And when the children of Israel went out of 


Egypt, they took with them the bones of Joseph, 
and they buried him in Hebron with his fathers, 
and the years of his life were one hundred and 
ten years. 


And when he had said these things he stretched out his feet, and died at a good old age. 
all Israel mourned for him, and all Egypt, with a great mourning. 


pS? 
And carry ye up Zilpah your mother, and 3 


nigh to Bilhah by the Hippodrome lay her near 


Rachel. 
And 


BS? 
For he felt even for the Egyptians as though 6 
a member (of their nation), and showed them 
kindness, aiding them in every work, and counsel, 


and matter. 


THE TESTAMENT OF BENJAMIN, THE TWELFTH SON OF JACOB AND RACHEL. 


1: The copy of the words of Benj 
2 a hundred and twenty-five years. 


5 conceived and bare me!. 
6 sons born from her". 


amin, which he commanded his sons to observe, after he had lived 


And he kissed them, and said: As Isaac was born to Abraham 
3 in his old age, so also was I to Jacob. And since Rachel m 


4no milk ; therefore I was suckled by Bilhah her handmaid. 
years ‘after she had borne Joseph’; and she prayed the Lord © 


y mother died in giving me birth, I had 
For Rachel remained barren for twelve 
with fasting twelve days, and she 


For ‘my father! loved Rachel dearly, ‘and prayed that he might see two 
Therefore was I called Benjamin, that is, a son of days. 


11. Leviand JudahcA. See T, R. vi. 5-12 (note). ‘Judah and Levi’ ES 


from them @ A S!: ‘from their seed’ c. 

unto you BS?: ‘untous’c: >A, 

[the Lamb, &c.] Christian additions. 

who taketh ... world c: ‘by grace’ 8S. 
12. Dan. vii. 14. 

pass away c 6-ab: ‘be shaken’ ab S}, 

watcher’s hammock. Isa. i, 8, xxiv. 20. 


XX. 2. Cf. Gen. 1. 25; Exod. xiii, 19. 


3. Asenath your mother cd: ‘ Zilpah your mother’ bef Ab*cdgs):- « 
Cf. LXX in Gen. xviii. 7 (? = Ephrath), 


[to the Hippodrome] > A. 
XXXV. 16 ff., xlvili. 7. 

nigh to Bilhah 6S}, 

4. good old age. 

6. as though . . 

of Rachel lived one hundred and ten years’ f S}, 


TITLE c: + concerning a pure mind’ 


I. 1. words: ‘Testament’ dA. 


2. old agecd: ‘hundredth year’ B-dA. Cf. Gen. xxi. Zea 


birth. See, however, Jub. xix. 13, 
3- my mother > B-d Aab¥edg si 
4. twelve years: ‘eleven’ in Jub. xxviii. 24, xxxii. 33. 

twelve days >c. 
6. Benjamin, a son of days. 

aright hand’. Cf. Gen. xxxv, 17; 


your brother’ A@>h; ‘brothers’ Aa, 
Rachel was buried near Ephrath, Gen. 


Jub. xxxiv. 16 says she was buried near Rachel, 
So I emend ‘good sleep ’c (cf. T. Z. x. 6): ‘eternal slee 
- nation aef: ‘as for his own members’ b (25 


p'8S':-cf. Jer. lig9: Tlss. viiloe >A. 
, ; 9 
+ “Joseph the eleventh son of Jacob and first son 


B-agS!: +*to love one’s neighbour’ g, 


Jashar (ii. 1172) gives the same date for Benjamin’s 


For the prayer and fasting cf. Num. rabba xiv. 8, 


Cf. Gen. xliv. 20 ‘a son of old age’; Philo, De Mut. Nom. 15. 
18. Jashar explains Benjamin as =‘ son of the south’ (iis 1172). 


354 


A reads ‘son of 


21 


Peel AMEN T OF BENJAMIN ft. 1—8. 6 


And when I went into Egypt, to +Joseph, and my brother recognized me, he saidt unto me: 


2 What did they tell my father when they sold me? i i 
y sold me? And I said ‘unto him’, They da 
with blood and sent it, and said: Know whether this be thy son’s coat. ference 


c po 
3 And he said unto me: Even 3. And he said unto me: Even 
so, brother, when they had | so, brother; for when the Ish- 
stripped me of my coat they | maelites took me, one of them 
gave me to the Ishmaelites, and | stripped off my coat, and gave 
they gave me a loin cloth, and | me a loin cloth, and scourged 
scourged me, and bade me run. | me,andbademerun. 4. And as 
4 And as for one of them that had | he went away to hide my gar- 
beaten me with a rod, alion met | ment, a lion met him, and slew 
5 him and slew him. And so his | him. 5. And so his associates 
associates were affrighted. were affrighted, and sold me to 

their companions. 


| 
Do ye also, therefore, my children, 
commandments’, following the example of the good and holy man 


eps 


3 1 


A 

And Joseph said unto me: 3 
Even so, brother, the Canaanite 
merchants stole me by force. 
And it came to pass that as 4 
they went on their way they 
concealed my garment, as 
though a wild beast had met 
me and slain me. And so his 5 
associates sold me to the Ish- 
maelites. And they did not lie 6 
in saying this. For he wished 
to conceal from me the deeds 
of my brethren. And he called 
to him his brethren and said: 
Do not tell my father what ye 7 
have done unto me, but tell him 
as I have told Benjamin. And 8 
let the thoughts among you be 
such, and let not these things 
come to the heart of my father. 


love the Lord God of heaven and earth, and keep His 
Joseph. 


A 


2 And let your mind be unto good, even as ye 
know me; for he that hath his mind right seeth 
3 all things rightly. Fear ye the Lord, and love 
your neighbour ; and even though the spirits of 
Beliar claim you to afflict you with every evil, 
yet shall they not have dominion over you, even 
4as they had not over Joseph my brother. How 
many men wished to slay him, and God shielded 
him! For he that feareth God and loveth his 
neighbour cannot be smitten by the spirit of 
. 5 Beliar, being shielded by the fear of God. Nor 
can he be ruled over by the device of men or 
beasts, for he is helped by the Lord through the 
love which he hath towards his neighbour. 


For until his death he was not willing to tell 2-5 
regarding himself; but Jacob, having learnt 
it from the Lord, told it to him. Nevertheless 
he kept denying it. And then with difficulty he 
was persuaded by the adjurations of Israel. 


6 For Joseph also besought our father that he would pray for his brethren’, that ‘the Lord’ would 


II. 1-2. Jashar (ii, 1222) makes Benjamin the first to recognize Joseph. 


1. to tJoseph and c: ‘and Joseph’ @-dAS, 
emend here to ‘ and I recognized Joseph’. 
2. Cf. Gen. xxxvii. 31-2; T. Z. iv. 9. 


If x. 1 belongs to this context, we might read it before il. 1, and 


3-5. The text of c alone agrees with the context, but T. Z. iv. ro makes his brothers give him the loin-cloth. 8 S* 


and A differ from the context and the biblical account. 


5. to their companions £ S*: ‘to the Ishmaelites’ A. Cf. Jashar (ii. 1187-90). 


8. And let +‘ not’ A”. 


Ill. 1. and earth cd: > 8-dS. 
holy ef S?: ‘true’ A. " 

3. spirits of Beliar claim. Cf. Luke xxii. 31. 
claim 6 S!: ‘dement’ c. 


to afflict with every evil: text = ‘ unto every evil of affliction ’. 


they not c: ‘no evil of tribulation’ 6 S?. 
4. spirit c +‘ of the air’ B Sia Chiepheit. 2. 
5. by the Lord . 
6. Joseph > bA®b* eds st, 

father +‘ Jacob’ bS’. 

his brethren c: ‘his sons’ 8-b: ‘ our brethren ’ b. 


. . love g(cf. c): ‘by the love’ (+‘ of the Lord’ 8-d gS?) B-g S’. 


355 Aa 2 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


7 not impute to them as sin ‘whatever evil they had done unto him'. 


And thus Jacob cried out: My 


good child, thou hast prevailed over the bowels of thy father Jacob. And he embraced him, and 


kissed him for two hours, saying: 
ef Sie 

8  Inthee shall be fulfilled the prophecy of heaven 
[concerning the Lamb of God, and Saviour of the 
world], and that a blameless one shall be 
delivered up for lawless men,and a sinlessone shall 
die for ungodly men [in the blood of the cove- 
nant, for the salvation of the Gentiles and of Israel, 
and shall destroy Beliar and his servants]. 


4 





See ye, therefore, my children, the end of the good man ? 


va 


In thee shall be fulfilled the prophecy of 8 
heaven, which says that the blameless one shall 
be defiled for lawless men, the sinless one shall 
die for ungodly men. 


Be followers of his ‘compassion, there- 


2 fore, with a good mind’, that ‘ye also' may wear crowns of glory. For the good man hath not 


3 a Tdark eye ; for he showeth mercy to all men, even though they be sinners. 


‘And though they 


devise with evil intent concerning him, by doing good he overcometh evil, being shielded by God'; 


4 and he loveth the righteous as his own soul. 


If any one is glorified, he envieth him not ; if any one 


is enriched, he is not jealous; if any one is valiant, he praiseth him; the virtuous man he laudeth; 
‘on the poor man he hath mercy ; on the weak he hath compassion; unto God he singeth praises". 


cA 


5 And him that hath the grace of a good spirit 
he loveth as his own soul. 


51 





B-aS! 

As for him who hath the fear of God, he pro- 5 
tecteth him as with a shield; him that loveth 
God he helpeth ; him that rejecteth the Most 
High he admonisheth and turneth back; and 
him that hath the grace of a good spirit he loveth 
as his own soul. 


If, ‘therefore, ye also' have a ‘good mind’, then will both wicked men be at peace with you, and 


the profligate will reverence you ‘and turn unto good; and the covetous will not only cease from 
2 their inordinate desire, but even give the objects of their covetousness to them that are afflicted. If 
3 ye do well, even the unclean spirits will flee from you'; and the beasts will dread you. "For where 
there is reverence for good works and light in the mind, even darkness fleeth away from him.! 
4 ‘For! if any one does violence to a holy man, he repenteth; for "the holy man' is merciful to his 


reviler, and holdeth his peace. 
c 


5 And if any one betrayeth a righteous man, the 
righteous man prayeth : though for a little he be 
humbled, yet not long after he appeareth far 
more glorious, as was Joseph my brother. 

as sincgA: > 6-gS1. 
done unto c: ‘devised regarding’ BS'. 

7. And thus Jacob c8-d: ‘then Joseph’ A. 
child +‘Joseph’ bg A. 


B-aS} 

And if any one betrayeth a righteous soul, and 5 
the righteous man, though he prayeth, be hum- 
bled for a little, yet not long after he appeareth 
more glorious, even as was Joseph my brother. 


8. For vicarious suffering, cf. 2 Macc. vii. 38 in pre-Christian times. 


a sinless 8 S!': ‘the sinless’ cA. 

in the blood of the covenant. 
IV. i. end c8S: ‘mercy’ A. 

crowns of glory : earliest reference. 
2. hath not at dark eye. Cf. Matt. vi. 22, 23. 
3. devise with evil intent BS!: ‘wish not well’ c. 


Heb. xiii. 20. 


by doing good he ca def: ‘he that doeth good’ 8S}. 


Cf. Rev. ii. 10; Jas. i. 12; Asc. Is. vii. 22. 
But read perhaps ‘ hath a compassionate eye: 


cf. T. Iss. iv. 6. 


overcometh evil. Cf. Rom. xii. 21; T. Jos. xviii. 2; T. G. vi, vii. 


righteous 8 A S!: ‘ unrighteous’ c. 
4. laudeth A: ‘loveth’ c: 
singeth praises 8: ‘feareth’ c. 


‘trusteth and laudeth’ B-af. 


5. helpeth b: d efg read ‘runneth with’ corrupt for ‘ hath pleasure in’, cf. Ps. xlix. 18 (LXX). 


V. I. have... mind cfS!: ‘are good’ A. 
covetousness + ‘which they had’ c. 
2. CErl. Iss. vii. 7* T. Diy ae TaNevie 4. 
3. Teverence .. 
light’ g. 
4. holy: ‘true’ A. 
repenteth. Cf. T. G. vi. 6. 


. light c: ‘light of (‘reverence for’ b) good works’ abefS!: ‘light, a good work’ d: 


‘a pure 


5. A has ‘and if a man insult a righteous soul, he is sorry, because he hath seen him humiliated, and hath repented, 


356 


as was Joseph my brother’. 


PEO TESTAMENT OF BENJAMIN 38. 6—7. 4 


6: The inclination of the good man is not in the power of the deceit of the spirit of Beliar, for the 
2 angel of peace guideth his soul. ‘And’ he gazeth not © passionately! upon corruptible things nor 
3 gathereth together riches ‘through a desire of pleasure’. He delighteth not in pleasure ‘The crieveth 

not his neighbour], he sateth not himself with luxuries, he erreth not in the uplifting of the eyes" for 
4 the Lord is his portion. The good inclination receiveth not glory ‘nor dishonour! from men, and it 
knoweth not any guile, or lie, or fighting or reviling ; for the Lord dwelleth in him and lighteth up his 
5 soul, and he rejoiceth towards all men alway. The good mind hath not two tongues, of blessing and of 
cursing, of contumely and ‘of honour’, of sorrow and of joy, of quietness and of confusion, of hypocrisy 
and of truth, [of poverty and of wealth]; but it hath one ‘disposition’, uncorrupt and pure, concerning all 
6men. It hath no double sight, nor double hearing ; for in everything which he doeth, or speaketh, or 
7 seeth, he knoweth that the Lord looketh on his soul. And he cleanseth his mind that he may not 


be condemned by men as well as’ by God. And in like manner the works of Beliar are twofold, 
and there is no singleness in them. ¢ 


ceo" A 
71 Therefore, my children, I tell you, flee the Flee, my children, malice [and fornication]; ; 


malice of Beliar; for he giveth a sword to them | for it giveth a sword to them that obey it. 
that obey him. 


cbg B-b g S! Is. 

2 And the sword is the mother 2. And the sword is the mother And the sword is the mother 2 
of seven evils. First the mind | of seven evils. First the mind | of seven evils, and it receiveth 
conceiveth through Beliar,f and | conceiveth through Beliar: and | (them) through Beliar. And 
first there is bloodshed; second- | sometimes it brings forth first, | first there is bloodshed (&c. as 
ly ruin; thirdly, tribulation ; | bloodshed; secondly, ruin; third- | in c 8 S}). 
fourthly, exile; fifthly, dearth; | ly, tribulation; fourthly, capti- 
sixthly, panic; seventhly, de- | vity; fifthly, dearth; sixthly, 
struction. panic; seventhly, destruction. 





3 Therefore was Cain also delivered over to seven vengeances by God, for in every hundred years 
the Lord brought one plague upon him. 


Cc BA 
4 And when he was two hundred years old he When he was two hundred years old he began 4 
began to suffer, and in the nine-hundredth year ! to suffer, and in his nine-hundredth year he was 


VI. 1. inclination. See T. A. i. 3 (note). 
angel of peace. See T. D. vi. 5 (note); T. A. vi. 6. 
3. Perhaps A is right in the omissions. 
uplifting, &c. See T. Iss. vii. 2 (note). 
Lord is his portion. Cf. T. Lev. ii. 12. 
4. receiveth not glory ... from men. Cf. John v. 41. 
knoweth not >c. 
lighteth up his soul. Cf. T. G. v. 7. 
rejoiceth ... alway. Cf. Phil. iv. 4. 
tongues of blessing and of cursing. Cf. James iii. Io. 
of sorrow and of joy >c. 
[of poverty ... wealth] >A. 
7, he cleanseth ... God. Cf. 1 Cor. xi. 31, 32. 
in like manner. ‘and whoso doeth’ A. 
works + ‘of God and’ A. 
in them > #-a AS’. 

VII. 1-2. See my Commentary zz Joc., p. 206. Read either (1) ‘Flee the malice of Beliar; for the mind 
conceiveth through Beliar, and is the mother of seven evils ; and first,’ &c., or (2) ‘ Flee the malice of Beliar; for he 
giveth a sword to those who obey him. And the sword’ (&c. as A). : 

For the seven compare the eight plagues of Sir. xl. 9; and seven of Pirke Aboth, v. 11. 

1. giveth a sword to: ‘is a sword in the hands OlgeAe: 

him c: ‘it’ 8S*. ; : ; ie? 
2. the mind .. . Beliar c@-dg S!: ‘the mind conceiveth wickedness through the malice of Beliar’ d. 

sometimes afS!: ‘what... is’ de. 

bloodshed. Read dédvos for POdv0s. Cain’s first evil was murder. 

ruin ... We expect ‘panic’ here. See notes in Commentary, p. 207. 

destruction: text reads ‘ desolation *. 

3-4. Gen. iv. 15, 24 tells of a sevenfold vengeance on Cain’s slayer. Here the sevenfold penalty is transferred to 
Cain himself. Contrast Jub. iv. 1. 31, which puts his death in his 860th year. Is Lamech here regarded as Cain’s 
slayer? Cf. Book of Adam and Eve ii. 13; Jalkut 1. 38, &c. . 

4. two hundred years. Cain was thirty to thirty-five when he slew Abel, according to Jub. iv. 2. 


357 


ur 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


Cc BA 
he was destroyed. For on account of Abel, his | destroyed [at the F lood], on account of Abel, his 
brother, with all the evils was he judged, but | righteous brother. With the seven evils, there- 
Lamech with seventy times seven. fore, was Cain judged, but Lamech with seventy 
times ‘seven'. 
Because for ever those who are like Cain ‘in envy and hatred of brethren’, shall be punished ‘with 
the same judgement. 


5 





cfs} A 

8: And do ye, my children, flee evil-doing, envy, Do ye, therefore, my children, flee evil-doing t 
and hatred of brethren, and cleave to goodness | and cleave to goodness. For he that hath it 2 

2and love. He that hath a pure mind in love, | looketh not on a woman with a view to fornica- 
looketh not after a woman with a view to fornica- | tion, and he beholdeth no defilement ; for there 
tion; for he hath no defilement in his heart, | resteth upon him a holy spirit. 
because the Spirit of God resteth upon him. 

3 For ‘as! the sun is not defiled by shining on dung and mire, ‘but rather drieth up both and driveth 
away the evil smell’; so also the pure mind, though encompassed by the defilements of earth, 
rather cleanseth (them) and is not itself defiled. 

9: And I believe that there will be also evil-doings among you, from the words of Enoch the right- 
eous : that ye shall commit fornication with the fornication of Sodom, and shall perish, all save a few, 
and shall renew wanton deeds with women; and the kingdom of the Lord shall not be among you, 
for straightway He shall take it away. 

cps} re 
2 Nevertheless the temple of God shall be in But in your portion shall be His inheritance. 2 


your portion, and the last (temple) shall be more | And on account of the temple of the Lord, Jacob 
glorious than the first. And the twelve tribes | exalted me that I should be glorified through it. 
shall be gathered together there, and all the | And the twelve tribes shall be gathered there and 
Gentiles, until the Most High shall send forth | all the Gentiles. [And the Lord shall be treated 3 
His salvation in the visitation of an tonly- | with outrage and set at nought. And He will 5 
3 begotten prophet. [And He shall enter into the | depart from earth to heaven: for I knew how He 
[first] temple, and there shall the Lord be treated | is on earth and how in heaven, or what is His 
with outrage, and He shall be lifted up upon | measure and place and way.| 
4atree. And the veil of the temple shall be rent, 
and the Spirit of God shall pass on to the Gen- 


[at the Flood], impossible on any chronology ; even the Samaritan (1307 A. M.). 
With the seven evils adgA: ‘in the 700 years’ bef. Onkelos and Ps. Jon. on Gen. iv. 15 (contrast on 
v. 24) say he was punished for seven generations. See my Commentary, p- 208. 


VIII. 1-2. A seems more original, though shorter. 
2. Cf. Matt. v. 28. 

hath . . . in his heart c8S: ‘ beholdeth’ A, not so good. 
3. by shining on f: mpooéywy cB-fAS!. 

cleanseth: text corruptly reads ‘ buildeth up’. 


IX. 1. that . . . among you: ‘also doings’ c, defective. 

from .. . righteous c8-dS!: ‘for I have learnt from the book of the words,’ &c. d: ‘for I have heard from 
the words of our fathers’ A. 

shall renew wanton deeds: ‘ and again ye ( > A) shall be renewed unto... deeds’ (‘unto... deeds’ >c)c A. 

straightway He 8S': ‘the upright’ (ed6cis) A®>bh:; ‘an upright man’ Ab¥ed (i.e. David shall take the 
kingdom from Saul): >c. 

2. The text of c8S* is better. The second temple is more glorious (cf. Haggai ii. 9), and under John Hyrcanus the 

twelve tribes met there in worship. 

the temple . . . in your portion. See Onkelos and Ps. Jon. on Gen. xlix, 272 

all the Gentiles. The Maccabean triumphs lead to the hope of a general conversion of the Gentiles in the 
second roe pa ee = ie a See oe earn Pe ee. 210, 211. The Testaments are strongly tinged with 
universalism. od understands all men, T. N. ii. 5 (cf. Sir. xvii. 3). Th is gi i 
T. L. xiv. 4. Michael guards all the righteous, 185 1G, ale AB S?), 3 Wim cS Ce 

_.. Apart from Christian interpolations like T. Jos. xix. 11, the salvation of the Gentiles is taught in T. L. iv. 4 

Vili. 14, _ ane ine Rae reed be 25 van 33 TA. vil see Te Dim. 7 3 Tad. xxv Ly Be iee bie, 22) sie Gs ee 

an 7Tonly-begotten prophet 6—b: ‘His only begotten ee? ‘ : é 2 
P. LL. vali. 15, Gpelovea as ‘ uroptet of the Most aise pivemeammmmertis 08 LG Gass hy 

3-5. Christian additions. Cf. Luke xviii. 32; Mark ix. 12. 
4. veil of the temple, &c. Cf. Matt. xxvii. 51. 
pass on to c B-bd: ‘ascend’ b S!: ‘descend’ d. 


358 


THE TESTAMENT OF BENJAMIN 7. 4—10. 10 


cB S! Bes. 
5 tiles as fire poured forth. And He shall ascend 
from Hades and shall pass from earth into 
heaven. And I know how lowly He shall be 
upon earth, and how glorious in heaven. | 
10: Now when Joseph was in Egypt, I longed to see his figure ‘and the form of his countenance’; and 
through the prayers of Jacob my father I saw him, while awake in the daytime, even his entire 
figure exactly as he was. 


2 ‘And when he had said these things, he said unto them’: Know ye, therefore, my children, that 


I am dying. 
c Bano! 

3 Do ye, therefore, truth each one to his neigh- Do ye, therefore, truth and righteousness ‘each 3 
bour, and keep the law of the Lord and His | one to his neighbour’, and judgement unto con- 
commandments. firmation, and keep the law of the Lord and his 

commandments. 


4 _ For these things do I leave you instead of inheritance. Do ye also, ‘therefore’, give them to your 

5 children for an everlasting possession ; for so did both Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. For all these 
things they gave us for an inheritance, saying: Keep the commandments of God, until the Lord 

6 shall reveai His salvation to all Gentiles. ‘And! then shall yesee Enoch, Noah, and Shem,and Abra- 
ham, and Isaac, and Jacob, rising on the right hand in gladness. 


eps? ys 
7 Thenshall we also rise,each one over our tribe, Then shall we also rise, each over our own 7 
worshipping the King of heaven, [who appeared | tribe, and we shall worship the heavenly King. 
upon earth in the form of a man in humility. 
And as many as believe on Him on the earth 
8 shall rejoice with Him]. Then also all men shall Then shall we all be changed, some into glory 3 
rise, some unto glory and some unto shame. and some into shame ; for the Lord judges Israel 
And the Lord shall judge Israel first, for their first for the unrighteousness which they have 
unrighteousness ; [for when He appeared as God | committed. 
in the flesh to deliver them they believed Him : 
9 not]. And then shall He judge all the Gentiles, And then so (shall He judge) all the Gentiles. 9 
[as many as believed Him not when He appeared ; 
ro uponearth]. And He shall convict Israel through And He shall convict Israel through the 1o 
the chosen ones of the Gentiles, even as He | chosen Gentiles, as He convicted Esau through 
reproved Esau through the Midianites,; who the Midianites who loved their brethren. Be ye 
deceived their brethren, [so that they fell into | therefore, my children, in the portion of them 
fornication, and idolatry ; and they were alienated | that fear the Lord. 
from God], becoming therefore children in the 
portion of them that fear the Lord. 





5. Hadescbdg: ‘people’efS’. 
AndIknow ... heaven >cA>*e4de8, 

X.1. >c. Restore to beginning of ii. 1. oA ake oN 

3. and judgement unto confirmation >a A®bh; ‘and judgement unto faith in the Lord’ A?*e¢. 

4. leave c: ‘give’ A: ‘teach’ 8S?. 

5. Keep . . . of God: ‘So do ye’ A. 

to all Gentiles: ‘in all the earth’ A. j : : : a: 

6-7. The Testaments give a primitive view of the resurrection to this present earth (cf. 1 En. vi-xxxvi, Ixxxiii-xc), 
transformed gradually to sinlessness (T. L. xviii. 9), of the righteous. Note the order of resurrection. Cf. v. 8; cf. 
also T. Jud. xxv. 4; Dan.xii.1,2. The risen enter Eden, and eat of the tree of life, T. L. xvi. Io, 11, and dwell in the 
New Jerusalem, T. D. v. 12. 

6. Shem B-dS!: ‘Seth’ c. Cf. T.S. vi. 5. 

on the right hand BA S!; ‘on His right hand’ c. Cf. Matt. xxv. 33, 34. 
7. over our tribe eek ahr! ey 
i SF all be changed’ A. rhe : : 
% ee ee: Cf. Dan. xP 2. Contrast 1 En. Ixxxili-xc; 2 Macc. vi-vii where the righteous alone are to rise. 
their unrighteousness c: ‘the unrighteousness (done) unto Him’ 8-dS'. 
God in the flesh c + ‘a deliverer’ £. 5 
ro. Israel is judged by Gentile standards. c omits this verse. 
oe. tiles > A®>, ’ os 
a He ere ited 0 a . loved. A has the better text. The corruption and addition n @S' refers to Num. xxv. 
therefore aA: ‘not’ 8-a, corruptly. 


302 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE ‘TWELVE PATRIARCKIo 


rr If ye ‘therefore, my children’, walk in holiness ‘according to the commandments of the Lord’, ye 
shall again dwell securely with me, and all Israel shall be gathered unto the Lord. 
c BS A 


1] 1 And I shall no longer be r. And I shall no longer be And I shall no longer be 1 


called a ravening wolf on account 
of your ravages, but [a worker 
of the Lord distributing food to 
them that work what is good. 
2 And there shall arise in the 
latter days] one beloved of the 
Lord, [of the tribe of Judah 
and Levi], a doer of His good 
pleasure in his mouth, [with 





called a ravening wolf on account 
of your ravages, but [a worker 
of the Lord, distributing food 
to them that work what is good. 
2. And there shall rise up from 
my seed in the latter times] one 
beloved of the Lord, [hearing 
upon the earth His voice] and 
a doer of the good pleasure of 


called a tcaptain of robbers, and 
at wolf, on account of your 
ravages. But one beloved of 2 
the Lord, and a doer of the 
good pleasure of His mouth. 





new knowledge — enlightening 


His will, [enlightening with new 
the Gentiles]. 


knowledge all the Gentiles, even 
the light of knowledge, bursting 
in upon Israel for salvation and 
tearing away from them like a 
wolf, and giving to the syna- 
gogue of the Gentiles. 


B 


3. Until the consummation of the age shall he be in the synagogues of the Gentiles, and among their 
4 rulers, as a strain of music in the mouth of all. And he shall be inscribed in the holy books, both 
5 his work and his word, and he shall be a chosen one of God for ever. And through them he shall 
go to and fro as Jacob my father, saying: He shall fill up that which lacketh of thy tribe]. 
c BAS} 

12: And when he had said these things he stretched And when he finished his words, he said: ; 
2 out his feet. And died jin [a beautiful] and | I command you, my children, carry up my bones 
3 good sleep}. And his sons did as he had enjoined | out of Egypt, and bury me at Hebron, near my 

them, and they took up his body and buried it | fathers. So Benjamin died a hundred and 2 
4 in Hebron with his fathers. And the number (of | twenty-five years old, at a good old age, and they 
the days) of his life were a hundred and twenty- | placed him in a coffin. And in the ninety-first 3 
five years. year from the entrance of the children of Israel 
into Egypt, they and their brethren brought up 
the bones of their fathers secretly during the 
Canaanitish war; and they buried them in Hebron, 
by the feet of their fathers. And they returned 4 
from the land of Canaan and dwelt in Egypt until 
the day of their departure from the land of Egypt. 





11. according ... ofc: ‘before the face of’ 8S}. 
securely : ‘in hope’ text, wrongly as LXX in Ezek. xxviii. 26, &c. 
XI. A is original and refers only to Benjamin. c adds a prophecy of the Messiah descended from Judah and Levi. 
8S? transfers it to Paul. Cf. Tert. Adv. Marc. v. 1 (on Gen. xlix. 27). 
Tey Lie bOacAS 
a worker ... what is good >A. 
: a Eane food. Cf. LXX of Gen. xlix. 27, and ‘dabit escam’, Tertullian Z. c. 
the spoil’. 
2. one beloved of the Lord. Deut. xxxiii. 12, of Benjamin. 
For ‘the Beloved’ = Christ. See my ed. Asc. Isa. i. 4 (note). 
of His mouth: ‘in his mouth’ c: ‘ of His will’ 8 AS}. 
bursting in b eg(df): ‘shining’ a. 
5. through them . . . my father f: ‘because of him’, &c., e: ‘ because of him b father i Doe 
>ad: ‘because of this he puffed me up’ g. eae Jace? is iat ana eae 
fill up that which lacketh. A phrase of St. Paul. Cf. 2 Cor. xi. 9, &c. 
tribe bg: ‘belly’ def. 
XII. Here 8 AS! is the better text. 
2. at a good old age 8 AS!: ‘in a beautiful and good sleep’ c. See T. Z. x. 6. 
3. See T. G. viii. 5 (note). 5 i ‘ 
entrance ... into: The text absurdly reads ‘exodus . . . from’. 
Canaanitish war BAS‘. See T. S. viii. 2; T. G. viii. 5. 
4. £S* add at the close: ‘ Benjamin, the twelfth son of Jacob, the second son of Rachel, lived 125 years.’ 


360 


There the Mass. has ‘divide 
Here c twists it into a reference to the Messiah. 


Cf. Eph. i. 5. 


APPENDIX I 


TRANSLATION OF A LATE HEBREW TESTAMENT OF NAPHTALI, WHICH 
CONTAINS FRAGMENTS OF THE ORIGINAL TESTAMENT 


These fragments are in italics, and their parallels in the original Testament given in the margin. 


THIS IS THE TESTAMENT OF NAPHTALI, SON OF JACOB. 


Ts: fhe Testament of Naphtali, Naphtali the son of Jacob, “whom Bilhah, the handmaid of Rachel, 
had borne him * [the wrestlings of God].2 When Naphtali had grown old, and had come toa good T. Naph. 
old age, and had completed his years of strength, and fulfilled the duty of the earth-born man, he i. 6 
began to command his children, and he said unto them, ‘My children, come and draw near and 
2 receive the commands of your father.’ And they answered and said unto him, ‘Lo, we hearken to 
3 fulfil all that thou commandest us.’ And he said unto them, ‘I do not command you concerning T Jos 
my silver, nor concerning my gold, *nor all my substance* that 1 leave unto you here under the sun, xi. 6 _ 
nor do I command you any difficult thing which you may not be able to accomplish, but I speak to 
4 you about an easy matter, which you can fulfil.’ And his sons answered and replied a second time, 
5 and said, ‘Speak, O father, for we listen.’ He said unto them, ‘I give you no command save in 
6 regard to the fear of the Lord: Him shall ye serve, and to Him shall ye cleave.’ They said unto 
him, ‘ What need hath He of our service?’ He said unto them, ‘It is not that He hath need of 
any creature, but that all creatures of the world have need of Him. But He hath not created the 
world for nought, but that His creatures should fear Him, and that none should do to his neighbour 
7 what he doth not like for himself.’ They said unto him, ‘Our father! hast thou forsooth seen us 
8 departing from thy ways, or from the ways of our fathers, either to the right or to the left?’ He 
said unto them, ‘ The Lord and I are witnesses that it is even as ye say ; but I dread that which is T. Levi 
to come, lest ye go astray after the gods of strange nations, and walk according to the ordinances of xix. 3 
the peoples of the lands, and lest ye jocz the children of Joseph instead of the children of Levi and T. Naph. 
9 the children of Fudah. They said unto him, ‘ What dost thou see that thou commandest us in this vii. 2 
to wise?” He said unto them, “ Because I know that one day the children of Joseph will depart from 
the Lord, the God of their fathers, and cause the children of Israel to sin, and to be banished from 
the good land into another that is not ours, as we have been exiled through his being a bond- servant 
in Egypt. 
1,2 ‘Further, I will tell you che viston I saw, when I was pasturing the flock. I saw, and lo, my T, Naph. 
twelve brothers were pasturing with me in the field ; and lo, our father came and said to us,“ My v. 1-3 
3 children, ran and seize ye, each *before me,* what comes to his portion.” We answered and said unto 
4 him, “ What shall we seize ? lo, we see nothing but the sun, moon, and the stars.’ *He said unto 
them, “(Take hold) of them.”® When Levi heard it he seized a staff in his hand, and jumped upon 
5 the sum and sat and rode thereon. And when Judah saw it, he did likewise ; and he sezzed a staff, 
6 and sprang upon ¢he moon, and rode thereon. So did *all the ® tribes; each rode upon his star and 
7 his planet in the heavens ; and Joseph only remained alone upon the earth. Jacob our father said 
unto him, ‘‘ My son, why hast thou not done as thy brothers?” He said unto him, “ My father, 
what have they’ that are born of woman to do in the heavens, as in the end they must needs stand 
upon the earth?” 
31 ‘Whilst Joseph was speaking, /o, there stood near hima huge dull with great wings like the wings T, Naph. 
2 of a stork, and his horns were huge \ike the horns of the Reém. And Jacob said to him, “ Get up, v. 6 
3 my son Joseph, and ride upon him.” And Joseph got up and mounted upon the bull. And Jacob 
4 our father departed from us. For about four hours Joseph gloried in the bull—at times he walked 
and ran, at times Ze flew up with him, till he came near to Judah, and Joseph stretched out the v. 7 
5 standard he had in his hands and began to smite Judah his brother. Judah said to him, “My 


1 only in P. 2 A gloss from Gen. xxx. 8. $ J; also in A in a corrupt form. 
+ Hor, 1955 read with T. Naph. v. 2, cara Sdvapey, ND >. The n> could fall out before the following INN >. 
i balla eave 6 A. ‘the nine’ PJ. Pi oheigeA. 


361 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


6 brother, why dost thou smite me?” He said unto him, “ Because thou holdest in thy hands twelve 
7 staves, and I have only one ; *give me ten,' and there shall be peace.” But Judah refused to give 
them to him, and Joseph beat him till he had taken from him ten against his will, and only two were 
8 left with Judah. Joseph then said to his ten brothers, ‘‘ Wherefore run ye after Judah and Levi? 
9 Depart from them and follow after me.” When his brothers heard Joseph’s words, they departed 
from Levi and Judah as one man, to follow Joseph, and there remained with Judah only Benjamin 
10, rr and Levi. When Levi beheld this, he descended from the sun full of trouble of spirit. Joseph said 
12 to Benjamin his brother, ‘‘ Benjamin, my brother! Art thou not my brother? Come thou also with 
me.” But Benjamin refused to go with Joseph his brother. And it came to pass when the day 
drew to an end, lo, there arose a mighty storm, which separated Joseph from his brothers, so that 
13 no two were left together. When I beheld this vision, I related it to Jacob my father, and he said 
unto me, ‘“ My son, it is only a dream, which will neither ascend nor descend, for it hath not been 
repeated.” 
41,2 ’ But no long time elapsed, when I saw another vision. Whilst we stood all together with Facob 7. Naph. 
our father on the shore of the Great Sea, behold a ship came sailing in the middle of the sea yj, ;-3. 
3 without a sailor and a man (pilot). Our father said to us, “ Do ye see what I am seeing?” We 
4 said unto him, “ We see it.” He said unto us, “ Do what ye see me doing.”’ Thereupon Jacob our 
5 father took off his clothes, and threw himself into the sea, and we all followed him. And the first 
6 were Levi and Judah, and they jumped in(to the ship), and Jacob with them. And behold in that 
7 ship there was all the goodness of the world. Jacob our father said unto them, “ Look at what 
is written on the mast; for there is no ship on which the name of the master is not written 
8 on the mast.” Then Levi and Judah looked, and saw, and behold there was written, “This ship 
g belongs to the son of Berachel, and all the good therein.” When Jacob our father heard that, 
he rejoiced very much, and bowed down, and thanked God. He said, “ Not enough that He has 
10 blessed me on earth, He has blessed me on the sea too!” Then he said unto us, “ My children, 
11 quit yourselves like men, and whatever each one of you seizes, that shall be his share.” Thereupon 
12 Levi sprang to the big mast therein and sat upon it. The second after him, Judah, also leapt 
13 to the second mast, which was next to Levi's mast, and he also sat thereon. And the rest of 
my other brothers took each his oar, and Jacob our father grasped the two rudders to steer the vi. 4. 
14 ship by them. And Joseph was left alone. Our father said unto him, “ My son Joseph, take 
15 thou also thine oar.” But Joseph refused. When my father saw that Joseph refused to take 
his oar, he said unto him, “Come here, my son, and take one of the rudders which I hold in 
t6 my hands, and steer the ship, whilst thy brothers row with the oars until you reach land.” And 
he taught each one of us, and said unto us, “Thus ye shall steer the ship, and ye will not be 
afraid of the waves of the sea, nor of stormy winds when they shall arise against you.” 
1,2 ‘And when he had made an end of commanding us, he disappeared from us. And Joseph took 
both the rudders, one with the right hand and one with the left, and the rest of my brothers were 
3 rowing, and the ship sailed on and floated over the waters. And Levi and Judah sat upon the two 
4 masts to look out which way the ship was to take. As long as Joseph and Judah were of one mind, 
and Judah showed to Joseph which was the right way, Joseph directed thither the ship, and? the 
5 ship sailed on peaceably without hindrance. And after a while a quarrel arose between Joseph and 
Judah, and Joseph no longer steered the ship according to the words of his father and the teaching 
of Judah ; and the ship went a wrong course, and she waves of the sea dashed it on a rock, so that T. Naph. 
the ship was broken up. vi. 5. 
t ‘Then Levi and Judah descended from the masts to escape for their lives, and as for the rest of 
2 the brothers, we escaped for our lives to the shore. And behold there came Jacob our father, and 
3 found us dispersed, one here, and another there. He said unto us, ““ What is the matter with you, 
4 my sons? Perhaps you have not steered the ship as it ought, (even) as I commanded you?” And 
we said unto him, “ By the life of thy servants, we have not departed from anything that thou hast 
commanded us; but Joseph transgressed against the command; for he did not. steer the ship 
according to thy command, and as he was instructed by Levi and Judah, for he was jealous of them.” 
5 And he said unto us, “ Show me the place (of the ship).” And he saw, and behold the tops of the 
6 masts were visible, and behold it was floating upon the surface of the water. And my father 
7 whistled, and we all gathered round him. And he cast himself into the sea as before, and he 
8 repaired the ship. And he reproved Joseph, and said unto him, “ My son, thou shalt not again 
deceive (nor) be jealous of thy brothers, for they were nearly lost through thee.” 
: I ee a I recounted this vision to my father, he smote his hands together and sighed, and his 
» 3 €yes shed tears. And I waited till I was ashamed, but he spake no word to me. So I took the 


+ PJ. ‘Come now, give them to me ee = ACS APS, 
362 ; 


APPENDIX | 


hand of my father to embrace it and to kiss it, and I said to him, “Oh servant of the Lord! why do 
4 thine eyes shed tears?” He said unto me, “ My son, because of the repetition of thy vision my 
heart has sunk within me, and my body is confounded by reason of Joseph my son, for I loved him 
above you all; and for the wickedness of my son Joseph you will be sent into captivity, and you will 
5 be scattered among the nations. For thy first and second visions are both one and the same vision. 
6 Therefore I command you not to unite with the sons of Joseph, but only wth Levit and F$udah.” 
8x ‘Further, I tell you my lot shall be in the best of the middle of the earth, and ye shall eat and be 
2 satisfied with its delights. I warn you not to kick in your fatness, and not to rebel, and not to (Deut. 
3 Oppose the command of the Lord, who satisfies you with the good things of His earth. And do not xxxii. 
forget the Lord your God, the God of your fathers; Who was chosen by our father Abraham when 15.) 
4 the nations were divided in the time of Phaleg. For at that time the Lord, blessed be He, came down 
from His highest heavens, and brought down with Him seventy ministering angels, Michael at their 
5 head. He commanded them to teach the seventy families which sprang from the loins of Noah 
6 seventy languages. Forthwith the angels descended and did according to the command of their 
Creator. But the holy language, the Hebrew language, remained only in the house of Shem and 
Eber, and in the house of Abraham our father, who is one of their descendants. 
9: ‘And on that day Michael took a message from the Lord, and said to the seventy nations, to each 
2 nation separately: “ You know the rebellion you undertook, and the treacherous confederacy into 
which you entered against the Lord of heaven and earth, and now choose to-day whom you will 
3 worship, and who shall be your intercessor in the height of heaven.” Nimrod the wicked answered 
and said, “For me there is none greater than he who taught me and my people in one hour the 
4 language of Kush.” In like manner also answered Put, and Migraim, and Tubal, and Javan, and 
Mesech, and Tiras; and every nation chose its own angel, and none of them mentioned the name of 
5 the Lord, blessed be He. But when Michael said unto Abraham our father, “ Abram, whom dost 
thou choose, and whom wilt thou worship?” Abram answered, “I choose and select only Him 
who said, and the world was created ; Who formed me in the womb of my mother, body within body ; 
Who placed in me spirit and soul; Him I choose, and to Him I will cleave, I and my seed, all the 
days of the world.” 
10: ‘Then the Most High dispersed the nations, and apportioned and allotted to every nation its share 
2 and lot. And from that time all the nations of the earth separated themselves from the Lord, blessed 
be He; only the house of Abraham remained with his Creator to worship Him; and after him Isaac 
3 and Jacob. Therefore, my sons, I conjure you not to go astray and worship any other god than 
4 Him whom your fathers have chosen. For know assuredly that there is none like unto Him, and 
no other who can do as He or like His works in heaven and on earth, and there is none who can do 
5 wonders like unto His mighty deeds. A portion only of His power you can see in the creation of 
6 man; how many notable wonders are there not in him? Hecreated him from head to foot; with 
his ears he hears, and with his eyes he sees, and with his brain he understands, and with his nose he 
smells, and with his wind-pipe he brings forth his voice, and with his gullet he absorbs food and T. Naph. 
drink, and with his tongue he speaks, and with his mouth he completes (7); with his hands he does ii. 8 
his work, and with his heart he reckons, and with his spleen he laughs, and with his liver he is angry ; 
and his maw grinds, and with his feet he walks, and 47s lungs are for breathing, and by his reims he 
4 is counselled. And none of his members changes its function, but every one keeps to its own. It is 
8 therefore proper for man to lay to heart all these things, Who hath created him, and Who it is that 
hath wrought him out of an ill-smelling drop! in the womb of the woman, and Who it is that bringeth 
him cut into the light of the world, and Who hath given him the sight of eyes and the walking of 
the feet, and Who causeth him to stand upright, and bringeth him nigh to his Creator and to His 
place, and hath prepared good deeds for him in the place of insight, and hath poured into him a 
9 living soul and a pure spirit from Himself. Blessed is the man who does not defile the holy spirit 
of God which hath been put and breathed into him, and blessed is he who returns it to its Creator 
as pure as it was on the day when He entrusted it (to him).’ : 
10. © Thus far are the words of Naphtali, the son of Israel, with which he admonished his sons, *with 
words sweeter than honey.” 


Vill, 2 


1 The phrase is found also in the Pirke Aboth, iii. 1. 2 Emended. See my Text. 


363 


APPENDIX II 


TRANSLATION OF ARAMAIC AND GREEK FRAGMENTS OF AN ORIGINAL 
SOURCE OF THE TESTAMENT OF LEVI AND THE BOOK OF JUBILEES 


CAMBRIDGE ARAMAIC FRAGMENT. 


Col. a. 
r ...from...daughter... that all... to do according to right in... Jacob my father, and saw 
...and we said to them... they desire our daughter, and we will be all br(ethren) and companions. 


2 Circumcise the foreskin of your flesh and appear (like us), and be sealed like us in the circumcision 
of... and we will be to y(ou) b(rethren). ; 


Col. 3. 
3... my brother at every time, ... that were in Shechem ... my brother and Dan showed . . . in 
Shechem and what... (doers) of violence, and Judah showed them... that I and Simeon my 


brother went to him... to Reuben our brother, who... Judah (?) before (that he le)ft the sheep... 


BODLEIAN ARAMAIC FRAGMENT. 


4  [Col. a]... peace, and all the desirableness of the first-fruits of the earth, all of it for food and for 
dominion ; the sword, fighting and battle and slaughter and trouble and rage and murder and famine. 
5 Sometimes thou shalt eat, and sometimes thou shalt be hungry; sometimes thou shalt labour, and 
sometimes thou shalt rest ; sometimes thou shalt sleep, and sometimes the sleep of the eye shall 
6 depart. Now behold how he has made thee greater than all, and how I give thee the greatness of 
7 everlasting peace. And two weeks passed from me, and I awoke from my sleep. Then I said: The T. Levi 
one vision ts even as the other. 1 wondered that all the vision should be (given) to him. Anxd TJ hid viii. 18 
8 this also in my heart and revealed it to no man. And I went to my father Isaac, and he also in like viii. 19 
g manner (blessed) me. Then when Jacob saw (in regard to the twelve) all that should happen to him 
according to his vow, (and how that) I was first at the head of (the priesthood), and to me of all his 
sons he had granted the offering, (he gave thanks) to God, and clothed me with the garment of the 
priesthood, and (/i/)led my hands,! and I became a priest to God ... , and I offered all his offerings, viii. 10 
1o and blessed my father in my life, and blessed all my brethren. Then they all blessed me, and father 
11 also blessed me, and I finished [Col. 4] offering his offerings in Bethel. And we went from Bethel, 
12 and /odged in the castle of Abraham our father, wth Isaac our father. And Isaac our father saw us ix. 1, 5 
13 all, and he blessed us and rejoiced. And when he knew that I was priest of the Most High God, 
the Lord of heaven, he began to charge me, and to teach me the rights of the priesthood, and said to ix. 7 
14 me, ‘ Levi, take heed to thyself, my son, my son, against all defilement and all sin. Thy rights are 
15 greater than those of all flesh. And now, my son, I will show thee the rule of the truth, and will not hide 
16 from thee any matter to inform thee in the rights of the priesthood. First, cake heed to thyself, my ix. 9 
17 son, against all lust and uncleanness, and against all fornication. And do thou take to thyself a wife ix. 10 
of my family, and defile not thy seed with harlots ; for thou art a holy seed, and holy is thy seed 
18 like the holy place, for a holy priest art thou called among all the seed of Abraham. Thou art nigh ii. 10 
to (God) and nigh to all His holy ones. Now be thou pure in thy flesh from every defilement of all (Jub. xxi. 
men. 16 
19 [Col.c] And when thou risest up to enter the *house of God, wash thyself with water, and then ae 
20 clothe thyself with the garment of the priesthood. And when thou art clothed, again wash thy 
21 hands and thy feet, before thou offer anything on the altar. And when thou takest to offer all that 
22 is fitting to offer on the altar, again wash thy hands and thy feet. And offer the split logs, and 
prove them first (free) from worms, and then offer them; for thus I saw Abraham my father taking 
23 heed. Of allthe zwelve kinds of wood, he told me that those of them are fitting to burn on the ix. 12 
24 altar whose smoke goes up with a sweet savour. And these are their names :—cedar, and bay, and 
almond, and fir, and pine,® and mountain ash, and cypress, and fig, and olive, and laurel, and myrtle, (Jub. xxi, 
12 
* So Jub. xxxii. 3, ‘ His father clothed him in the garments of the priesthood, and filled his hands? ) 
* Gk. Frag. and T. Lev, ix. 11 give ‘ the sanctuary ’. 
* Text reads ‘ thorns’ (xm) corrupt for NOY = ‘pine’. 


364 


APPENDIX II 


25 and aspalathus.! These are they which he told me it was right to offer under the sacrifice on the 
altar. And when (thou hast placed) of the wood of these (trees) on the altar, and the fire begins to 
26 kindle [Col. d@| them, then begin to sprinkle the blood on the sides of the altar. And again wash 
27 thy hands and thy feet from the blood, and begin to offer up the limbs, salted. Offer the head first 
28 and upon it spread the fat, and let there not be seen on it the blood of the offering of the bull. And 
after it the neck, and after the neck its forelegs, and after its forelegs the breast with the side, and 
after the legs the thigh with the spine of the loin, and after the thigh the hind-legs washed together 
30 with the entrails. And let all be salted with salt as is fitting for them according to their need. And 
after this the meal mingled with oil, and after it all, wine of the drink-offering; and burn on them 
frankincense ; and let all thy works be in order, and all thy offerings be pleasing (?), for a sweet 
31 savour before the Most High God. And whatsoever thou doest, do it in order by measure and 
weight ; add nothing which is not fitting, and fall not short of the account of what is fitting (?) con- 
32 cerning (?) the logs that are fitting to offer for all that goes up upon the altar. For the great 


bullock a talent of wood by weight; and if the fat alone is offered, six minas ; and if it is a bull-calf? 
which is offered. ... 


oi, 


~~ 


Verses 32-66 (found only in the Greek). 


33 And for the second bull fifty minas ; and for the fat alone, five minas. And for a great bullock 
34 (udcxov) forty minas. And if it be a ram or a he-goat that is offered, for such thirty minas, and for 
35 the fat three minas. And if it be a lamb or a kid twenty minas; and for the fat two minas. 
36 And if it be a lamb without blemish of the first year, or a kid of the goats, fifteen minas ; 
37 and for the fat half a mina. And sprinkle*® salt upon the great bull to salt its flesh, and offer 
it on the altar. One measure is fitting for the bull. And where there is a superfluity of salt, 
38 salt therewith the hide. And for the second bull five-sixths of the measure. And for the 
39 bullock (udcxov) the half of the measure. And for the ram half a measure, and for the he-goat the 
40 like measure. And for the lamb and the kid the third of the measure. And the meal that is fitting 
41, 42 for them. For the great* bull and for the second bull and the bullock a measure of meal. And for 
the ram and the he-goat two-thirds of a measure, and for the lamb and for the kid a third part of 
43, 44 4 Measure, and the oil. And the fourth of the measure for the bull mingled with this meal. And 
for the ram the sixth of the measure, and for the lamb the eighth of the measure tand of the lambf. 
And as for the wine, pour a libation according to the measure of the oil on the bull and the ram and 
45 the kid. Of frankincense six shekels for the bull, and the half thereof for the ram, and the third 
46 thereof for the kid, and (let) all the meal (be) mingled. If you offer this not upon (?) the fat, let 
there be offered upon it a weight of two shekels of frankincense. And the third of the measure is the 
47 third of the ephah. And the two parts of the bath and the weight of the mina are of fifty shekels. 
And of the shekel the fourth part is a weight.0 The shekel comes to be about sixteen thermoi 
48 (Gepuot) and of one (and the same) weight. And now, my son, hear my words and give ear to my 
commands, and let not these my words depart from your heart throughout all thy days, because thou 
49 art a holy priest of the Lord. And all thy seed shall be priests. And to thy sons so give com- 
50 mandment that they do according to this use ® as I have shown thee. For so my father Abraham 
sr commanded me to do and to give commandment to my sons. And now, my son, I rejoice that thou 
hast been chosen to the holy priesthood, and to offer sacrifice to the Lord Most High, as it is 
2 befitting to do according to that which is ordained for Him. When thou takest a sacrifice to offer 
before the Lord of any flesh, according to the reckoning of the wood so receive (it) as I command 
thee, and the salt and the meal and the wine and the frankincense receive at their hands for all the 
53 animals. And always wash’ thy hands and thy feet when thou goest to the altar, and when {NOU as ae 
goest forth from the sanctuary let no blood touch thy garments. Thou shalt not {kindle it the same }¢_,;g — 
54,55 day}. And thy hands and thy feet wash continually from all flesh. And let no blood be seen upon venges 
56 thee, tand every soul,{ for the blood is the life (soul) in the flesh. And if thou preparest for thyself ® 53-56 
any flesh at home to eat, cover its blood first in the earth before thou eatest of the flesh, and thou 
57 shalt not eat of the blood. For so my father Abraham commanded me; for so he found it in the yup. xxi, 
58 writing of the Book of Noah concerning the blood. And now, as I tell thee, my beloved son, thou } 
"art beloved of thy father and holy unto the Lord Most High, and thou shalt be loved beyond all thy 


1 The list in the Aramaic practically agrees with that in Jub. xxi.12. The Greek fragment diverges in 
omitting the almond and the olive, and adding the oyivos. See my text of the Testaments, 249. 

2 The Greek has ‘the second bull’ here and in verses 38, 41. 

3 Emended. See my Text. 

4 See verse 32. ms 

5 Here follows in the text Oepudy 8’ corrupt for deppay 6’ = ‘of four thermoi. 

5 kpiow = DSW. f ; 

7 Verses 53-6 agree almost verbally with Jub. xxi. 16-18. y : 

8 MS. reads ovens ceavroy, which may possibly be emended into roujs ceavT@. 


365 


79; 


THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS 


59 brethren. +By thy seed shall be blessed in the earth,} and thy seed shall be eden p oe ee sei Pr 
60 the memorial of life unto all ages. And thy name and the name of thy seed sha oe e : i. 

61 out unto all the ages. And now, my son Levi, thy seed shall be blessed upon the ee unto all the Sn 
62 generations of the ages.’ And when four weeks were fulfilled in the years of ny : er e. a is - me 
twenty-eighth year, 1 took unto myself a wife of the lineage of my father, even Milcah, t A ims er soe 

63 Bethuel, the son of Laban, my mother’s brother. And she conceived and bare me a = a and xi. 
I called his name Gershom ; for I said that my seed would be sojourners in the land where — : 
64 born. We are sojourners as...in the land... And in the case of the lad I saw in my hele that xi. 3 

65 he would be cast out, he and his seed from the chief priesthood .... Thirty years old was I in ee 
66 life when he was born, and in the tenth month he was born towards sunset. And again she conceive é 
and bare me about the time that is fitting with women, azd / called his name Kohath. xi. 6 


CAMBRIDGE ARAMAIC FRAGMENT. 


Col. c| (And it happen)ed about the ti(me of women that I was with her, and she concei)ved 
a ae a bare me aye son, and) I (call)ed his name (Kohath. And I saw) that to him xi. 5 
(would b)e che gathering of all (the people, for) his would be the high-(priest)hood (over all Is)rael. 
68 In the folur and thirtieth year of my life was he born, in the fir(st) month, (on the fir)st day of the x4 
69 mo(nth), at sunrise. “And again I was wi(th her), awd she bare me a third son and I called his name xi. 7 
Merari, for it was bitter to me concerning him exceedingly, for as soon as he was born he died ; and 
it was very bitter to me concerning him, because he was like to die,and 1 besought and prayed for 
71 him, and it was in all bitterness. J the fortieth year of my life she bare, in the third month. And 
72 again I was with her, and she conceived and bare me a daughter, and I made her name Fochebed, xi. 8 
(for) I sai(d), as she hath borne to me honour, she hath borne for me glory to Israel. Jn the sixty- 
Sourth year of my life she bare, in the first day of the seventh month, after that [Col. d.] we entered 
73 Egypt. In the sixte(enth) year we entered the land of Egypt, and to my sons (were given) the is 
74 daughters of my brothers at the time . .. to them sons. The names of the sons of Gershon (Libnat xii. 
and) Shimet ; and the names of the sons of Ko(hath, Amra)m and Izhar and Hebron and Uzaiel 3 kik 
75 (and the names of) ¢he sons of Merari, Mahli and Mushai. (And) Amram (took) to him as wife xii. 
76 Fochebed my daughter, while I was yet living in the 9(4) year of my life. And I called the name 
of Amram, when he was born, Amram, for I said when he was born, this (child) (shall br)ing out the ‘ 
77 people from the (land of Eg)ypt. Therefore his name was called the exalted people. _ On one day xii. 
78 (were they born he) and Jochebed my daughter. Eighteen years old was I when I went an(to the l)and Xii. 
of Canaan, and (nine)teen years old when I slew She(chem) and destroyed the workers of violence. 
79 And I was nineteen years old when I became priest, and twenty-eight years old when I took to me 
80awife. And eight and forty years old was I when we went into the land of Egypt, and eighty and 
nine years I lived in Egypt. 
81 [Col. e] And all the days of my life were 1( 3)7 years, and I saw my sous of the th(ird generation) xix. 4 
82 before I died. And zx the (hundred and eigh)teenth (year) of my life, that is, the y(ear) in which xii. 6, 7 
Foseph my brother died, 1 called (my) so(ns) and their sons, and began to charge them with all that 
was in my heart. 
83 And I answered and said to (my) sons: 
(Hear) the word of Levi your father, 
And hearken to the commands of God’s beloved; 
84 give you a charge, my sons, 


“ 


we 


as 


And I show you the truth, my beloved. per 
85 Let the sum of your works be truth, (Ps. cxix, 
And (let) righteousness abide with you for ever. 160) 
86 And the tr(uth) 22. 
And to them the harvest is blessed. 
87 He that soweth good, reapeth good ; Xili. 6 
And he that soweth evil, his seed returneth upon him. 
88 And now, my sons, a book of instruction in wisdom teach your sons, xiii. 2 
And let wisdom be with you an everlasting honour. 
89 He that learneth wisdom, she is an honour to him, xiii, 3 
And whoso despiseth wisdom is given over to contempt. 
90 My sons, behold ¥Yoseph my brother, xiii. 9 
Who gave instruction in the wretings and discipline of wisdom. xiii. 2 


This verse is indeed found in the Aramaic, but I have given the translation of the Greek, 


5 as the Aramaic is for 
the most part wanting. 
366 


APPENDIX II 


91 [Col. f]...man... and increased (?).. . to every co(untry) and city ... to him brother .. . was xiii. 3 
in it, he zs (not Like) a stranger in it,* and not li(ke to) a stranger (in it) and not like an alien in it; 
for they all give him honour in it, for all desire to learn of his wisdom. xiii. 4 
92 Ls friends are many, 
And they that salute him are great ones. 
93 And ona seat of honour they place him, 
To hear the words of his wisdom. 
94 Great wealth of honour is wisdom. 
And a goodly treasure to all that ge her. 
95 If there come mighty kings and much people, 
And an host and many horsemen and chariots with them, 
And take .. country and city, 
And spoil all that is in them, 
The treasures of wisdom they shall not spoil 
Nor find out her hidden things 
Nor-.3% 


Rite 


1 The form in the Aramaic varies. We have here duplicate renderings of the same Hebrew original. 


THE SIBYLLINE @QRAGEES 
INTRODUCTION 


§ 1. SIBYLLINE ORACLES IN GENERAL. 


THE collection of verses known as the Sibylline Oracles was originally comprised in fifteen books 
and various fragments. Three books (ix, x and xv) are entirely missing, and there are gaps in some 
of those that remain, but with a total of some 4,240 lines their bulk is still very considerable. The 
greater part of this collection, however, is late and of comparatively little intrinsic worth, and the 
present study deals only with those of the fragments which are preserved in Theophilus ad 
Autolycum, and together form a kind of prelude or Proem, and with the earlier books iii, iv and v. 
But it will be necessary to give some preliminary sketch of the problem presented by the Sibylline 
literature in general. 

It is a common feature of early peoples to look for oracular utterances of divine or quasi-divine 
inspiration from the mouth of old women, such as are represented by the witch of Endor in the Old 
Testament, the Pythian priestess among the Greeks, and, possibly, the nymph Egeria among the 
Romans; and it added immensely to the prestige of such utterances if they were ambiguous or 
difficult to understand. It was from a common feeling such as this that the Sibylline Oracles took 
their rise, but they are pre-eminent among all similar literature in the authority which they wielded 
and the fascination which they exercised over the minds of men. Their power they owed chiefly to 
their claim to remote antiquity, and to the obscurity in which they were always wrapped. Of Greek 
origin, and written principally, if not exclusively, in Greek, it was at Rome where they were chiefly 
venerated and had the most direct influence. In times of special difficulty they were frequently 
consulted, apparently with satisfactory result. There can be little doubt that the ingenuity of the 
custodians of the Sibylline rolls supplied sometimes a suitable response to the question under 
discussion. 

A brief account of these oracles among the Romans is given below, but it is not with them that 
we have to deal. They have nearly all perished, and have left little more than a name and a history 
behind. But their great interest lies in the fact that the success which they achieved in their day led 
Jews and, later, Christians, seeking to defend or propagate their faith, to compose or adapt verses 
which they put forth under the name and authority of the ancient mysterious prophetesses known as 
the Sibyls,and in which lessons of monotheism and the like were put forth as the real teaching of the 
inspired teachers of the most hoar antiquity. With the morality of such a proceeding we have not 
here to deal: it is closely bound up with the question of the ancient idea of copyright, which was, as 
is obvious, radically different from ours. But of the success of this method of proselytising there can 
be little doubt, and indeed most Christian writers down to the time of Augustine accept without 
question the genuineness of these verses. 

The Sibylline Oracles, therefore, which we possess are a compilation of old and new oracles 
worked up by Jewish or Christian authors who lived at various times between c. 160 B.c. and the fifth 
century, or even later, A.D. Their chief interest for us lies in (i) their date and interpretation, (ii) 
their relation to other apocalyptic literature, (iii) the side-lights thrown on history. 

The above brief sketch must now be somewhat amplified, in order to explain the peculiar 
authority exercised by this form of oracle over Pagan, Jewish and Christian thought alike. And it 


will be necessary to go into a little more detail as to the Sibyl herself and the history of the 
Sibylline literature. 


§ 2. THE SIBYL. 


The name ‘Sibyl’ first attracts attention. It has been maintained by some scholars (especially 
by R. H. Klausen in Aeneas und die Penaten) that the word is not a proper name but implies a sound 
issuing from a subterranean oracle, conveyed either by the rustling of the wind, as in the case of the 
oaks of Dodona, or by the splash of water. But there seems to be little justification for this, and it 
is better to follow the universal testimony of antiquity in regarding S/BvAAa as a proper name. Nor 

368 


INTRODUCTION 


is there any inherent improbability in deriving the name from @eéds and Bova, for there is sufficient 
evidence to show that among the Aecolians and Dorians @cés appeared as is, and in an inscription 


from Cumae BoddG@ is found for Bovdyj. SiBvdda i s 
oe 5), Bovdn B , therefore, means the counsel of God (ci. ‘act 

_ Early writers know of only one Sibyl. So Heraclitus (ap. Plutarch), Aristophanes, Plato, and 
Aristotle. But in course of time many more were recognized, though the exact number differs 
widely among various writers. The earliest mention of a plurality of Sibyls seems to emanate from 
a certain sophist named Sopater, who is quoted by Photius as the author of a work on Prophetic 
women ‘which include the so-called Sibyls’. Other writers, e.g. Solinus and Ausonius, recognize at 
least three : Pausanias and Aelian speak of four: Clement of Alexandria mentions nine, and Varro’s 
list (cf. Lact. ki ¢.) includes ten. The names given to the various Sibyls vary considerably, but there 
is convincing testimony that the earliest and most famous was the Erythraean, of whom Clement 
preserves a detailed but somewhat confused account. He gives her date as prior to Orpheus, 
whereas others, including Augustine, make her contemporary with the siege of Troy, and Suidas 
puts her nearly five centuries later. The Erythraeans believed her to be the offspring of a shepherd 
and a nymph. According to an early and widespread tradition she was connected with Apollo. 
This is referred to in ‘ Constantine’s’ Oratio ad Sanctos, preserved in Eusebius, where it is said that 
she was at an early age consecrated by her parent against her will to the temple of that god. At his 
hands she is said to have met her death after surviving nine generations of men, and her grave-stone 
was for long shown on the Erythraean shore, while her image or token is regularly found on the coins 
of that town. 

Before long the claims of Erythrae to be the birthplace of the Sibyl were challenged by Marpessus, 
a town said by Pausanias to lie in Trojan Ida. Erythrae based her claims on the testimony of the 
Sibyl herself as contained in the lines (Orac. in Pausanias x. 12. 3): 

elu & eyo yeyavia pécov Ovyris te Ocas re 
voupns T a0avarns, Tatpos 8 ad Kntopdyoro 
pntpddev “Tdoyevts, matpls 5€ ol ear ’Epvdpy. 
But Marpessus alleged that "Epv6p7 was merely an adjective, and that the next line, 
Mapzayocds, pyntpos tep7}, moTapos & ’Aidaveds, 
had been suppressed by the Erythraeans. 

Connected alike with Erythrae and Marpessus is the Sibyl of Cumae, whose fame early rivalled 
that of Erythrae. Justin Martyr paid a visit to Cumae, and relates how he saw there the cave made 
out of the single massive rock from which the oracles were given, and the three cisterns in which the 
Sibyl was said to wash. It was this Sibyl who, in the famous story told by Varro and Livy, came 
to Rome and offered the nine fateful books to Tarquin, and on being refused her price came back 
with six books and then with three. Various notices of her are preserved by Virgil and Ovid. The 
former represents her as having lived 700 years and having 300 yet to run, while Ovid relates that 
being offered by Apollo any boon she chose, she took up a handful of sand and asked that she might 
live as many years as there were grains in it. 

These are the more famous Sibyls. It will not be necessary to do more than enumerate the 
various others connected with Tibur, Samos, Colophon, Rhodes, Ephesus, Babylonia, Egypt, Libya, 
and Sicily. 


§ 3. THE EARLIEST SIBYLLINE VERSES. 


The first reference to the oracles of Sibyls is found in a quotation from Heraclitus, preserved in 
Plutarch (De Pyth. Or. 709 C): he says that the poems contained many gloomy matters, and 
specifies ‘many revolutions and upheavals of Greek cities, many appearances of barbarous hordes 
and murders of rulers’. Aristophanes mentions the Sibyl more than once and always’ with some 
tinge of respect (Pax 1095, 1116), and Plato speaks of her with reverence: Aristotle lays stress on 
her melancholy character and dismisses her more summarily. More details are given by Suidas, who 
summarizes the writings of the various Sibyls which he knows. Servius in his commentary on 
Virgil, Zc. iv, mentions that the Cumaean Sibyl divided up the ages under the names of metals and 
showed which god was ruler in each (gus guo imperaret). But there is nothing to show exactly when 
collections of such verses came to be made. If we may believe the story of the Sibyl who appeared 
to Tarquin there was already a collection of nine books, but they must have been small in compass 
if a woman could carry them in the cumbrous form of rolls. It is probable that there were a great 
number of detached oracles, sometimes consisting of a line or two, current in the Greek-speaking 
world, and there may have been many private collections. After the destruction of the official 
Sibylline books in the burning of the Capitol in 82 B.C., a commission was dispatched to collect 


1105.2 369 Bb 


THE SIBYLLINE @RACLES 


oracles from Sicily, Greece, and Asia Minor, and a large number were brought back (including 
1,0c0 lines from Erythrae), from which a collection was made. After this the numbers increased so 
rapidly that Augustus commanded 2,000 spurious volumes to be destroyed. But with their increase 
in bulk their credit began to diminish, and the Emperor found it necessary to carry out a similar 
process of weeding. 


§ 4. THE JEWISH SIBYLLINE VERSES. 


The beginning of the Maccabean revolt revived the enthusiasm of the Jews in every department 
of life. Among other things the missionary side of their faith aroused greater interest, and a serious 
attempt was made to place its claim on intellectual grounds more clearly before the world. At the 
same time eschatology began to exercise more and more influence on men's minds, and the 
conception of a final setting aright of all apparent injustice by the direct judgement of God appealed 
with increasing force to the more thoughtful of the Jews. The former tendency may be illustrated 
by the attempt of Aristobulus, a Jew living at the court of Ptolemy VII about 160 B.C., to prove that 
the best literature of Greece was in reality indebted to a large extent to Jewish inspiration : _the 
latter point by the composition of the books of Danieland Enoch. Both these tendencies combined 
to suggest to a cultivated Jew living in Egypt about the middle of the second century B.C., that, if 
he could use the authority of the ancient and revered Sibyl, he might by means of verses written in 
the Sibylline style gain a very much wider audience for the propagation of his faith, The example 
of the book of Daniel was in all probability before him, and he would recognize no moral fault in the 
use of such means, especially if collections of Sibylline Oracles were from time to time receiving 
large additions. His method was not pure invention: he took ancient oracles and pieced them 
together, adding passages of his own which breathed strong monotheism and the glorification of the 
Jewish people. It is probably to this’ unknown author that we owe the greater part of the third 
book. His example could hardly fail to inspire imitators both among Jews and later among Christians. 
Nor did the feeling of the day see anything incongruous in the ancient Sibyl denouncing idolatry 
and singing the praises of the happy land of Judaea. Indeed the new collection of oracles achieved 
very considerable success. 


§ 5. THE SIBYLLINES IN LATER HISTORY. 


The burning of the Capitol in 82 B.C. resulted in the complete destruction of the official collection 
of Sibylline Oracles. Seven years later the Senate dispatched three commissioners to Erythrae 
to fetch from thence any that could be discovered, and as a result of their efforts some 1000 verses 
were collected from that place while a considerable number were added from elsewhere. It is not 
improbable that the interest aroused by this search inspired the manufacture of many spurious 
oracles, some of which may have been of Jewish origin. From the materials thus collected a selec- 
tion was made by the Quindecemviri, and the accepted verses were kept in greater secrecy. Never- 
theless some knowledge of them was public property. Cicero (de Div. ii. 54) remarks on the art 
displayed in them as exemplified by their? acrostic form and throws some suspicion on their 
genuineness. Virgil in his famous description of the Golden Age in L£:clogue iv quotes from Sib. iii. 
785 ff. But the publication of oracles took away the main point of their sanctity, and we find the 
Emperors diligent in preserving them, as far as possible, inviolate. So Augustus instituted a search- 
ing inquiry into them and destroyed all except a small collection which was stored under the base 
of the Palatine Apollo. A further investigation was carried out on similar lines by Tiberius. 

In view of these facts, it is obvious that the wide knowledge of Sibylline verses among early 
Christian writers points to there having been many collections over and above the official collection of 
Rome. It is possible that the oracles rejected by the scrutiny of the Quindecemviri instead of being 
destroyed merely found a wider audience, being incorporated with various subsequent additions. 
Inasmuch as the official collection, which was finally burned by order of Stilicho in the reign of 
Theodosius, was, as far as we know, never published, it would appear that the verses which we 
possess were all preserved in private hands. 

There is no evidence that the Sibylline Oracles enjoyed any great popularity with later Jewish 
writers. Josephus (Azz. i, § 4) indeed alludes to Sib. iii. 97 ff., but the early appropriation of the 
Sibyl by Christian writers seems to have militated against extensive Jewish use. Among the early 
Fathers allusions and_ quotations are very frequent. Hermas alludes to the Sibyl in Pastor ROA. 
Clement of Rome (cf. Justin, Resp. ad Quaest. 74) speaks of the Sibyl’s prophecy that the world should 


* The suggestion that the writer was Aristobulus himself isa tempting one and was put forward by Alexandre 
(Exc. ad Sib.). 


mee only Sibylline acrostic which we possess is the Christian one in Sib. viii. 217-50, which is of considerably 
ater date. 


oe 


INTRODUCTION 


perish by fire. Justin refers without reserve to Books iii and iv, Athenagoras and T i 

Proem and Book iii. Clement of Alexandria quotes freely from all the Jewish ae ee 
represents St. Paul as appealing to the Sibyl (Strom. vi), and Celsus (ap. Orig. v, § 4) is moved to 
ridicule by their frequent use in Christian writers. Origen himself only once mentions the Sibyl i 
(c. Ceds. v, § 61), while Tertullian, though speaking of the Sibyl as anterior to all literature (ad Naz. 2) 
never makes use of the testimony of the Sibyl in his apologetics. Lactantius uses less reserve :} he 
quotes freely from all the Jewish books and his writings are a perfect mine of Sibylline verses. His 
view of the Sibyls was that, though in themselves they were prophetesses of false gods, yet from 
time to time filled with Divine inspiration they poured forth precious truths. Ambrose has but one 
quotation from the Sibyllines : Augustine is aware of a prejudice against them, but in discussing their 
claims he finds nothing in them pertaining to the worship of false gods and he gravely admits the 
Sibyl to the number of those who belong to the City of God (de Civ. Dez xviii. 23). 


§ 6. INTRODUCTION TO THE JEWISH BOOKs. 


The two considerable fragments which are usually printed at the end of the book, together with 
the three lines of Fragment ii, are preserved to us in the treatise of Theophilus ad Aztolycum (end of first 
century A.D.) in which the writer attempts to justify to an educated heathen the Christian idea of God 
and the doctrine of the Resurrection. From Fr. i. 30, Alexander has deduced a Christian origin for 
them, but their tone is rather Jewish than Christian and their main purport is to vindicate the 
unique sovereignty of the Holy Invisible God as against the undignified stories of polytheism on the 
one hand, and the worship of animals and idols on the other. In character they are closely similar 
to iii. 1-45 and all seem to originate from Egypt. There is no distinctive mark of date, but the 
Fragments are most probably prae-Christian. They are ascribed to the Erythraean Sibyl by Lac- 
tantius and Clement of Alexandria. From the way in which Theophilus introduces these lines 
(ad Aut. ii. 36 SiBvdda d€, év“EdAnow kal év trois Aoumots Cveoww yevouern TpopHtis, ev apxH THs mpopntetas 
abris Gvediler To Ty GvOpdmwv yévos éyovea .. .) the inference has been drawn that they stood origin- 
ally at the beginning of the third book. 


Book III has been variously divided. Friedlieb divides into three main sections 1-294: 295-488 : 
489-828, but these sections are not entirely homogeneous. 

The following is an analysis : 

1~7 is an introduction expressing the pain of the Sibyl under the Divine compulsion. 

8-45 express the Jewish hatred of idolatry and give a description of the true God the Creator of 
the World. 

46-62, an eschatological passage describing the reign of the Holy King and the destruction of the 
wicked. Lines 46, 47 and 52 give an indication of date, which, however, is not easy to fix. Itmay 
be as early as c. 168 B.C., at which time Rome first interfered decisively in the affairs of Egypt by the 
embassy of Popilius Laenas. Then the three men of I. 52 who are to afflict Rome would be, perhaps, 
the Gracchi. Or the date may be c. 96 B.C. when Ptolemy Apion bequeathed by will his kingdom 
of Cyrene to the Roman people. In this case the three men would be Marius, Sulla, and Cinna. 

Or it may be as late as c. 51 B.C. when Ptolemy Auletes bequeathed his kingdom to his Roman 
creditors. Then the three men would be the Triumvirs, whether the First (so Volz, ¥éd. Eschat., 
p- 47), or the Second (so Friedlieb, Intr. p. xxvii). The middle date is,on the whole, to be preferred. 
‘Alexandre would refer the ‘ holy king’ of 1. 49 to Vespasian and the ‘ three men’ to Galba, Otho, and 
Vitellius, but this is quite improbable. 

62-92. The destruction of Beliar: a late passage probably from the latter part of the first 
century A.D. SBousset, Antichrist, pp. 87, 100, considers the passage to be Jewish, but Jiilicher, 
reviewing him in 7%eol. Litt.-Zeitung, 1896, maintains its Christian origin, and Geffcken is of the 
same opinion. The question largely turns on the meaning given to S<Bacrjvwv in 63. The idea that 
the whole world should come under the dominion of a woman recurs in viii. 200. The most probable 
explanation is that the woman is Rome. yy ; 

93-6. Four lines of transition usually regarded as Christian, but not necessarily So. 

97-294. A section derived primarily from the Erythraean Sibyl relating to the building | of 
Babylon, the story of the Titans and the birth of Zeus, with a short summary of history dealing 
specially with the history of the Jews. The antiquity of the section ts attested by the references to 


1 Detailed references are given in Struve (/7agmenta librorum Sibyllinorum quae apud Lactantium reperiuntur, 
1817) and Alexandre (Excursus ad Sibyllina, 254 ff.). Also in Vervorst (De Carminibus Sibyllinis apud Sanctos 
Patres disceptatio, Paris, 1844) and Besancon (De Vemplot que les Peres de PEglise ont fait des oracles sibyllins, 


ban, 1851). 
Montauban, 1851) 371 urD 


THE SIBYLEINE *ORACLES 


it in Alexander Polyhistor (80-40 B.C.) and Abydenus (first or second century B. c.) and by the 
frequent quotations in Christian writers. There are two main marks of date: (1) the reference to 
the seventh king of Egypt in 192, 193 (cf. 318, 608) who is, in all probability, Ptolemy Philometor 
182-146 B.C.; (2) the description of Rome in 175 ff., which would suit the years immediately 
following the battle of Pydna 168 a.p. A date circ. 160 A.D. would seem to be the most probable. 
The working up of old heathen oracles by a Jew would then be closely parallel to the attempt of 
Aristobulus about the same date to prove that the Old Testament was the primary source of the 
best works of ancient Greek literature. The Sibyllist takes not only the Erythraean Sibyl, but also 
extracts from the Babylonian (97-104), and perhaps the Chaldaean (218-30). But the latter section 
is also ascribed by Lactantius to the Erythraean Sibyl. i 

295-488 contain for the most part a collection of various oracles of different dates. Many of 
them are of a general character and cannot be historically identified. But the following passages 
contain some note of time. 

314-18 seems to refer to the internal struggles in Egypt between Ptolemy Philometor and 
Ptolemy Euergetes which ended with the capture of Euergetes in Cyprus in 154 B.C. 

323-33 may refer to the desecration of the Temple by Antiochus Epiphanes in 168 B.C. 

350-5 probably refers to the Mithradatic war of 88—84 B.C. 

388-400 is best explained as depicting the events of 162-142 B.C. 

464-9 appears to have reference to the Social war of 89-88 B.C. 

483-8 mentions the capture of Carthage and Corinth in 146 B.C. 

The section contains some ancient oracles, e.g. 364-6; 401-30. 

The passage about Alexander 381-7 is referred to by Varro as coming from the Persian Siby] ; 
while the Scholion on Plato, Piaedr. 244 ascribes it to the Chaldaean Sibyl. 

Lines 414-33 are ascribed on the authority of Pausanias and. Varro to the Erythraean Sibyl. 

489-829. This long section begins with woes on various lands, and especially on Greece, which 
is to be subjugated by a barbarian power. Then follows praise of the Jews and a reference to the 
attack of Antiochus Epiphanes on Egypt in 170 B.C. (611-15). An eschatological passage comes 
next, leading up to the description of the coming of the Messiah, to be followed by a time of ideal 
peace and prosperity for the Jews. This is interrupted by a short passage (732-40), which appears 
to celebrate the capture of the Acra of Jerusalem from the Seleucid troops. Another Messianic 
passage (767-95) is followed bya short description of the signs that are to precede the end (796-808) 
and the book ends with an Epilogue, which in itself seems to be composite, 819-29 being apparently 
a later addition. 


The marks of date then in this last section are as follows :— 


508-11. Refers to the Gaulish invasion of Asia Minor in 280 B.C. 

520-61. Subjugation of Greece especially after the capture of Corinth in 146 B.C. 

573-85. Prosperity of the Jews in Maccabean times ¢. 140 B.C. 

608-15 refer particularly to 180-179 B.C. 

732-40 represent the feeling of c.-140 B.C. 

It should be noticed that 1, 776 bears marks of having been at least worked over by a Christian 
hand. 


Taking the book as a whole there is no adequate reason for doubting that lines 97—819 are, with 
the exception of a few passages (e. g. 350-5, 464-9, 776) either composed or incorporated by a Jew, 
probably living in Egypt about 140 B.c. The Egyptian colouring is marked e.g. by the interest in 
Egyptian history, 159, 161, 314-18, 348, 608-15; but the writer has frequent references to Rome 
and Greece, and, to a lesser degree, to Asia Minor. 

An attempt has been made (by Friedlieb) to show that lines 97-808, together with the Proem, 
comprised the poem that went under the name of the Erythraean Sibyl, and is said by Lactantius! 
to comprise about one thousand lines. It is a further suggestion of Bleek that lines 1-45, 819-29 
may be ascribed to the author of Books I and II. These suggestions have the merit of providing 
a comprehensive framework for the first three Sibylline bocks, but they cannot be regarded as more 
than tentative. It is probable, for instance, that iii. 97-104 comes from the Chaldaean Sibyl, or 
possibly a Hebrew Sibyl (Josephus, Avz. i. § 4) and the frequent notice of Egypt to which reference 
has been made would suggest that parts at least of the poem are from another source. At the same 
time, it is obvious that the Erythraean Sibyl became by far the most noted, and it is quite possible 
that other ancient oracles which bore no special mark of authorship were collected under her name. 

The fourth book does not present any such difficult problems. Its plan is fairly simple. After 


1 Div. Inst. i. 6 
372 


INTRODUCTION 


a description of God as the source of inspiration (1-23) the writer proceeds to draw a picture of the 
joy of the righteous and the fate of the ungodly (24-46). He then proposes a sketch of the history 
of the ten generations of the world, but after two generations he breaks off into a series of oracles 
against various countries and towns in the dismal Sibylline style (47-151). Then follows an eschato- 
logical passage (1 52-92) interrupted by an exhortation to repentance (162-78). 

The book is, therefore, in all probability a unity, and its date can be fixed with considerable 
certainty. 

107-8 speak of the restoration of Laodicea after the earthquake of 60 A.D. 

115-18 speak of the internal struggles in Jerusalem during the siege in 69 A.D. 

125-6 speak of the destruction of the Temple. 

119-24 speak of the disappearance of Nero, the expectation of his return, and the struggles of 
69 A.D., and a similar expectation recurs in 138 f. 

a 28,129, 143, 144 speak of a great earthquake in Cyprus, which is fixed by a notice of Eusebius 
in 76 A.D. 

The date then is after 76 A.D., but not long after, and at a time when the stirring events of the 
years 69-70 were fresh in men’s minds, and the expectation of the return of Nero was real and vivid. 
So by general consent the book is ascribed to about the year 80 A.D. 

There is some uncertainty as to whether the writer is a Jew or a Christian. In favour of the 
latter supposition is adduced the outlook on temples (28) and sacrifices (29), the mention of the folly 
of the Jews (117), and the stress laid on repentance (168). But none of these ideas would be 
unnatural in a thoughtful Jew of 80 A.D., and as there is nothing specifically Christian in the book, 
so it ends with an eschatological outlook which seems distinctly Jewish in character. 

The fifth book presents problems of its own. It is obvious at once that lines 1-51 stand by 
themselves. They give a brief sketch of history up to the time of Hadrian, or, if ]. 51 be genuine, up 
till the time of Marcus Aurelius. 

The rest of the book consists, in the main, of the proclamation of troubles in various lands ; in 
Egypt (52-114), Asia (115-36), Greece, Italy, and other lands (137-78), Egypt, India, Corinth, &c. 
(179-227), Asia, Thrace, &c. (286-343), Babylon, &c. (434-83), Egypt, &c. (484-511). This fills 
up the main bulk of the book, but, interspersed among these conventional Sibylline outpourings, there 
are sections on other subjects which merit attention. Such are an ode to #Bpis (228-46), which 
seems Eastern in character, and in which Hildebrandt claims to have discovered a direct quotation 
from the Avesta; an ideal description of Judaea (247-55, 260-85) ; a Christian fragment (256-9) ; 
an eschatological passage (344~85); a denunciation of evil livers (386-402); a hint of an attack on 
the Holy Land and of a Divine vengeance (403-33) ; and a description of a coming battle of the 
stars (512-31). ; 

Passages which bear upon the question of the date are as follows. In the first section the 
extravagant praise of Hadrian (48, 49) would be inexplicable in a Jewish writing except in the 
earlier years of his reign, or at any rate before the revolt of Bar Cochba and the erection of Alia 
Capitolina on the site of Jerusalem. But 1. 51 speaks of three successors of Hadrian, one of whom 
(by which Marcus Aurelius is probably meant) should reign late in life. There is good reason to 
suspect this line to be a later interpolation. fet S45 ; 

In the main section, 52 to end, the chief indication of date lies in lines 411-13, which seem to 
speak of Titus as doomed to death as soon as he reached Italy on his return from the capture of 
Jerusalem. The expectation, which appears to have been somewhat widely held, was, of course, 
falsified by history, and so this section at any rate, if the emendation proposed be accepted, is fixed 
for the year 70 A.D. For the rest the expectation of the return of Nero appears in 34 f., 104 ff, 
139 ff., 215 ff., 363 ff., as a conviction deeply held, although he is by this time half identified with 
the Antichrist. 

The general conclusion leaves the date more or less uncertain. But there is no real reason 
to separate I-51 from the rest of the poe if we 28: lines 51 and 411-13 we may fix the 
date as somewhere in the reign of Hadrian before 130 A.D. ; 

The author seems sindcubieal to be living in Egypt. So the Sibyl calls herself (if the text be 
not corrupt) sister of Isis (53), and has much to say about Egypt and its towns (60-114, 179-99, 

8-9, 484-511). ek mets 
4 mee 3 much divided as to whether the author is a Jew or a Christian. The adjective 


1 The minute dissection of a ‘Higher Criticism’ may be illustrated by the following table taken from Zahn’s 
Apokalyptische Studien :— 
, ewe D. 71, 111 (or 115)-78; ? 200-5 ; 228-46; 361-4333 484-531. dian fenitns Fg 
(4) ¢. A. D. 120, 1-49*, 50P; 52-110; 179-99; 206-27; 247-360 (or, at any rate, 247-85 3 328-82); 434-83. 
(c) ¢. A.D. 150, 49°-50%5; 515 2573 413, and probably many isolated verses. 


513 


THE SIBYLLINE ORACLES 


deoxpiorovs in 1, 68 seems to stamp the section to which it belongs as Christian, and 256-9 are 
unmistakably the same. But for the rest of the book the outlook is more Jewish than Christian. 
There is no reference to a New Testament writing, with the possible exception of 1a158 (el a poe., 


viii. 10). 
§ 7. MANUSCRIPTS. 


Special service in the collation of MSS. has been rendered by A. Mai, Keil, and Rzach. The 
results are given at length in the introduction to Geffcken’s edition. The MSS. fall into three main 
classes, to which the terms Q, ®, and ¥ are conventionally given. The following are the only MSS. 


which contain the Jewish portions :— 


In class Q: 
V. Codd. Vaticani 1120, 743, both fourteenth century, contain iv. 
Cod. Monacensis 1541 contains iv. 


In class ®: 
A. Cod. Vindobonensis hist. gr. xcvi. 6, fifteenth century, contains all our sections. 
P. Cod. Monacensis 351, fifteenth century, contains all our sections except the first part of 
the Prologue. 
S. Cod. Scorialensis 11 © 7 contains all our sections. 
B. Cod. Bodleianus Baroccianus 109, end of fifteenth century, contains all our sections except 
the Prologue and iii. 1-106, 


In class ©: 

F. Cod. Florentinus Laurentianus plut. xi. 17, fifteenth century, contains iii with the subscrip- 
tion orixor* add (1,034 lines), iv with subscription pad? (181 lines), v with subscription orixou 
an * (538 lines). 

R. Cod. Parisinus 2851, end of fifteenth century, contains iii (with similar remark oriyor ad), 
iv (arixou pra), v. 1-106. 

L. Cod. Parisinus 2850: 1475 A.D. contains the same three books with the same remarks ; 
only Book iii is called Adyos rérapros and Book iv Adyos réurros. 

T. Cod. Toletanus, a MS. recently discovered in the Library of Toledo Cathedral, written 
about 1500, containing all our sections except v. 482-end. It has Latin notes both in the 
margin and between the lines, but Geffcken regards it as of no particular value. 


Besides the MSS. the following extracts have been found :—- 


Cod, Parisinus 1043 contains iv. 179-85, 187, 189, 190; v. 93-I1I. 
Cod. Vat. 1357 contains viii. 217-50. 


The citations in the early Fathers are also of great service in restoring the text. 


_ _ Geffcken calls attention to the extreme difficulty of arriving at a satisfactory text. It is not 
infrequent to find lines in which no MS. gives a metrically possible text, and then it becomes 
necessary to have recourse toconjecture. In other instances a composite text has to be formed out 
of several different versions. But Geffcken arrives at two conclusions that are of definite value 
First, the Q text is on the whole preferable to ® and &; and secondly, ® and ¥ seem to have 
branched off from an earlier and better text, and of the two ® is to be preferred though not by any 
means in every instance. 

As regards the date of the different classes of MSS., Geffcken would put the © in the third or 
fourth century, and would find a kind of © before the end of the fifth century. 


§ 8. THEOLOGY. 


The main object of the Jewish Sibyllists is to maintain the uni i 
; nain obje ty and sovereignty of God. 
is one Being, invisible, self-sprung, without beginning or end. Idolatry is sondern in ae 
unmeasured Scorn ; the heathen gods are nothing, lifeless and powerless ; the sacred animals of Egypt 
are merely deceptions; Isis and Sarapis will be found ineffective to help their worshippers in tHe 


Our present third book contains only 829 lines. But there 1S go od reason to suppose that Orig le l y it conta ne d 


? Our book contains 192. B i 
ea it ae a ut ¥ omits 86, 94, 95, 112, 113, 115, 148, 153, 154, 182, 183, 186, I9I. 


374 


INTRODUCTION 


time of bitter distress. Phoebus himself, the inspirer of the heathen Sibyl, is a mere delusion. All 
idolaters, of whatever class, are people who have mistaken the true highway of life and wandered off 
into tortuous by-ways. They have failed to recognize the true God, Who although so lofty and 
majestic, has yet revealed Himself to men, and Who keeps a constant watch over all that goes on 
on earth. The ignorance and wilful transgressions of purblind man are inevitably storing up for the 
world volumes of wrath that will burst forth in terrible destruction. 

_ The doctrine of God, then, is a fairly full one: again and again stress is laid on His unique 
position as existing from all time and owning no Creator. The terms which express this idea 
(avropurs, adroyévyntos, a’roAdyevtos) are themselves open to misconstruction, but they seem to imply 
nothing more than God’s eternal existence, as contrasted with the idols that are the works of men’s 
hands and the gods of mythology concerning whose birth so many tales were rife. In three respects 
His intimate connexion with the visible world is vindicated: He is the Creator and Sustainer of all, 
sending rain and fruitful seasons, and manifesting His wrath in hailstorms and earthquakes. He has 
also revealed Himself to man, and although the means of His self revelation are not actually stated 
they are probably regarded as lying in the visible phenomena of nature. And again God is finally 
to judge the world, sending the just either to a fresh life of happiness on earth or to the abode of 
bliss, while the wicked are condemned to the woes of Tartarus. It may be noted that stress is laid 
on the conception of God Himself being the Judge (cf. iv. 41, 183) as though in protest against the 
Christian idea of Christ as the Judge of all, whereas the work of Creation is carried out through the 
medium of the Word (iii. 20, cf. Ps. xxxiii. 6). 

With regard to worship there are varying conceptions. The older passages speak freely of the 
offering of sacrifices (e.g. Frag. i. 21: Bk. iii. 576 ff), but in the fourth book we find a repudiation 
of all animal sacrifices (28 ff.) and even of a visible temple (8 and 28). This book seems to be 
tinged with Essene thought which manifests itself also in the stress laid on Grace before meals 
(25 f.) and lustrations (165). 

The middle of the second century B.C. was a time when men’s minds were very full of the 
thought of the coming judgement of God, and the literature of that age influenced deeply the thought 
of successive generations. So although the main eschatological portions of the Sibyllines occur in 
the third book, echoes of them are not lacking in other parts. The wrath of God as it culminates 
in judgement on the earth is depicted in scenes of bewildering complexity. A principal element is 
fire, which is to burn up the world. Sometimes it is in the form of a rushing stream (ii. 54), some- 
times as an essence (iii. 72), sometimes it comes in form of a sword (iii. 672, 798, iv. 174). A mighty 
darkness is to envelop the earth (v. 349); the sun, moon, and stars are to fail (ili. 801, v. 346); the 
very heavenly bodies are to come crashing down (iii. 80 ff.) ; a star is to be one of the agents of the 
destruction (v. 158 ff.). God himself is to appear in the clouds (v.65 f). The destruction of 
the earth is sometimes represented as complete (e.g. iii. 84 ff.). More generally it is only the 
ungodly who are to be destroyed, the righteous being reserved for a blessed life (v. 375-85). The 
signs of the end are manifold. There is to be a great increase of wickedness and presumption ; in 
the later books this is usually connected with the return of Nero. A comet is to herald the end 
(iii. 334). Various portraits are to be seen, e.g. a battle among the clouds (iii. 805, v. 212). There 
is to be great distress among nations (ii. 556 ff., v. 225). Beliar is to appear and lead men astray 
with various lying wonders (ii. 63 ff.). Nero is to return in pride and arrogance, the world is to fall 
under the dominion of a woman (iii. 75 ff.). ; 

It is noticeable that the destruction of the world is not strongly distinguished from judgements 
that are to affect merely certain localities. The universal and the particular shade off very easily 
into one another. Similarly in some passages the judgement is merely a prelude to the establishment 
of a blessed kingdom among the godly on earth (e.g. iii. 767 ff.). The Messiah himself is to come 
from heaven to assume the kingdom (v. 414 ff.). Under his rule the godly are to enjoy great peace 
(iii. 702 ff.); the earth is to bring forth her fruits in extraordinary abundance (iii. 741 ff.); the rough 
places of nature are to be made smooth (iil. 777 ff.), and even the animal world is to share in the 
universal peace and goodwill (iii. 785 ff-). Jerusalem is to become the fairest spot on earth (v. 420 ff.) ; 
the temple is to be resplendent once more with the gifts of varied peoples (ili. 657, 797%). 

It will be seen that the greater part of these idyllic conceptions are not in themselves unique or 
peculiar, but their fullness and variety make the Sibylline workings conspicuous among similar 
literature. They testify to the deep-rooted dissatisfaction with the present conditions among the 
most loyal spirits of the Jews, and the confident hope that the apparent injustice of God's dealings 
in the world as shown in the triumph of His enemies, would be righted within no very long time by 
the vindication of His Divine purpose for men. 


375 


THE SIBYLLINE ORACLES 


§ 9. BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

(a) CHIEF EDITIONS OF THE TEXT. 

Betuleius, Xystus, Szy//norum Oraculorum Libré Octo, Basel, 1545. 

Opsopoeus, Joh., S«BvdAAaxol Xpynopol, Paris, 1599. 

Gallaeus Servatius, S¢8vdAtakoi Xpyopoi, Amsterdam, 1687-9. 

Mai, Angelo, 2:8vAAns Adyot 5!, Milan, 1817. 

Alexandre, C., Xpnopol S:Bvddtakol, Paris, 1841, 1853. 

Friedlieb, J. H., Xpyopot 2BvddAcaxoi, Leipzig, 1852. 

Rzach, Aloisius, Xpyopoi SBvAdAcakol, Vienna, 1891. 

Geffcken, J., Dze Oracula Sibyllina, Leipzig, 1902. 


(6) CHIEF CRITICAL ENQUIRIES AND EDITIONS. 


Schwally, ‘ Sibyllae’ in Real-Encyklopidie der klass, Altertumswissenschayt. 
Thorlacius, B,, Librz Stbyllistarum veteris ecclesiae crisi subiecti, Havniae, 1815. 
Bleek, F., ‘Ueber die Entstehung und den Zusammenhang der uns in acht Biichern erhaltenen Sammlung 
sibyllinischer Orakel,’ Theol. Zettschr., 1819, 1820. 
Gefrorer, Kritische Geschichte, Stuttgart, 1831. 
Volkmann, De Oraculis Sibyllinis, Leipzig, 1853. 
Alexandre, Excursus ad Sibyllina, Paris, 1858. 
Ewald, H., Adhandlung tiber Entstehung, Inhalt und Werth der sibyllinischen Biicher, Gottingen, 1858. 
Klausen, R. H., £neas und die Penaten, Gottingen, 1858. 
Keuss, ‘ Les Sibylles chrétiennes,’ Vouvelle Revue, 1861. 
Badt, B., Ursprung... und Text des 4. Buches der sibyllinischen Orakel, Breslau, 1878. 
Hilgenfeld, Jwdische A pokalyptik, Jena, 1857. : 
5 ‘ Die jiidische Apokalyptik und die neuesten Forschungen,’ Zeztschr. der wi'ss. Theologie, 1860. 
: ‘ Die jiidischen Sibyllen und der Essenismus,’ Z.W.T., 1871. 
Larocque, J., ‘Sur la date du troisi¢me livre des oracles sibyllins,’ Revue Archéologigue, 1869. 
Hildebrandt, ‘ Das rémische Antichristentum zur Zeit der Offenbarung Johannis und des V. sibyllinischen Buches,’ 
Z.W.T., s. 57-95, 1874. ; 
Zahn, T., * Ueber Ursprung und religiésen Character der sibyllinischen Biicher iv, v, Zeitschr. fiir kirchl. Wiss. 
und kirchl. Leben, 1886. 
Diels, K., Szbyllinische Blatter, Berlin, 1890. 
Fehr, E., Studia in Oracula Sibyllina, Upsala, 1893. 
Geffcken, J., ‘ Komposition und Entstehungszeit der Oracula Sibyllina, Zexte u. Untersuchungen, 1¢02. 


The literature which touches on the Sibylline Books is a very large one, and only a selection has been given 
above. A fuller Bibliography (up to 1900) will be found in Terry’s translation. Of the works mentioned Alexandre’s 
Excursus ad Sibyliina is a mine of information upon which the present writer has drawn freely. Friedlieb’s edition, 
with its spirited translation into German hexameters, contains many useful suggestions. Rzach’s text is furnished 
with a good apparatus criticus, but it is on the whole inferior to Geffcken’s which forms the basis of the present 
translation. Schiirer has some serviceable remarks in his fistory of the Jewish People (English translation, 
Edinburgh, 1886), and sidelights may be gleaned from various books on Jewish History and Eschatology, notably 
R. H. Charles, Eschatology ; Bousset, Religion der Juden im N.T. Zeitalter ; and Volz, Sidische Apokalyptik. 


(c) TRANSLATIONS. 

The following are noted in the very full Bibliography in Zhe Sibylline Oracles translated from the G k int 

English Blank Verse of M. S. Terry. a * ee a 
(a) English. 

J. Floyer, Zhe Sibylline Oracles, translated from the best Greek copies and compared with the sacred prophecies, 
especially with David and the Revelation, and with as much history as plainly shows that many of the Sibyl’s 
predictions are exactly fulfilled. With answers to objections made against them, London, 173i 

Terry, M. S., of. cit., New York, 1890. 

(6) French. 


Champier, S., Oracles de la Sibylle, tracduits par Simphorien Champier et Jean Robertet, 1702, 170 
Bouché-Leclerq, in Revue de Vhastoire des religions, vols. Vii, viii, ix. ; a aa 


(c) German. 


Nahrung, J. C., Newn Biicher sibyllinischer Prophezeiungen aus der srie hiscl in di 
aoe ae on oD. Te griechischen in die deutsche Sprache 


Friedlieb, J. H., Dze sibyllinischen Weissagungen vollstindig gesammelt, nach neuer Hand iften-Ver- 
gleichung, mit kritischem Commentare und metrischer deutscher Uebersetzung, Leipzig, 1852. ee PR RO Eanes 
Blass, F., ‘ Die sibyllinischen Orakel’ (in Afokr. u. Pseudep. des Alten T: estaments), Tubingen, 1900. 
(Z) Italian. 
Antolini, V., Oraculé Sibilini tradottt dal Greco in verst Italiani, Viterbo, 1775. 
(e) Latin. 
Castalio, S., Siby/lina Oracula de Graeco in Latinum conversa et in eadem j 
tat 
Mai, Angelo, as above, Milan, 1817, 1828. ea 
(/) Spanish. 


Poreno, Baltasar, Ordculos de las doze Sibilas. Profetisas de Christo nuestro Senor entre los Gentiles, Cuenca, 1621 
; : 


376 


Wie oly ie iNE ORACLES 
ERAGMENTS. . 
1 


(1) O ye mortal men of flesh who are nought, (2) why do ye so quickly exalt yourselves, having no 
eye unto life’s end? (3) Do ye not tremble at bis God, who a reat Soe (4) the Most Hich 
who knows, who looks on all, who witnesses all, (5) who nourishes all? the Creator who has planted 
his sweet Spirit in all, (6) and made him a guide to all mortals? (7) There is one God, sole Sove- 
reign, excellent in power, unbegotten, (8) almighty, invisible, yet seeing all himself. (g) Yet he him- 
self is beheld by no mortal flesh. (10) For what flesh can see visibly the heavenly and true (11) God, 
the Immortal, whose abode is the heaven? (12) Nay not even face to face with the sun’s rays 
(13) are men able to stand, being mortals, (14) mere veins and flesh wedded to bones. (15) Worship 
him, who is alone Prince of the World, (16) who alone exists from age to age, (17) self sprung, 
unbegotten, holding all in sway through all time, (18) giving to all men their testing time in the 
common light. (19) But of your evil counsel ye shall have the fitting reward, (20) for that forsaking 
the honouring of the true and cternal God, (21) and the offering to him of sacred hecatombs, 
(22) ye have made your sacrifices to the deities in Hades. (23) In insolence and madness ye walked, 
and, forsaking the straight high-road, (24) ye turned aside and were wandering through thorns 
(25) and stakes. Cease, vain mortals, (26) roaming in darkness and in black murky night, (27) and leave 
the darkness of night and take hold of the light. (28) Behold he is plain unto all and such as cannot 
be missed. (29) Come, pursue not ever darkness and murkiness! (30) Behold, the sweet-eyed light 
of the sun shines brightly forth. (31) Conceive wisdom in your hearts and have knowledge. 
(32) There is one God who sends rain and winds and earthquakes, (33) lightnings, famines, pestilence 
and sad cares, (34) and snow and hail: why should I detail them one by one? (35) He is Lord of 
heaven, Sovereign of earth, the one Existence. 


il 
(1) But if the gods have offspring and yet remain immortal, (2) there would have been more gods 
born than men, (3) nor would room have been found for mortals to stand. 


ili 
(1) But if any thing brought into being wholly perishes, God could not have been fashioned 
(2) from the loins of a man and from the womb. (3) But God is one, most exalted of all, who has 


made (4) the heaven, the sun, the stars, and the moon, (5) the fertile earth too, and the swellings of 
the sea-water, (6) and the lofty mountains, and perennial founts of springs. (7) Again he brings into 


i. The whole Fragment is preserved in Theoph. ad Auzéol. ii. 36. The first line is quoted by Clem. Al. Stvom. ili. 
3. 14. The strong monotheism of the passage is probably Jewish rather than Christian, but Fehr (Stud. 2x Or. Sib., 
p. 16 ff.) points out its close similarity with Orphic writings. 

5, 6. Cf. Wisdom xii. 1. The lines are quoted in Lact. Div. Just. iv. 6. 5 as coming from the beginning of the 
Erythraean Sibyl. In 6 Lact. has Oesy for Bporéy, but this is probably a Christian alteration. 

7-9. Quoted by Justin, Co. ad Graec. 16. 

ro. Gf. iii..17 ; Deut. v. 26. 

12. Geffcken quotes a similar thought ascribed to Socrates in Clem. Al. Protrept. vi. 71. 

14. The rendering follows the restoration of Nauck. ; 

18. testing time, xpirnpiov, is of doubtful meaning. Geffcken quotes Philo, De Ofif. Mund, 20, p. 14, In which it 
appears to mean ‘discrimination’. The phrase ‘common light’ is probably of Stoic origin. It recurs in 11. 494. 

22. For the idea that the heathen gods are dead cf. iii. 545 ff., vill. 393. 

28-35. Quoted in Clem. Al. Protrepé. viii. 37. Line 28 is also quoted in Strom. v. 14. 116. 

30. Alexandre supposes the ‘sweet-eyed light’ to refer to Christ. But the thought is more of the actual sun 
declaring the glory of God. 


ii. The second Fragment is also found in Theophilus (ad Awd. ii, 3. 2), and is alluded to specifically in [Con- 
stantine’s] Or. ad sanct. coet. 4. It appears to be closely connected with the following Fragment. 
iii, The Fragment is preserved in Theoph. ad Aut. ii. 36. 29. The first and the second lines are quoted in Hipp. 
Philos. v. 16, and in Lact. Div. Jns¢. i. 8. 3, and alluded to in Justin, Cohort. ad Graec. 23. 6. 
377 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Fracment III, Lines 8-49 


being the multitudes countless in number of the creatures of the water, (8) and He keeps alive the 
reptiles that move on the earth,(g) and the manifold species of winged things, twittering with clear voice, 
(10) brown birds with liquid trill, beating the air with outstretched wings ; (11) and in the mountain 
glades he has set the wild race of beasts, (12) and to us mortals he has subjected all domestic 
creatures. (13) He has constituted man as the Divinely appointed ruler of all, and (14) to eee 
has subjected every variety of things, and things that cannot be understood. (15) For what morta 
flesh can know all these things? (16) Nay, none knows them save He who from the beginning Hee 
made them, (17) the incorruptible Creator, the Eternal, dwelling in the sky (18), putting before the 
good much greater reward of good (19) but for the evil and unjust raising up wrath and od 
(20) and war and pestilence and tearful woes. (21) Ye men, why do ye vainly exalt yourselves—to e 
rooted out? (22) Be ashamed of making gods of cats and beasts. (23) Does not madness and frenzy 
take away the sense of the mind, (24) if gods purloin dishes and carry off pots: (25) and in place of 
dwelling in the golden limitless sky (26) they look moth-eaten and are woven with thick spiders webs. 
(27) Ye witless folk, worshipping serpents, dogs and cats, (28) ye reverence winged creatures and 
animals that creep on the earth, (29) and images of stone and statues made with hands, (30) and 
stones piled together by the roads. These things ye reverence (31) and many other vain things 
which it is a shame even to mention. (32) These are gods who lead on weak-willed men by guile, 
(33) from whose very mouth deadly poison is poured. (34) But to Him Who is both life and death- 
less, endless light, (35) and who pours forth upon men gladness sweeter than (luscious) honey, 
(36) to Him alone bend thy neck, (37) and finclinet thy path among the blessed lives. (38) All 
these things ye left and quaffed the full goblet of justice, (3y) unadulterated, strong, fortified, in no wise 
tempered, (40) yea all of you with spirit frenzied by folly. (41) And ye will not wake to soberness 
and come to a temperate mind, (42) and know the King, the God Who oversees all things. (43) There- 
fore the gleam of blazing fire is coming upon you. (44) Ye shall be burned with torches the livelong 
day throughout the age, (45) being ashamed of your lying futile idols. (46) But they who honour 
the true and everlasting God (47) inherit life, throughout the aeonian time (48) dwelling in the fertile 
garden of Paradise, (49) feasting on sweet bread from the starry heaven. 


BOOK, Ii 


(1) O thou who thunderest from on high, blessed heavenly one, who hast the Cherubim (2) as thy 
throne, I pray thee give me a short respite from mine unerring oracle, (3) for my soul within me is 
weary. (4) Nay, why did my heart again flutter, and why is my soul, (5) lashed with a spur from 
within, compelled to announce my message (6) to all? So again I will proclaim all (7) that God 
bids me proclaim unto men. 


8. keeps alive. The verb Wuyorpodeira: is apparently found nowhere else. The middle is a little awkward, and 
Opsopoeus’ reading, Wuyorpode re (from M), is not reliable. 

12. Cf. Ps. viii. 7,8. Philo, De Opif. Mund? 28 (the whole chapter should be read). 

17-19. Quoted by Lact. De Jra De? xxii. 7, as from Erythraean Sibyl. 

18, 19. Cf. Sirach xxxix. 25. 

21. The question is a highly compressed one. For the thought cf. iil. 57 ff. 

22. The mention of cats as objects of worship points to an Egyptian source cf. iii. 30. 

25. limitless, dreipova, an emendation of Wilamowitz. 

26. look moth-eaten. The phrase ontoBpera dédopxe is scornfully modelled on the heroic idiom mop... OedopKas 
(Odyss. xix. 446, &c.). The sarcasm is very effective. The deified cats pilfer savoury morsels, and the images are 
covered with spiders’ webs. 

32. who lead on . . . by guile, dé jynrihpes is Wilamowitz’s suggestion for dodorropes. 

35. This line and the next are deficient. There is nothing to show how they should be filled up. 

37. tinclinet. The verb is uncertain. MS. reading is dvak\wvot. Rz. alters to dvakNivos, but the optative is 
awkward after the imperative. Perhaps read dvakaivov, ‘ renew.’ 

38. The metaphor of the cup is probably derived from Isa. li. 17s 

45. MS. ‘being ashamed of lies in the futile idols’. 

46-48. Quoted by Lact. Div. Jst. ii. 12. 19. 

47. The phrase inherit life recalls Matt. xix. 29, but is not exclusively a Christian conception. 


49. Sweet bread. This is probably manna, which is to be the food of the blessed. Cf. Sib. iii. 746 and 
2 Baruch xxix. 8. 


III. 1-7. Introduction. The Divine compulsion. 

I. The line needs emendation to make it scan. Read wWiBpope, udkap, ovpavte ds Exes Ta XepovBiv, The scansion 
goes more by accent than by strict rules, and indeed in all this section there are metrical abnormalities. 

3. The Sibyl regularly represents herself as speaking under Divine compulsion, cf. infr. 1, 295. The Fathers 
distinguished her inspiration from that of the Hebrew prophets by its unwilling character. 


378 


THE SIBYLEINE -BOOKS: ~Boox III, Lines. 1-62 


(8) Ye men that bear the form that God did mould in his image wh : 
random and walk not in the straight path, (10) being ever mindful e the Sunadee ee : 
(11) There is one sovereign God, ineffable, whose dwelling is in heaven, (12) self sprung, unseen 
yet seeing all himself alone. (13) No mason’s hand did make him, nor does some model formed 
from gold (14) or ivory by the varied skill of man represent him. (15) But he, himself Eternal 
hath revealed himself (16) as One who is and was before, yea and shall be hereafter. (17) For 
who, being mortal, can gaze on God with his eyes? (18) Or who could bear even to hear the mere 
name (19) of the mighty, heavenly God, the World-Ruler? (20) Who by his word created all, both 
heaven and sea (21) and tireless sun and moon at full (22) and twinkling stars, mighty mother Ocean, 
(23) springs and rivers, fire immortal, days and nights. (24) Yea it is God Himself who fashioned 
four-lettered Adam, (25) the first man fashioned, who completes in his name (26) morn and dusk, 
‘antarctic and arctic. (27) He too both established the fashion of the form of mortal men (28) and 
made the beasts and things that creep and fly. (29) Ye do not worship nor fear God, but wander at 
haphazard, (30) bowing down to serpents and doing sacrifice to cats, (31) and to dumb idols and stone 
statues of mortal wights, (32) and sitting down before the doors of godless temples (33) ye weary 
the God who ever is, who guards all (34), taking your delight in miserable stones, forgetting the 
judgement (35) of the Eternal Saviour Who created heaven and earth. (36) O race that delights in 
blood, crafty, wicked race of godless men, (37) liars and double-tongued, immoral, (38) adulterous, 
idolatrous, of wily devices, (39) within whose heart is evil, a frenzied spur, (40) snatching for 
yourselves, having a shameless mind! (41) For no man of wealth endowed with goods will give 
any part to another, (42) but miserable meanness shall be among all mortals, (43) and faith they shall 
never keep at all, (44) but many widowed women shall have other secret lovers for lucre’s sake, 
(45) and gaining husbands shall not keep hold of the rope of life. 

(46) But when Rome shall rule over Egypt as well, (47) tas she still hesitates to do,f then the 
mightiest kingdom (48) of the immortal king over men shall appear. (49) And a holy prince shall 
come to wield the sceptre over all the world (50) unto all ages of hurrying time. (51) And then there 
shall be inexorable wrath on Latin men. (52) Three with piteous fate shall bring ruin on Rome, 
(53) and all its people shall perish in their own dwellings, (54) whensoever a cataract of fire shall 
flow from heaven. (55) O wretched me! when shall that day arrive, (56) even the judgement of the 
eternal God, the mighty King? (57) Yet for the present be ye founded, O ye cities, and adorned all of 
you (58) with temples and race-courses, with markets and statues (59) of gold and silver and stone, that 
ye may come to the day of bitterness. (60) For come it will, whenever the odour of brimstone pervades 
(61) all mankind. But I will tell out in particular (62) all those cities in which men are to suffer woe. 


8-45. Praise of God and denunciation of idolatry. The passage is similar to Fr. 1. and ii, Cf. also Isa. xl. 18 ff. ; 
Wisdom of Solomon xiii. 10 ff. 

12. seeing ... alone. There is no need to alter dpay pdvos (, p) into dpapevos. For the thought cf. Orph. 
Frag. iv. 9 £. o08€ tts abrov eicopder Ovnt&v adres O€ te mavras Sparat. ; ; 

14. by the varied skill. réxvyo’ is a conjecture of Wilamowitz. It is possible to translate the MSS. rexijs, ‘no 
model of the art of man. . 

17. Cf. Exod. xxxiii. 20; Judg. xii. 22, &c. ; ‘ : 

20. For God’s word as the agent of Creation cf. Ps. xxxiii. 6. It is not yet personified as in Philo. 

24. The letters of Adam are represented as giving the initials of East, West, South, and North. In 2 En, xxx, 13 
an acrostic is formed on this name. The same idea recurs in an anonymous writing, De Montibus Sina et Sion 4, 
and in Aug. 7vact. in Loh. Evang. ix. 14. : 

25. in his name. For kal odvopa it is necessary to read kar ovvopa. 

30. The objects of worship are specially Egyptian. Cf. Fag. ill. 27. 

31. dumb. ddddos. So Alexandre emends from adXous. tenet ae 

33. ye weary. The MSS. reading rnpeire can hardly be translated. — Read reiper’ dei, Cf. Isa. xlili. 24. : 

34. forgetting. ékAa<ovres does not occur elsewhere in the active with this meaning. Mein. suggests ex\chafdvres, 
but this is usually causative in meaning. R 

37. The restoration of the text is due to Castalio. Fe 

4o. for yourselves. For avrois it seems necessary to read avrois. 

42. meanness, «akin in the special sense of s/zmgzness. Cf, Rom. i, 29. % ae 

44-5. In 1 Tim. v. 11, 12 regularly constituted church widows are forbidden to marry again. Here the objection 
seems to be against second sl eg in ata 

ife. This is probably a nautical metaphor. : 

ee oon of the aoly Kine and the Becicion of the wicked. For the question of the date see Intro- 
duction, p. 371. : : ; y urea Peat i 

46. A Rabbinic guess as to the time of the coming of the Messiah was nine months a ter the empire of Rome ha 
extended over the whole world. Cf. Edersheim, Zi/e and Times, 1. 169 (with notes). _ : ; 

47. tas she still hesitates to dot. The text is uncertain, and various emendations are possible. In Geffcken s 
text elxére (for MSS. «is év) dnOivovea *rére 8)* it seems necessary to omit 57. Buresch and Fehr suggest «is év 0° (uve. 

49. a holy prince. He must be the Messiah, and not as Alexandre suggests, MEER as ine é seh, 

54. Possibly a reference to the burning of the Capitoline Juppiter in 84 B.C., in which the Sibylline Books perished, 
or to the destruction by lightning of the statue of Juppiter on the Alban Mount in 57 B.C. 

60. For brimstone as a feature of the Judgement cf. infr. 462; 1 Enoch cxvii. 6. 


379 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS, “Book IIT, (inzs%63—1¢2 


(63) From the stock of Sebaste Beliar shall come in later time (64) and shall fraiset the ae 
heights and raise the sea, (65) the great fiery sun and the bright moon, (66) and he shall sprees e 
dead and shall perform many signs (67) for men: but they shall not be effective in him. . ) Nay, 
but he deceives mortals, and many shall he deceive, (69) Hebrews faithful and elect and lawless too, 
and other (70) men who have never yet listened to the word of God. (71) But at whatsoever 
time the threatened vengeance of the Almighty God draws near, (72) and fiery energy comes 
through the swelling surge to earth, (73) and burns up Beliar and the overweening men, (74) even 
all who have put their trust in him, (75) then the world shall be under the dominion of a Neen 
hands (76) obeying her every behest. (77) Then when a widow shall reign over the whole nee ‘ 
(78) and cast both gold and silver into the godlike deep, (79) and the brass and iron of short ive 
man (80) cast into the sea, then the elements of the world one and all (81) shall be widowed, 
what time God Whose dwelling is in the sky (82) shall roll up the heaven as a book is rolled. 
(83) And the whole firmament in its varied forms shall fall on the divine earth (84) and on the sea: 
and then shall flow a ceaseless cataract of raging fire, (85) and shall burn land and sea, (86) and the 
firmament of heaven and the stars and creation itself (87) it shall cast into one molten mass and clean 
dissolve, (88) Then no more shall there be the luminaries’ twinkling orbs, (89) no night, no dawn, 
no constant days of care, (90) no spring, no summer, no winter nor autumn. (91) And then the judge- 
ment of the Mighty God shall come into the midst (g2) of the mighty aeon, when all these things 
shall come to pass. ; 3 

(93) O for the watery tracks and all the dry land, (94) when the sun arises which never sets again. 
(95) All shall obey him as he ascends again upon the world, (96) for as much as he first fashioned ~ 
them, and his might. 

(97) But whensoever the threatened vengeance of the Mighty God is brought to pass, (98) that 
vengeance with which once he threatened mortals when they made a tower (gg) in the Assyrian 
land—Nowall were of one tongue (100) and they desired to ascend into the starry heaven. (101) But 
straightway the Eternal laid great stress (102) upon the blasts: then the winds dashed down the great 


63-92. The coming and destruction of Beliar. In P. this section is introduced with the following words: ‘ After this 
she proceeds in her discourse about the deceiving devil, the Antichrist, and speaks as follows.’ cs See 

63. Sebaste is Samaria, and the reference is probably to Simon Magus regarded as Belial or the Antichrist. But 
“the stock of Sebaste’ may refer to the Emperors (Augusti), and, if so, Beliar is Nero represented as returning. So 
R. H. Charles (Asc. Zsa. p. Ixviii). P : 

64. raise. The use of the verb orjoe: is difficult. Possibly it alters its meaning from ‘bring down’ in this line to 
‘raise up’ in |. 66. Or in 1. 64 we might read orpacer. 

67. In Acts of Peter with Simon xxviii ff. Simon Magus resuscitates a dead body, but only in appearance. When 
he departs the charm vanishes, and it is St. Peter who actually performs the miracle. The unreality of the miracles 
is alluded to in Ps. Hippol. xxiii. 106. 14. 

70. The reading of # ow Gceod Adyov need not necessarily be altered. 

71. The idea that the world would be destroyed by fire appears among the Romans as a Stoic doctrine. Probably 
it was derived from Heraclitus. Among the Jews it was possibly suggested by Oriental influences. 

75. For the idea of the dominion of a woman cf. viii. 200. It has been suggested that Cleopatra is intended, 
transformed into a demoniacal personage. Bousset sees a recollection of the mythical Sea Monster, originally 
regarded as feminine. 

79. the brass too and iron. Kai yadxdv re cidnpov. Emend with Wilamowitz into ody Xa\k@ te cidnpov. 

81. be widowed. Probably, as Blass suggests, ‘ bereft of living things’. 

82. Cf. Isa. xxxiv 4; Ps. cii. 26; Apoc. vi. 14, and frequently in later literature, e.g. Armenian Apoc. of Daniel, 
240. 13 (cf. Bousset-Keane in Antichrist Legend, p. 242). 

84. cataract of ... fire. Cf. Secrets of Enoch x. 3 

86. stars, ojpara, a conjectural emendation for para. 

89. The cessation of seasons is paralleled in Secrets of Enoch xxxiii. 2; cf. also 4 Ezra vii and Sib. ii. 325. 

go. winter. There is no need to alter the MS. reading XElpw@y tO xeLuor’, 

92. the mighty aeon (aldy péyas) was originally a Stoic conception. 

93-6. The lines are usually regarded as Christian, but there is nothing distinctively Christian in them. The 
reference to the sun probably goes back to Malachi iv. 1,2. It is possible, indeed, that Justin is referring to these 
lines in Cohort. ad Graec. 38, and if so he understood them to be Christian in interpretation. But that does not prove 
that they are of Christian origin. 

96. fashioned (émjyvve) for MSS. ‘knew’ (enéyva). 

97-294. A long section from the Erythraean Sibyl beginning with twelve lines adapted from the Babylonian Sibyl. 
The passage is widely quoted or alluded to: cf. Euseb. i. 23, 24, who quotes from Alexander Polyhistor (fl. 80-40 B.C.) ; 
Josephus, Azz, i. 4. 3. Eusebius preserves also notices in Abydenus and Eupolemus (cf. Praep. Ev. ix. 14, xvii). 
Lact. Dzv. Just. i. 6 explicitly refers the section to the Erythraean Sibyl, but a notice in the Scholia on Plato, Phaedr. 
244 B ascribes the account of the tower and the giants to the Hebrew Sibyl. 

100. There appears to be some confusion of the story in Genesis with the legend of the giants piling Pelion on 
Ossa. Fench 7 x1. 304 ff.; Virg. Georg. i. 280 ff. 

102, ihe wind 1s not mentioned in Genesis, but the allusion occurs in Jubilees x. : i : 
Epiph. Adv. Haer. i. 1. 5. ; J 26; Josephus, Ant. i. 4. 3; 


380 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Book III, Lines 103-163 


tower from on high, (103) and incited mortal men to mutual strife. (104) Therefore men named the 
city Babylon. 

(105) But when the tower was fallen and men’s tongues (106) divided off with divers kinds of sounds 
then the whole (107) earth began to be filled with separate kingdoms. (108) Then came the tenth 
generation of articulate men, (109) since the flood came upon the men of yore. (10) And Cronos 
Titan, and Iapetus were kings, (11) the goodliest children of Gaia and Ouranos, whom men called 
(12) Earth and Heaven, dubbing them so (13) because they were the first of all articulate men. (14) Three- 
fold were the divisions of earth in the portion of each, (15) and each was king in his own sphere, nor 
did they fight, (16) for oaths had been made to their father, and the shares were just. (17) Then their 
father’s full time of age arrived (18) and so he died. And his sons in monstrous transgression of their 
oaths (19) stirred up strife against one another (20) as to who should reign over mortals in possession 
of royal honour. (21) And Cronos and Titan fought against each other. (22) But them Rhea and 
Gaia and garland-loving Aphrodite, (23) Demeter and Hestia and fair-tressed Dione (24) brought to 
friendship, reconciling the kings (25) all brethren as they were and of one kin, and the other (26) men 
who were of like blood and parentage. (27) And they resolved that Cronos should reign as king of 
all, (28) because he was eldest and fairest of form. (29) But Titan for his part imposed mighty oaths 
on Cronos (30) that he should not rear a family of male children, so that he himself might be king 
(31) when old age and death overtook Cronos. (32) So whensoever Rhea was in travail, the Titans 
would sit beside her (33) and tear in pieces every male child, (34) but the women children they 
would leave alive to be reared with their mother. (35) But our lady Rhea when she brought forth 
her third child (36) brought forth Hera first: and when they saw evidently (37) that the child was 
female they went away to their homes, those rough (38) Titans. And then Rhea brought forth a man 
child, (39) whom she quickly sent away, to be reared secretly and privily, (40) to Phrygia, taking 
three Cretan men under oath into her counsel. (41) Therefore they gave him the name of Zeus 
because he was sent away unsuspected. (42) In like manner too she sent away Poseidon stealthily. 
(43) Then at the third time Rhea, goddess among women, gave birth to Pluto (44) as she was passing 
Dodona, whence ran the watery courses (45) of the river Europus, and the water flowed to the sea 
(46) blended with the Peneius, and they call it the Stygian stream. (47) But when the Titans heard 
that there were sons (48) born privily to the union of Cronos and Rhea, (49) then Titan mustered his 
seventy sons, (50) and held in bonds Cronos and Rhea his consort. (51) And he hid them in the 
earth and kept them in fetters. (52) Then indeed the sons of mighty Cronos heard of it, (53) and 
they raised up for him a great war and battle din. (54) And this is the beginning of war to all mortals 
(55) [yea this is the first beginning of war to mortals |. iY 

(56) And then God inflicted evil on the Titans. (57) And all the families of the Titans and of 
Cronos (58) died. Then in the circling course of time (59) the Egyptian empire arose, then that of 
the Persians, (60) of the Medes and Ethiopians and of Assyrian Babylon, (61) then that of the Mace- 
donians, again that of Egypt and then of Rome. 

(62) And then the message of the Great God fluttered in my breast (63) and bade me prophesy 


104. The derivation is taken from Genesis where the name is connected with Ob3. Babel is probably dad z/z ‘gate 
of god’, and Babylon daé ilani ‘gate of the gods’. : : ; 
hot The account of the Titans is parallel to Hesiod, 7zeog. 421 ff., but differs in several details. See Friedl., 
Einl., p. Xxvil. ge ; ait 
114 i Compare the account in Epiph. Azcoratus cxiv, in which Noah is represented as dividing the world among his 
three sons and exacting from them an oath that none should invade his brother’s portion. It is from Ham's violation 
of this compact by robbing Shem of Canaan that Epiphanius deduces the justice and morality of the command to 
Israel to exterminate the Canaanites. A similar story is told in an Ethiopian work (Kebra Nagast, ed. Bezold, 1905). 
119. For the wars of the gods cf. Hes. Theog. 629 ff. 5 wt hy : i 
ee Geffcken quotes a ‘similar story from Moses of Khoren (/2story of Armenia i. 6) in which Kronos is 
represented by Zrwan. ote et. ie 
132. The account is curiously parallel to Apoc. xu. 4. : the hates 
ee The ordinary account as alluded to in Callimachus, Hymn to Zeus, 46 ff.; Lucr. il. 629 ff.; Virg. Georg. iv. 150 
represents Zeus as reared in Crete when the Curetes drown his infant cries by beating cymbals. 
141. The derivation of Zeus, from the preposition of dveréupn, * he was sent away’, is singularly weak, and may be 
not original, but Geffck. compares a similar derivation in Cornutus 2. 
144. Dodona was celebrated for its whispering oaks, the most ancient oracle of Zeus. _ ee 
145. the river Europus, i.e. Homer’s Titaresius, a tributary of the Peneius. _ In Z/. ii. 753 f. it is said to flow with 
the Peneius, but not to mingle its waters. Homer also mentions Its connexion with Styx. Gal 
156-61 ‘A concise summary which is, perhaps, not original here. Friedlieb suggests that 156 is picked up by 199, 
i ing lines being an interpolation. : 
se ete jaisctcs given to eave is to be noticed. It is the first of empires and the only name that recurs. 
ee The Babylonian Sibyl standing in the remote past reviews the history of the world as far as the time of 
Cyrus (167-210 an interpolation). : 
Pe acheced, imraro, so MSS. _ Rz. and Geffck. stood’, igraro. 


381 


THE SIBYLLINE. BOOKS. - Boox IIT, Lines 164=279 


severally about each (64) land and to their kings, and to put them in mind of things that are 
tobe. (65) And this was the first thing that God vouchsafed to my understanding, (66) namely how 
many kingdoms of men are being mustered. (67) First of all the house of Solomon shall hold 
sway, (68) and the Phoenician invaders of Asia and of the islands as well (69), and the race of the 
Pamphylians, Persians, and Phrygians, (70) and that too of the Carians and Mysians and Lydians 
rich in gold. 

(71) Then shall come the Greeks overweening and unholy: (72) then a very motley race of 
Macedonia shall hold sway, (73) who shall come as a dread war cloud upon mortals. (74) But the 
God of heaven shall smite them utterly. 

(75) Next there shall be the sway of another empire, (76) an empire of many hoary heads from the 
western sea, (77) which shall hold sway over much land, and shall convulse many men, (78) and shall 
cause fear to many kings in time to come; (79) much gold too and silver it shall ravish (80) from 
many cities: and again there shall be in the godlike earth (81) gold, yes, and silver, and raiment too. 

(82) And they shall afflict mortals. But those men shall have a great (83) fall, whensoever they 
enter on a course of unjust insolence. (84) And straightway a stress of ungodliness shall fall on 
them, (85) and male shall draw near to male, and they shall set their children (86) in ill-famed houses, 
and there shall be in those days (87) great tribulation among men, and it shall set all things wrong, 
(88) and cut everything short, and fill everything with evils, (89) through covetousness the corrupter 
of life, and ill-gotten wealth, (90) in many lands and especially in Macedonia. (g1) And it shall stir 
up hatred, and they shall show all manner of guile, (g2) until the seventh reign when there shall 
reign (93) over Egypt a king, who shall be of Greek origin. 

(94) And then the nation of the Mighty God shall be again powerful, (95) that nation which shall 
be to all mortals the guide of life. (g6) But why has God put this too into my mind to say (97) 
what shall be the first evil and the next one and the last which is to fall (98) on all men, and what 
shall be the beginning of these? (99) First of all God shall inflict evil on the Titans, (200) for they 
shall suffer vengeance at the hands of the sons of the mighty Cronos, (201) because they bound Cronos 
and the honoured mother. (202) Then, secondly, the Greeks shall have tyrannies and haughty 
(203) kings, overweening and unchaste, (204) adulterous and evil in every way, and no longer shall 
mortals have (205) rest from war. And the terrible Phrygians shall perish, (206) all of them, and evil 
shall be upon Troy on that day. (207) Then to the Persians and Assyrians evil shall come, (208) and 
to the whole of Egypt, and to Libya and the Ethiopians, (209) and the Carians and Pamphylians 
an evil hard to remove, (10) and to all men. Why, then, do I detail each severally ? 

(11) But when the first have reached their end, straightway then shall (12) be a second series 
upon men. But now I will proclaim this first of all. (13) Evil shall come to the godly men, who 
dwell around the great temple (14) of Solomon, and who are the descendants of righteous (15) men. 
Yet of these also I will proclaim (16) the family and kindred of their fathers and the people of all, 
(17) everything expressly will I proclaim, O mortal of cunning wiles and crafty mind. 

(18) There is a city (Camarina) down in the land of Ur of the Chaldees, (19) from which comes 


167 ff. The list of world powers falls into five divisions: (a) Asia, (4) Greece, (c) Rome, (@) Egypt, (e) Jews. 

168. and the Phoenician invaders of Asia, &c. MSS. have ‘ invaders of Phoenicia, Asia’, &c. 

172. then. «ira Volkmann for dAdo, MSS. 

175-93. Rome is still a distant power, but it arouses intense apprehension. The lines seem to reflect a date 
between 190 (Magnesia) and 165 B.c. when Rome intervened to effect a peace between the Hasmoneans and Lysias. 

176, of many hoary heads, lit. ‘white and many headed’, referring to the Roman Senate. 

178. Perhaps referring to the check of Antiochus Epiphanes by G. Popilius Laenas in 168 B. Ci; cioPolyb.ixxixs27- 

179. Referring to the tribute of 15,000 talents exacted after Magnesia. 

180. there shall be in the godlike earth gold. The meaning seems to be that men would hide their treasures in 
order to prevent their being requisitioned to pay the tribute. The practice is condemned in Sirach XxIx. 10; 2 Enoch li. 2. 

183 ff. The particular vices are out of place as ascribed to the Romans of this early date. 

188. The line is repeated in 1. 613, where it refers to Antiochus the Great. 

190. Macedonia was divided after the battle of Pydna (168 B.c.), and made a Roman province in 147 B.C. 

192. The seventh king is Ptolemy VII, Philometor, son of Cleopatra I, and grandson of Antiochus III. He was 
proclaimed king in 182 B.c. Ewald, however, would understand the king to be Ptolemy Physkon. 

194. The exaltation of the Jews refers to the age of the later Maccabees. 

199-210. Another different enumeration of world powers beginning with the Titans. 

200. 1.€. viois yap kparepoio dikas riovor Kpdvoro emended from vor yap kpt. Kpovov turovow dixas (Badt). 

204. adulterous refers to the abduction of Helen by Paris. 

209. an evil hard to remove. Read 7’ dzopov for re kaxév (with Herwerden). 

211-17. An introduction to a sketch of Jewish history, which extends to 294. 

218. The lacuna is to be filled up by ‘Camarina’, which Eupolemus gives as an old name for Ur. Schrader points 
out that Camarina might be connected with the Arabic word for moon, Ur being one of the main seats of the worship 
of Sin the Moon God. Ewald understands Ovpxaddaiov to refer to Abraham, and ‘the land of Abrahany’ to mean 
Palestine. He reads onkéds re for kaudpwa. For Odp XadOaliwv W read cipuayua, but this seems a mere cuess 

219. For 6) w reads pou, ‘my race’; as if the Sibyl claimed a Mesopotamian descent. x 


382 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Book III, Livgs 220-285 


a race of most righteous men, (20) who ever give themselves up to sound counsel and fair deeds. 
(21) For they search not out the circling course of the sun or the moon, (22) nor monstrosities beneath 
the earth, (23) nor the depth of Ocean’s shimmering sea, (24) nor portents of sneezes, and birds of 
augurers, (25) nor wizards, nor magicians, nor enchanters, (26) nor the deceits of ventriloquists’ foolish 
words, (27) nor do they study the predictions of Chaldaean astrology, (28) nor do they astronomize: 
for all these things are in their nature prone to deceive, (29) such things as witless men are searching 
out day by day, (30) exercising their souls for a work of no profit. (31) Yes, and they have taught 
deceits to ill-starred men, (32) from which come many evils to mortals on the earth, (33) so that they 
are led astray from good paths and righteous acts. (34) But these diligently practise justice and 
virtue, (35) and not covetousness, which is the source of myriad ills (36) to mortal men, of war and 
desperate famine. 

(37) But they have just measures in country and city, (38) nor do they carry out night robberies 
one against another, (39) nor do they drive off herds of oxen and sheep and goats, (40) nor does 
a neighbour remove his neighbour’s landmarks, (41) nor does a man of much wealth vex his lesser 
brother, (42) nor does anyone afflict widows but rather assists them, (43) ever ready to supply them 
with corn and wine and oil. (44) And always the wealthy man among the people sends a portion 
of his harvest to those who have nothing, (45) but are in want, (46) fulfilling the command of the 
Mighty God, the ever abiding strain: (47) for Heaven has wrought the earth for all alike. 

(48) But when the people of twelve tribes with their God-sent leaders (49) shall leave Egypt and 
pursue their road, (50) journeying with a fiery pillar in the night-time, (51) and in a pillar of cloud 
whensoever the dawn leads on day, (52) over them He shall set up as leader the mighty man (53) 
Moses, whom the princess found and took home from a marsh, (54) and bringing up called her son. 
But when he came, (55) leading the people whom God was bringing from Egypt (56) to Mount Sina, 
then God gave them the law forth from heaven, (57) writing all its ordinances on two tables, (58) and 
commanded to keep them: and if so be any disobeyed, (59) he should pay the penalty, either 
according to law or by mortals’ hands, (60) or if he escaped mortal men, he should perish by divine 
justice. 

(63) To them alone does the fruitful field yield its fruit (64) up to an hundred fold from one, and 
the measures of God are yielded. 

(65) But they too shall have evil, neither shall they escape (66) pestilence. Yea, and thou too shalt 
leave thy lovely shrine (67) and flee, since it is thy fate to leave thine holy soil. (68) And thou shalt 
be carried to the Assyrians, and shalt see thine infant children (69) enslaved to hostile men, (70) and 
thy wives: and all thy livelihood and wealth shall perish. (71) And every land shall be full of thee 
and every sea: (72) and every one shall be incensed at thy customs. (73) And the whole land shall 
be empty of thee: and the fenced altar, (74) and the temple of the Mighty God and the long 
walls (75) shall all fall to the ground, because thou didst not obey in thy mind (76) the holy law of 
the Immortal God, but wentest astray, (77) and didst serve miserable idols, and didst not fear (78) 
the Immortal Father of gods and of all men, (79) nor wouldst honour Him, but didst honour the 
idols of mortal men. (80) Therefore for seven decades of times thy fruitful land (81) shall all be empty 
of thee and (so shall) thy wondrous shrine. (82) But there awaits thee good at the end and exceeding 
great glory, (83) as the Immortal God has ordained for thee. But do thou tarry, (84) trusting in the 
holy laws of the Mighty God, (85) when bowing thy knee thou prayest toward the light of dawn. 


227-8. astrology ... astronomize. The distinction between dorpodoyetv and dorpovopeiy appears, apart from 
this passage, to be not earlier than Sextus Empiricus. For Chaldaea as the home of astronomy cf. Philo, De Migratione 
A brahamt, Cc. 32. ‘ adg : : 

242. Theline is metrically defective, and has to be emended. Read ovd€ ye Tus XTjpas OdiPer padrdov dé Bondet (Mein.). 

246. ever abiding, Zupovor, conjecture, for ‘lawful’, évvopoy. For ‘strain’, vuvov, there is a variant, ‘ sleep’, Umvop. 

247. For the sentiment cf. ii. 319 ff., vill. 110 ff. i : xe 

248. God-sent leaders. These are either Moses and Aaron, or, according to Jewish tradition, angels, who 
guided the Israelite host. Volkmann compares Philo, Vita Mosis, i, p. 628. 

251. whensoever (érav), a conjecture of Geffck. for ‘ all’ (av). < ae 

260. divine (cin) seems required for MSS. ‘all’ (doy). Compare the trespass of Achan (Judg. vii). After this line 
two lines are omitted. Lines 247 and 585 are inserted in some MSS. ; : 

264. measures of God perhaps = ‘bounteous measures’. The imperfect 7eAéOovro (are yielded) is, perhaps, used 


mically. ; : : ; 

Seas ieaue: xatadurev, though metrically defective, need not be altered to kdpra huray (Wilamowitz) or kad\eirov 
] . c . / 

pore Immortal. MSS. kai Bpords for duBporos. Volkmann would read 6 cat Bporés, and understand a reference to 


the Incarnation, but this is highly improbable. es - ae ele : pies : 
esen The ecic certainly corrupt. The MSS. have ommore oeto kapov dpOov youu mpos paos dpn, § whenever he lifts 
thy tired (or ‘and my’) knee upright toward the light.’ The emendation is not very violent to 6mmére cou Kdymtoy 


dpOpov ydvu mpos dos apn. by 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Boox III, Lines 286-340 | 


(86) And then the God of heaven shall send a king, (87) and shall judge each man with blood and 
flame of fire. (88) There is a royal tribe, whose family shall (89) never stumble: and this in the circuit 
of times (90) shall have dominion and shall begin to raise up a new shrine of God. (91) And all the 
kings of the Persians shall succour it (92) with gold and brass and well wrought iron. (93) For God 
Himself shall give a holy dream by night. (94) And then the Temple shall be again as it 
was before. 

(95) Then indeed my spirit ceased its God-sent strain, (96) and I besought the Great Father to 
ease me from my spell. (97) And again the word of the Great God fluttered in my breast, (98) and 
bade me prophesy of each several (gg) land and to put in the minds of the kings that which is to be. 
(300) And this first God put it in my mind to say, (301) how many grievous woes the Eternal has 
devised for Babylon, (302) because it sacked His great temple. Lali } 

(303) Woe unto thee Babylon and race of Assyrian men, a rushing destruction is coming one 
day upon the whole land of the sinners, (305) and a crash shall destroy the whole country of men, 
(306) even the scourge of the Mighty God jthe inspirer of my strains}. 

(307) For from the air from above there shall come to thee Babylon (308) (yea from heaven there 
shall come down to thee from the Holy Place) (309) and to the children of wrath eternal perdition. 
(10) And then thou shalt be as thou wast before as though thou hadst not been born. (11) And then 
thou shalt be surfeited with blood, as formerly thou thyself (12) didst spill the blood of good men 
and just, (13) whose blood even now cries unto the farthest heaven. 

(14) Then shall come home to thee, O Egypt, a mighty plague (15) and dread, which thou didst 
never expect to come to thee. (16) {For a sword shall go through the midst of thee}, (17) and con- 
fusion and death and famine shall last (18) to the seventh generation of kings, and then thou shalt 
cease. 

(19) Woe unto thee, land of Gog and Magog that art in the midst of (20) the rivers of Ethiopia ; 
what an outpouring of blood shalt thou receive, (21) and thou shalt be called among men the habita- 
tion of judgement, (22) and the drenched earth shall drink thy life blood. 

(23) Woe unto thee, Libya: woe to the sea and land! (24) Ye daughters of the West to what a 
bitter day shall ye come: (25) yea come pursued by a grievous struggle, (26) dreadful and grievous: 
a dreadful judgement shall there be again. (27) And perforce ye shall all come to perdition (28) for- 
asmuch as ye utterly destroyed the great House of the Eternal, (29) and ground it fearfully with iron 
teeth. (30) Therefore thou shalt see thy land full of dead bodies, (31) Some from war and all assaults 
of the devil, (32) by famine and pestilence, and by savage-hearted foes. (33) And all thy land shall 
be empty of thee, and thy cities deserts. 

(34) In the west a star shall shine, which they shall call a comet, (35) a messenger to men of the 
sword, famine, and death, (36) and the }destructiont+ of ruling men and great notables. ; 

(37) Again there shall be very great signs among men: (38) for deep eddying Tanais shall leave the 
Macotic sea, (39) and down the deep bed a fertile furrow shall be drawn, (40) and the vast stream shall 


286. king. The king is Cyrus, though possibly the writer has in mind his own times rather than the Babylonian 
captivity, and looks for a deliverer like Cyrus. Ewald understands the king to be the Messiah. 

288. The royal tribe is Judah, from which tribe sprang Jesus son of Jozedek. 

293. The writer is probably thinking of the story in 1 Esdras iii. 3 ff. 

295-488. The third main section in the book. The date is uncertain, various sections of different ages being 
apparently incorporated. Alexandre supposes the editor to be a Christian or semi-Jew of the age of the Antonines 
but there is no trace of Christian influence. Badt puts the date at about 140 B.C. : 

306. the inspirer of my strains. The title NyNTopos Uuvyev is curious and of uncertain meaning. 

307. from the air, or ‘at dawn’ (so Kautzsch, Pseudep.). 

314-18. Woe on Egypt. Bousset regards these lines as a later insertion. 

316. Reference to the internal struggle between the two brothers Ptolemy VII Philometor and Ptolemy Euergetes II 
who ee conjointly in Egypt from 170 B.c. The MSS. reading is unmetrical, and emendations are purely 
conjectural. 


318. Cf. supr. 192. Here, however, it is pointed out that there is a more obvi i ic hi 
after the death of Ptolemy Physkon in 117 he nips ee er aa 
_319-22. The names Gog and Magog occur frequently in apocalyptic literature but their identification i i 
difficulty. Nowhere else are they located as ‘ amid the Ses OL EN ihonia® Here, perhaps, they ena ee 
who returned with Antiochus from Egypt, when he desecratedthe Temple. In Rabbinic theology Gog and Magoe 
are those who revolt against God and His Messiah. See references in Volz, Jiidische Eschatologie, p- 176. eke 
324. daughters of the West. These are probably Libyans in the army of Antiochus. Alexandre understands the 
phrase to refer to the Romans under Vespasian, Explanations differ widely, but there is, very probably, a reference 
to Ezek. XXXvVlll. 39, which represents Magog, Persia, Ethiopia, and Libya as marching to lay waste the Holy Land 
333. thy cities deserts. MSS. have ‘the desolations of thy city’. : 
534. Perhaps refers to the comet mentioned in Seneca, Vat. Quaest. vii. 15 
King of Syria. 
336. destruction. pfopay, though metrically false, is not improbably original. 
338. Tanais = the River Don. The ‘ Maeotic Sea’ = the sea of Azov. 


384 


as occurring at the death of Demetrius, 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Boox ITI, Lines 341-392 

bend its neck. (41) Chasms there shall be and yawning gulfs: and many cities (42) shall fall with all 
their people: in Asia’s land Iassus, (43) Cebren, Pandonia, Colophon, Ephesus, Nicaea, (44) Antioch, 
Cyagra, Sinope, Smyrna, Murine, (45) Gaza rich in wealth, Hierapolis, Astypalaea, (46) and of Europe 
famous Tanagra, royal Meropea, (47) Antigone, Magnesia, and divine Mycenae. (48) Know then that 
the baleful race of Egypt is nigh its doom, (49) and then to the Magnesians the year that is past 
shall be better. 

(50) For all the wealth that Rome received from tributary Asia, (51) threefold as much shall Asia 
receive back again (52) from Rome, and shall repay to her her hideous violence. (53) And for all 
those children of Asia who served Italian homes, (54) Italians to twenty-fold shall live in bondage 
and penury in Asia, (55) and shall pay back their debt ten thousand-fold 

(56) O Rome, pampered golden offspring of Latium ! (57) thou virgin oft intoxicated by thy many 
suitors in marriage, (58) as a slave-girl shalt thou be wedded without ceremony, (59) and ofttimes 
shall thy mistress shear thy luxuriant locks, (60) and passing sentence on thee shall cast thee from 
heaven to earth, (61) and shall lift thee up again from earth to heaven, (62) because men held toa bad 
and lawless life. 

(63) Samos too shall be sand, Delos shall vanish (64) and Rome become a street: and all the 
oracles are being fulfilled. (65) Of perishing Smyrna there shall be no account. Outlaw shall she 
be, (66) but with evil counsels and the villainy of her leaders. 

(67) But tranquil peace shall make its way to the land of Asia. (68) And Europe shall then be 
happy, the air salubrious, (69) year after year bracing and free from storms and free from hail, 
(70) producing everything, birds and creeping creatures of the earth. (71) Thrice happy who shall 
live unto that time, man (72) or woman: *happy he whose life is as among country folk*. (73) For 
good law shall come in its fullness from the starry heaven (74) upon men, and good justice, and with 
it (75) the best of all gifts to men, sober concord, (76) and affection, faithfulness, friendship from 
strangers and fellow-citizens too. (77) And lawlessness, murmuring, envy, wrath, and folly (78) shall 
flee from men: penury, too, shall flee, and distress, (79) and murder, and destructive strifes, and 
baleful feuds, (80) and thefts by night and every evil in those days. 

(81) But Macedonia shall bring forth a grievous calamity for Asia, (82) and for Europe there shall 
shoot up a desperate woe, (83) from the race of the son of Cronos, a family of bastards and slaves. 
(84) This shall subdue even the fortified city of Babylon, (85) and after being called mistress of every 
land on which the sun looks, (86) shall perish with miserable fate, (87) keeping but a name among its 
far-wandering sons of a later age. 

(88) One day there shall come unexpectedly to Asia’s wealthy land (89) a man clad with a purple 
cloak upon his shoulders, (90) savage, a stranger from justice, fiery: for he hath exalted himself 
(91) even against the thunder, a mortal as he is. And all Asia shall have an evil yoke, (92) and 


344. Cyagra. Alex.’s emendation for Tanagra (see line 346). 

Murine. An emendation of Alex: for Mdpos. : are : 

347. The end of the line is uncertain. Meineke suggests Mycenae, Oiantheia (in Locris). . 

350-62. A great Roman disaster in Asia. If a specific occasion is to be found it may be the Mithradatic war of 
88-84 B.C., or the defeat of Crassus at Carrhae in 53 B.C. But possibly it denotes merely the humbling of the world 
powers that is to precede the days of the Messiah.  _ 

356 ff. The picture suggested by Isa. xiii; Apoc. xviil. : : fy. : i 

363. Samos... sand. For the play on words Sdpos dppos, Andros adndos, “‘Ponn pupn, cf. iv. 92, viii. 165, 166. 
Also Tert. De Pallio 2, Lact. vii. 25. wie’ j 

366. There is apparently a gap after this: but the whole order of lines is uncertain. , 

372. The line is unintelligible and no satisfactory emendation has been suggested. Geffcken Proposes pakdpoy Kev 
én pdris &s év aypavdors, and suspects a Christian interpolation. But the first part should probably be pdkap ds kev &y. 
For the thought cf. Pss. Sol. xvii. 50. ; lege : tae 

376. from strangers and fellow-citizens too. feivwy amd xagraéy, a conjecture for geivwy amo kavrar. 

381-7. Disaster to Asia and Europe arising from Macedonia: perhaps from the Persian Sibyl. _ ‘ 

383. Alexander gave himself out to be the son of Juppiter Ammon after his visit to the shrine of that God in 
332 B.C. The translation follows an emendation of Castalio. MSS. have vddov dotddy re. 

. Babylon, captured in 331 B.C. 4s ; } CaNG 

OS The oe is ae disputed. The view adopted here is, in the main, that of Hilgenfeld, Jud. AZok., 
68 ff. The unknown one (388) is Antiochus Epiphanes; the race which he destroys (394) is his brother Seleucus 
Philopator’s infant son. But Demetrius, the elder son of Seleucus, had the sons of Antiochus put to death (395). 
A certain Alexander Balas, however, came forward as the second son of Antiochus, and in 150 B.C. Demetrius I fell 
in battle against him (398). Alexander Balas was defeated by Ptolemy Philometor in 145, and shortly afterwards 
assassinated. Demetrius II then reigned alone, but a usurper, Tryphon, seized the throne (400), at first in the name 
of Antiochus, a young son of Alexander Balas. He, however, died, or was murdered, in 142, and Tryphon then 

Ing, : ’ 
Pee Lat y to Asia’s wealthy land, or ‘unexpectedly from Asia to the wealthy land’. All MSS. have 
: a uired. » ’ 
s ve for be: hath exalted himself even against the thunder. The rendering rests on a conjecture. MSS. have 
‘for the thunder raised him up before, a man’. 


11052 385 Cc 


i 
\ 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Boox III, Lines 393-446 


the drenched earth shall drink large draughts of blood. (93) But even so Hades shall attend him 
utterly destroyed. (94) By the race of those whose family he wishes to destroy (95) by them shall 
his own family be destroyed. (96) Yet after leaving one root, which the Destroyer shall cut off, 
(97) he shall put forth a side-shoot of ten horns. (98) He shall cut down the warrior parent of the 
purple race, (99) ¢and he himself at the hand of his grandsons shall perish in a like fate of wart: 
(400) and then a parasite horn shall have dominion. 

(401) Then fertile Phrygia shall have a sign (402) when in the land of Rhea an accursed race, 
a perennial branch (403) vigorous with roots that feel no thirst, (404) disappears stock and all in one 
night, (405) with men and all in the city of the earth-shaking Thunderer, (406) which in time to come 
they shall call from that event Dorylaeum (407) in ancient dark Phrygia, the land of many tears. 
(408) That time goes by the name of the Earth-shaking time. (409) It shall shatter the recesses of 
the earth and pull down the walls, (10) and signs shall spring forth which are the beginning not of 
good but of evil. (11) It shall have kings expert in the war of every tribe, (12) *wily indigenous 
descendants of Aeneas, an aboriginal race*. (13) But in after times thou shalt bea prey to thy lovers. 

(14) Ilium, I pity thee: for in Sparta an avenging fury (15) shall put forth a shoot exceeding fair, 
ever famed and noble, (16) leaving the far-spread sea of Asia and Europe. (17) But to thee above 
all it shall bring lamentations and labours and groanings, (18) and set them down; yet to future 
generations thy fame shall never wax old. 

(19) Then again there shall be an aged wight false in writing, (20) and false in birthplace: and the 
light in his eyes shall set. (21) Yet he shall have much wit, and a verse fitted to his thoughts 
(22) blended under two names. Chian shall he call (23) himself, and he shall write the story of 
Ilium, not truthfully indeed, (24) but with poetic skill; for he shall gain possession of my verses and 
measures. (25) He first shall unfold my books with his hands: (26) and then right well shall he deck 
out the helmed men of war, (27) Hector Priam’s son and Achilles, offspring of Peleus, (28) and all the 
rest who cared for doughty deeds. (29) Yea and he shall make gods stand by the warriors’ side 
(30) leading astray in every way the mortals of empty head. (31) Their widespread glory rather will 
it be to have died (32) in Ilium: but he himself shall receive his recompense. 

(33) To Lycia too the race of Locros shall bring forth many evils. 

(34) Chalcedon, to whose lot has fallen the passage of the narrow sea, (35) to thee too shalt the 
scion of Attolia come and work ruin. 

(36) Cyzicus, from thee the sea shall rend away thy ponderous wealth. (37) *And thou, Byzantium, 
one day wilt look on Ares’ shield*, (38) and then thou shalt receive groanings and seas of blood. 

(39) Thou too, Krasos, lofty mountain of Lycia, from a rock (40) opening in chasms from thy peak 
water shall bubble forth, (41) until it cause even Patara’s prophetic wonders to cease. 

(42) O Cyzicus, thou that dwellest in vine-growing Propontis, (43) the crested wave of Rhyndacus 
shall thunder round about thee. 

(44) And thou, Rhodes, shalt for a long time escape slavery, (45) thou daughter of the day, and 
great shall be thy wealth in later times, (46) and on the sea thou shalt have strength pre-eminent over 


396. The Destroyer is Demetrius I. 

397. side-shoot. This is Alexander Balas, who gave himself out as a son of Antiochus Epiphanes. The ‘ten 
horns’, if it refers to him, may have reference to the ten letters of Alexandros. But cf. Daniel vii. Fiske, 

The reading in 397 and 399 is uncertain. The conjecture followed in 399 is kairés i viavdv kal opdpova aicay ”Apnos. 

398. The parent is Demetrius I: the purple race is Demetrius II, who married Cleopatra of Egypt. 

399. This is wrong. Alexander Balas was assassinated by some followers after a defeat by Ptolemy Philometor 
not by the hand of Demetrius’ children. 

400. a parasite horn, i. e. Tryphon. 

401-18. The Fall of Troy. From the Erythraean Sibyl. Cf. Paus. x. 12. 2. 

402. the land of Rhea = Phrygia. The ‘accursed race’ = the Trojans, ancestors of the Romans. 

Lines 402-4 recur early in i. 184-6. For xa it seems necessary to read kAjpa, ‘branch’. 

405. the city of the . . . Thunderer, i.e. Troy, whose walls were built by Poseidon. 

; 406. Dorylaeum is in Phrygia, on the Thymbris. Coins of this city with the head of Poseidon have been found. 
But the whole passage 406-9, which appears to identify Troy with Dorylaeum, has not been satisfactorily explained. 
It is possible that Dorylaeum is merely suggested in its literal meaning (= the prey of the spear) as anickname for Troy. 

412. wily indigenous descendants of Aeneas. Read Alveddas dodéous avtéxOovas. 

413. thy lovers, i.e. Paris and Helen. Geffcken compares Pausanias x. 12. 2 7 O€ “Hpodidn, vewrépa pev éxeivns 
(sc. THs Achguxijs) faiverar 5€ Guws mpd rod modéuov yeyovvia Kai abrn tod Tpacxod* xal “EXéevny te mpoediAwoer ey trois 
Xpne pols ws em OdCOp@ Tis Agias kal Etpoans tpadnooro év Srdprn. 

419. aged wight, i.e. Homer. For the contention that Homer borrowed from the Sibyl cf. Lact. Drv. Just. i. 6. 9 
Diod. Sic. iv. 66. The argument is also found in Aristobulus in the second century B.C. , 


420. The blindness of Homer is alluded to as early as in the Homeric hymn to Apoll ted in Th iil 
422. two names, i.e. the //éad and Odyssey. 1‘? Porc ae a he ee 


433-88. A series of calamities on various towns and countries. 
437. look on... shield. The rendering rests on an emendation (domida Sépén for "Acid. orépEn). 
441. Patara, the seaport of Xanthus, contained a famous oracle of Apollo. Cf. Horace, Cavm. ili. 4. 64. 


386 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Boox III, Lines 447—4099 


others. (47) But in the end thou shalt be a prey to thy lovers (48) wi : 
a grievous yoke shalt thou put upon thy a ‘ ‘ EP) with thy Desaly and a 

(49) Furthermore, a Lydian earthquake shall lay Persia in ruins, (50) bringing most direful woes on 
Europe and Asia. (51) {The Sidonians’ baleful king, and the war of others (52) shall bring baleful 
destruction to the sea-faring Samians.f (53) With the blood of perishing men the plain shall bubble 
to the sea: and wives with bright-robed girls (55) shall shout aloud for their own hideous violence 
(56) some for their bridegrooms, some for their perishing sons. 

(57) The token of Cyprus: an earthquake shall destroy its ravines, (58) and Hades at one fell 
swoop shall possess himself of many souls. 

(59) Trallis, neighbour to Ephesus, shall shake down with an earthquake (60) its well-built walls and 
people of stout-hearted men. (61) And the earth shall be drenched by boiling water, (62) and the 
stupefied earth shall drink in mist as well: and there shall be an odour of sulphur. (63) Samos too 
at that time shall build a royal mansion. 

(64) italy, to thee no foreign war shall come, (65) but a people of thy blood shall destroy thee, 
(66) shameless one, with many woes, stalwart as thou art and much renowned. (67) And thou, 
stretched by thine own warm ashes, (68) tcareless of thy children’s future, shalt slay thyself,t 
(69) and thou shalt be not the mother of heroes but the nurse of beasts. 

(70) But when from Italy a destroyer shall come, (71) then Laodicea, (72) thou fair city of the 
Carians beside the wondrous waters of Lycus, thou shalt be dashed headlong, (73) and be silent after 
bemoaning thy much-vaunted parent. 

(74) The Thracian Crobuzi shall rise throughout Haemus. 

(75) On the Campanians there falls chattering of teeth, by reason of the city-wasting famine, 
(76) and they shall bewail their long-lived ancestor. 

(77) Cyrnos and Sardo, by the great storm eddies (78) and the lashes of the Holy God through 
the depths of the sea, (79) shall sink beneath the wave with their sea-faring children. (80) Alas for 
all the maids that Death shall wed, (81) and the lads whom the deep shall attend unanealed. 
(82) Alas for the infant children floating on the sea, and the stores of wealth. 

(83) The happy Mysian land shall suddenly produce a royal race. (84) But not for long shall 
Carthage {truly} be. (85) And the Galatians shall have a miserable and piteous fate. (86) To 
Tenedos too there shall come a final unequalled evil. (87) And brazen Sicyon and thou, Corinth, too 
(88) fshalt resound with howls for all: and Aulis shall shout in equal measurey. 

(89) Then when my spirit ceased its inspired strain, (go) again the oracle of Mighty God stirred 
within my breast, (91) and bade me prophesy of several lands. 

(92) Woe to the race of Phoenicians, men and women, (93) and to all their sea-coast cities: not 
one of you, (94) shall come to the light of the sun in that light that iscommon toall. (95) Nor shall 
there be any more any numbering of thy life nor tribe to thee, (96) because of thine unrighteous 
tongue and thy lawless and unclean life (97) which all have led, opening their mouth for uncleanness, 
(98) and because they covenanted with monstrous words, false and unjust, (99) and stood before God 


447. Rhodes was subdued by Rome in 167 B.C., after having successfully maintained its independence and 
prosperity through many difficult years. ‘ ; 
451-2. Reading very uncertain. A slight emendation would give ‘a baleful king and war of others shall bring 
baleful destruction to the sea-faring sons of the Sidonians.’ Sidon was barbarously ravaged by Artaxerxes Ochus in 
2 B.C. 
oe. bridegrooms (vupdiwv), a conjecture of Rzach for ‘corpses’ (vexvov). 
462. mist : a conjecture (dyAtpv for airjs). 
463. Samos fell into the hands of the Ptolemies some time before 274 B.C. 
464 ff. Reference probably to the Social War. 
no foreign war. For otis MSS. have ofros. 
467. ashes, orodijor, a conjecture for ‘ offerings’, omovonct. aire: : Fa : 
468. MSS. unintelligible. Various conjectures proposed. The text translates dmpoid)s Texéeaarv €ois evapieat avrny. 
470. a destroyer, i.e. probably Sulla, who sailed for Greece in 87 B.C. to prosecute the war against Mithradates. 
472. For the earthquakes at Laodicea cf, iv. 107. The date is, however, uncertain. 
473. thy much-vaunted parent, i.e. Zeus, whose figure is very common on the coins of the town. 
474. Thracian Crobuzi. The restoration of these names is due to Meineke. pv Opies dxpoBvgor. 
475. city-wasting. MSS. ‘fruitful’ (#rodtropbov (So Castal.) for moAvuKapT oy). 
476. The end of the Lay is Se es restored from 473. 
. Cyrnos and Sardo = Corsica and Sardinia. 
we Benipace the discussion on death represented as marriage in J. C. Lawson’s Axczent Greek folk-lore and 
j religion, pp. 546 ff. ; 
ort eli ee Pe anosed to read ‘Chalcedon’. But the allusion may be to the fall of Carthage in 146 B.C. 


487-8. The rendering is a mere conjecture, the text being unintelligible. ‘ 
489-808. A further series of woes, the prosperity of the righteous, eschatological pictures, and exhortations to true 


worship. : ake 
to bor tribe. Perhaps ‘throughout thy race’, kara porov for kai pidoy. 


387 Cee 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Boox III, Lings 500—563 


the Great King, (500) and opened with falschood their filthy mouth. Therefore shall he (501) mar- 
vellously bring them low with His scourges more than any (502) land, and God shall send on them 
a bitter fate, (503) burning their cities from the ground and their many foundations. 

(504) Woe to thee, much-vexed Crete. To thee shall come a scourge (505) and a dread eternal 
destruction. And all the earth shall see thee once more wreathed in smoke, (507) and fire shall 
never leave thee but thou shalt burn. f 

(508) Woe unto thee, Thrace: how shalt thou come to the yoke of bondage: (509) when Galatians 
mingled with the sons of Dardanus (10) swoop on to ravage Hellas, then shall be thine evil day, 
(11) and to a strange land thou shalt give (thine own) and receive nought. ; ' 

(12) }Woe unto thee, Gog and Magog, and to all the several tribes, (13) Marsians and Daciansf, 
how many evils fate brings near to you: (14) (many, too), to the sons of the Lycians, Mysians and 
Phrygians. (15) And many tribes of the Pamphylians and Lydians shall fall, (16) of Moors and 
Ethiopians and nations of barbarous speech, (17) Cappadocians and Arabians. But why should 
I proclaim the fate of each severally ? (18) for upon all nations who dwell on the earth (19) the 
Most High shall send a grievous scourge. : 

(20) But whensoever a numerous barbarian -race shall fall upon the Greeks, (21) it shall destroy 
many heads of picked men, (22) and many of men’s fat flocks shall they ravish, (23) and herds of 
horses and mules and lowing oxen. (24) And well-built houses shall they lawlessly burn with fire. 
(25) And many miserable wights shall they carry by force as slaves to another land, (26) children 
and tender deep-girdled women, (27) snatched from their chambers and with delicate feet falling 
forward. (28) They shall see them in bonds at the hand of strange-tongued foes (29) suffering every 
horror of outrage. And they shall have (30) no man to lend them but a little aid in war and to 
succour their lives. (31) They shall see the foe reaping the enjoyment of their own possessions and 
of all their wealth, (32) and trembling shall be underneath their knees. (33) An hundred shall flee 
and one shall slay them all: (34) and five shall rout a heavy squadron; and they, thrown one 
against another (35) in shameful confusion by the dread din of battle, (36) shall bring exultation to 
the foe but to Greeks mourning. 

(37) Then all Hellas shall lie under the yoke of slavery, (38) and war and pestilence shall come 
upon all mankind at once, (39) and God shall make the great heaven above brazen, (40) and drought 
over the whole earth, and it of iron. (41) Then all mankind shall grievously lament (42) no sowing 
and no ploughing: and fire upon earth (43) shall He send down column upon column, who created 
heaven and earth: (44) and of all mankind the third part shall be destroyed. 

(45) Hellas, why dost thou put thy trust in governors, (46) mortal men who are powerless to escape 
the consummation of death? (47) With what view dost thou proffer vain gifts to the dead (48) and 
sacrifice to idols? Who has put error in thine heart, (49) that thou shouldst perform these rites 
and forsake the face of Mighty God? (50) Reverence the name of the Father of all and forget him 
not. (51) There are a thousand years and five hundred more, (52) since the reign of the haughty 
kings (53) of the Greeks who were the pioneers of evils to mankind, (54) holding fast to many idols 
of defunct gods, (55) whereby ye have been taught to think vain things. (56) But when the wrath 
of the great God shall be upon you, (57) then shall ye know the face of the great God. (58) And 
every soul of men with deep groans, (59) upraising their hands straight to the broad heaven, (60) shall 
begin to call to his succour the Mighty king, (61) and to seek who shall come as a deliverer from the 
mighty wrath. 

(62) But come and learn this and store it in thy mind, (63) how many shall be the woes of the 


505. destruction. The reading follows a conjecture of Wilamowitz, ¢£addmaéis for e€adardE&et, 
509. The Gaulish invasion of 280 B.c. 


510. The line as it stands is unmetrical. 
swoop on to ravage Hellas, then shall be thine 

511. {thine own). Supply 76 ody after déceis. 

512-13. The lines are corrupt and the names of the tribes cannot be restored with certainty. For Marsians we 
should perhaps read Mardians, a tribe inhabiting the hill country of Hyrkania. 

520 ff. Probably referring to the Roman invasion culminating in the capture of Corinth in 146 B.C.: so Hilgenfeld. 
The reference, however, may be to the Gaulish invasion of 279)B1C; 

533. Cf. Isa. xxx. 17; Deut. xxxii. 30. 

534. Squadron (Adxov), Wilamowitz’s conjecture for ‘ wrath’ (yéor). 

539. Cf. Deut. xxvili. 23; 1 En. Ixxx. 2; Jub. xxiii. 18. 

543. column upon column. Alexandre’s suggestion modvvnoroy is followed for the unintelligible woddyp iordv. 

544. shall be destroyed, gover’ éiorov, a conjecture for ¢ocerat adfis, 

545, 547-9. Quoted by Lact. Div. Just. i. 15. 15. 

554. holding fast, xaréyovres, a conjecture for Oavedrtar, 

563. A line has evidently dropped out after this. 
that the doom of Hellas is irrevocably fixed. 


evilday. Read"E\aS éemécouvrat ropbeiv, rére oor Kakdv Zora. 


which leaves no governing verb. 
That inserted is a mere conjecture. Apparently the meaning is 


388 


WHE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Boox III, Linss 564-633 


circling years. [For not even if thou shouldst offer up hecatombs i 
Hellas offered of old, of kine and bellowing bulls, (65) hes wHolk barke caer be cata mee i 
: : , : a ple 
of the Mighty God, (66) not even so‘wilt thou escape from jarring war and panic (67) and pestilence 
and the yoke of bondage again. (68) But so long the race of godless men shall exist, (69) until the 
day of fate reaches its appointed end. (70) Ye shall not sacrifice to God until all these things come 
to pass. (71) Whatsoever the one God purposes fails not of its accomplishment. (72) For that all 
things be accomplished the stress of necessity will insist. 

(73) There shall be thereafter a holy race of God-fearing men, (74) adhering to the counsels and the 
mind of the Most High: (75) who pay full honour to the temple of the mighty God, (76) with drink 
offerings and fat offerings and sacred hecatombs, (77) with sacrifices of lusty bulls and unblemished rams, 
(78) and piously offer as whole burnt sacrifices rich flocks of firstling sheep and lambs upon the great 
altar. (80) And in righteousness possessing the law of the Most High, (81) they shall dwell happily 
in their cities and rich fields, (82) themselves as prophets exalted by the Immortal One, (83) and 
bringing great joy to all mortals. (84) For to them alone the Mighty God has given discreet counsel, 
(85) and faith and an excellent understanding in their hearts: (86) in that they give not themselves 
to vain deceits, nor honour the works of men’s hands, (87) of gold and brass, silver or ivory, 
(88) idols of dead gods of wood and stone, (89) idols of clay vermilion painted, pictured likenesses of 
beasts, (90) such things as men with minds void of counsel do honour. (gt) But they instead raise 
heavenwards holy arms, (92) rising early from their bed and ever cleansing their flesh (93) with water, 
and they honour Him alone who reigns for ever, (94) the Eternal, and after him their parents: and 
more than any (95) men they are mindful of the purity of marriage. (96) Nor do they hold unholy 
intercourse with boys, (97) as do the Phoenicians, Egyptians, and Latins, (98) and spaczous Hellas, and 
many nations of other men, (gg) Persians and Galatians and all Asia, transgressing (600) the holy law 
of the immortal God which he ordained. (601) For which cause the Eternal shall impose on all men 
(602) retribution and famine and woes and groans, (603) war, too, and pestilence and fearful calamities ; 
(604) because they would not honour in holiness the eternal Father of all men, (605) but reverenced and 
honoured idols (606) made by men’s hands, which men themselves shall cast (607) into the crannies 
of rocks and hide in shame, (608) whensoever a youthful king of Egypt, seventh in line, (609) of 
his own land reckoned from the Greeks shall reign over (10) an empire, over which the doughty 
Macedonians shall reign; (11) and there comes from Asia a mighty king, a fiery eagle, (12) who 
shall darken every land with foot and horse, (13) and shall break up everything and fill everything 
with miseries: (14) he shall cast down the kingdom of Egypt, and taking all (15) its wealth, shall 
ride upon the broad surface of the sea. (16) And then at length to God the great King, the Eternal, 
(17) they shall bend the white knee upon the fruitful earth, (18) and the works of men’s hand shall 
all fall into the flame of fire. (19) And then God shall give great joy to men. (20) For the earth 
and the trees and the innumerable flocks of sheep, (21) shall give their true fruit to mankind, (22) of 
wine and sweet honey and white milk (23) and corn which is to men the most excellent gift of all. 

(24) But thou, O man of wiles, tarry not with hesitation, (25) but turning round again make inter- 
cession to God. (26) Sacrifice to God hundreds of bulls and firstling lambs (27) and of goats in the 
circling seasons. (28) Yea, make intercession to Him, the Immortal God, if perchance He may have 
mercy upon thee. (29) For He alone is God, and there is none beside. (39) Honour righteousness 
and oppress no man: (31) for these are the commands of the Eternal to wretched mortals. 

(32) But do thou beware of the wrath of the mighty God, (33) whenever the consummation of 


564. The beginning of the line is quite uncertain. MSS. have ‘ even those which Hellas offered ’. 
573 ff. The happy state of the righteous. The writer has, perhaps, in mind the prosperity of the Jews under Simon 
Maccabeus. ete nea <a 
578. flocks, pda. For this Mendelssohn suggests ‘thighs’, pjpa, but the correction is not convincing. 
589. Cf. Wisdom xiii. 14. Such painting was common among the Romans: cf. Pliny, Wat. Hist. xxxv. 45; Virg. 
Eccl, x. 25. i E . 
Bie ding is uncertain. Perhaps mua prrdxptor’ i) Coypapias rumoedeis (so Volkmann). 5 
591-2. Cf. iv. 165-6, The insistence on lustration is specially Essene. Cf. Joseph. Bed/. Jud. ii. 8.5. For prayer 
king cf. Pss. Sol. vi. 6. ; : ; 
Shee, The end of the line is a conjecture. (dvmep @Onxev for ov mapéBnoav). MSS. ‘which they transgressed’. 
Gt. a jbl, May, HG), SSSA Gr : ’ : . 
ee See teil king. ine: cee Philometor, cf. 192. In fleeing from the invasion of Antiochus Epiphanes 
(170-169 B.C.) he was captured and brought back a prisoner. Antiochus failed to take Alexandria, but captured 
much booty and returned by sea (615). 


613. Cf. supra 188. v 
616 The Paes passes over an interval of years and comes to the prosperous conditions under the later Maccabees. 


618. Lact. quotes this line (Div. Inst. vii. 19. 9) as épya dé xetporoinra Gedy kataxavOyjcovra. He refers it to the 
Erythraean Sibyl. ui : 
Gee Outed by Clem. Al. Protrept. vi. 74 as Orphic tare 
‘ 389 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Boox III, LINES 634-696 


pestilence comes upon all mortals, (34) and, overthrown, they meet with a terrible alias (35) se 
king captures king and takes his land, (36) and nations ravage nations and potentates people, (37) an 

rulers all flee to another land, (38) and the land is changed in men and a barbarian Ser (39) eee 
Hellas, and drains the rich land (40) of its wealth, and men come face to face in strife (41) for the 
sake of gold and silver, (42) (the love of money shall be the shepherd of evils to Deny) (43) - . 
foreign land. And all shall be unburied, (44) and vultures and savage beasts of the earth (45) sha 

devour the flesh of some. And when all these things are fulfilled, (46) the giant earth shall devour 
the relics of the dead. (47) And it shall all be unsown and unploughed, (48) proclaiming in its misery 
the corruption of myriads of men. (49) And then for many spaces of time in circling years ae 
shall gather and burn in their houses] (50) targes and shields and javelins and divers kinds o 

weapons. (51) Nor shall wood be cut from the thicket to kindle fire. ae 

(52) And then from the sunrise God shall send a king, (53) who shall give every land relie 
from the bane of war: (54) some he shall slay and to others he shall consecrate faithful vows. 
(55) Nor shall he do all these things by his own will, (56) but in obedience to the good ordinances of 
the mighty God. : 

(57) And again the people of the mighty God shall be laden with excellent wealth, (58) with gold 
and silver and purple adornment. (59) The land shall bear her increase, and the sea (60) shall be full 
of good things. And kings shall begin to be weary (61) of repelling evil one against another with 
wrath. (62) Envy is no good thing for miserable mortals. (63) But again the kings of the nations 
shall throw themselves against this land (64) in troops, bringing retribution on themselves. (65) For 
the shrine of the mighty God and the noblest men (66) they shall seek to ravage whensoever they 
come to the land. (67) In a ring round the city the accursed kings shall place (68) each one his 
throne with his infidel people by him. (69) And then with a mighty voice God shall speak unto all 
(70) the undisciplined empty-minded people, and judgement shall come upon them (71) from the 
mighty God, and all shall perish (72) at the hand of the Eternal. From heaven shall fall 
(73) fiery swords down to the earth: lights shall come bright (74) and great, flashing into the 
midst of men. (75) And earth, the universal Mother, shall shake in those days (76) at the hand of 
the Eternal, and the fishes in the sea, (77) and all the beasts of the earth and the countless tribes of 
flying things, (78) and all souls of men and every sea (79) shall shudder at the presence of the Eternal 
and there shall be panic. (80) And the towering mountain peaks and the hills of the giants (81) He 
shall rend, and the murky abyss shall be visible to all. (82) And the high-hung ravines in the lofty 
mountains (83) shall be full of dead bodies: the rocks shall flow (84) with blood, and each torrent 
shall flood the plain. (85) The well-built walls of the disaffected men shall all fall to the ground, 
(86) because they knew not the law (87) nor the judgement of the Mighty God, but with witless 
mind (88) with one united onslaught tye cast your spearst against the Holy One. (89) And God 
shall judge all with war and sword, (90) and with fire and cataclysms of rain. And there shall be 
(91) brimstone from heaven, yea stones and hail (92) incessant and grievous: and death shall be upon 
the fourfooted beasts. (93) And then shall they know the Immortal God, who ordains these things. 
(94) T Wailing and lamenting through the length and breadth of the land} (95) shall come with the 
perishing of men: and all the shameless (96) shall be washed with blood. Yea, the land itself shall 


635-7. An allusion to the invasion of Egypt by Antiochus Epiphanes (see on 1. 608). 
638. a barbarian empire, i.e. Rome. Cf. 1. 520. 
642. to many, wodeoow, possibly intended as from moAvs. 
648. myriads (uvpioy) is unmetrical. Possibly read pepdrar, ‘ articulate ’. 
After this verse there is a gap in the text. The line supplied is a conjecture. The thought is taken from Ezek, 
xxxix. 9, and is referred to again in Lact. Div. Just. vii. 26. 4. 
651. Recurs in 729, 
652 ff. The coming of the Messiah, 
from the sunrise, dm’ jeAiovwo, may mean either ‘from the East’ or ‘from heaven’: cf. supr. 286 (of Cyrus), Sib. 
Vv. 414. 
Holtzmann thinks of Simon Maccabeus as the heaven-sent king, 
657. people (Aads). Meineke and Geffck. alter to ‘temple’ (vads), but this seems unnecessary. 
661-2. shall begin... wrath. MSS. ‘shall begin to be angry with one another (koréev) avenging evils in their 
mind’. The translation renders komiay . . . dmaptvorres. 
663. A fresh onslaught against the Holy City. The description is borrowed in part from Jer. i. 15. Cf. 1 En. 
Vi. 5. 
667. Cf. 4 Ez, xiii. 33; Clem. Al. Strom. vi. 5: 43. 
673. Cf. Lact. Div. Just. vii. 19. 5. 
shall come. A comparison with 1 En. cii. 2. 3 suggests that for iovrac we should very likely read gpigovra., 
,, 088. ye cast your spears. The change of person is awkward. Perhaps read ‘they lifted up reproach’ (jjpay 
eXeyxos for pare Adyyxas). 
691. Cf. Apoc. ix. 17. 
694. The text of the MSS. needs some emendation. Read (with Rzach) olpeyn r 4 Ss 6uod Kar are. in 
pat wabietasless (dvaidcis) for: speechless? (Gaal ( ) oipwyn 7 ddadaypds 6uod Kar ameipova yatay. 


39° 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Boox ITT, Lines: 6072758 


ee of the pati aay perishing: the beasts shall eat their fill of flesh. (98) God 
A ae e great eternal God (99) bade me prophesy these things : and they shall not lack their 

ment. (700) Nothing fails of its appointed end when He but conceives the thought. (701) For 
all over the world the Spirit of God cannot lie. 

(702) Then again all the sons of the great God (703) shall live quietly around the temple; 
rejoicing in those gifts (704) which He shall give, who is the Creator, and sovereign righteous 
Judge. (705) For He by Himself shall shield them, standing beside them alone in His might, 
(706) encircling them, as it were, with a wall of flaming fire. (707) Free from war shall they be 
In city and country. (708) For they shall not feel the touch of horrid war, for the Eternal shall 
be (709) Himself their champion, and the hand of the Holy One. (10) And then all the isles 
and the cities shall say, (11) How doth the Eternal love those men! (12) For all things work 
in sympathy with them and help them, (13) the heaven and God’s chariot the sun, and the moon. 
(15) A sweet strain shall they utter from their mouths in hymns. (16) Come, let us all fall upon 
the earth and supplicate (17) the Eternal King, the mighty, everlasting God. (18) Let us make 
procession to His Temple, for He is the sole Potentate. (19) And let us all ponder the law of the 
Most High God, (20) who is the most righteous of all on earth. (21) But we had gone astray 
from the path of the Eternal, (22) and with foolish heart worshipped the works of men’s hands, 
(23) idols and images of men that are dead. (24) So shall the souls of the faithful raise their 
cry. (25) Come, let us throughout God’s people fall upon our faces, (26) and gladden with hymns 
God our Father throughout our households, (27) furnishing ourselves with the weapons of our 
enemies throughout the whole land (28) for seven spans of circling years, (29) targes and shields 
and helms and weapons of all and sundry kinds (30) in great numbers, and quantities of bows and 
arrows and javelins. (31) For even wood shall not be cut from the thicket for kindling fire. 

(32) But, wretched Hellas, cease thine arrogance : (33) supplicate the great heart of the Eternal and 
take heed to thyself. (34) To dispatch indeed against this city thine ill-advised people, (35) which 
comes not of the holy land of the Mighty! (36) Arouse not Camarina: ’tis better not aroused. 
(Rouse not) (37) a leopard from its lair, lest mischief befall. (38) Nay, withhold thine hand, and 
cherish not a spirit of overweening arrogance in thy breast, (39) dispatching to a mighty contest. 
(40) And serve the Mighty God, that thou mayst have a share in these gifts. 

(41) But whefi the fated day shall reach this consummation, (42) and there shall come to mortals 
the judgement of the Eternal God, (43) there shall come upon men a great judgement and empire. 
(44) For Earth the universal mother shall give to mortals her best (45) fruit in countless store of 
corn, wine and oil. (46) Yea, from heaven shall come a sweet draught of luscious honey, (47) the 
trees shall yield their proper fruits, and rich flocks, (48) and kine and lambs of sheep and kids of goats. 
(49) He will cause sweet fountains of white milk to burst forth. (50) And the cities shall be full 
of good things and the fields rich: (51) neither shall there be any sword throughout the land nor 
battle din: (52) nor shall the earth be convulsed any more with deep-drawn groans. (53) No war. 


702-31. The peace and prosperity of the sons of God. 

705. in His might (ueyadwori) for ‘and greatly’ (ueyddos re). So Geffcken. 

706. Cf. Zech. il. 5. 

710. isles = ‘Gentiles’: cf. Isa. xlix. 1, li. 5. 

713. After this 1. 675 is interpolated in the MSS. : 

715. Reading a little uncertain. The hymn is modelled on the theocratic Psalms xcv-c. 

718. make procession (opméGpev), a conjecture for ‘ send’ (méurrepev). 

721 f. The confession of the converted is quoted by Justin, Cohor?. 16. 

725-31. Apparently an alternative hymn incorporating 649-51. 

728 ff. Cf. 649 ff. : eee 

730, javelins (dxidwv), a conjecture of Meineke for ‘of the unjust (adikwv). 

32-40, A warning to Greece. ; : 

a et A passage that has given much trouble and occasioned many conjectures, The rendering keeps the MSS. 
reading with the single exception of yy for pév in 735. It is probably a taunt sung at the expulsion of the Seleucid 
garrison from the Acra at Jerusalem in 141 B.C. bab 1 

736. An ancient proverb quoted by Servius on Virg. Ae. iii. 701. There was a swamp round Camarina which 
protected the city till it ies sales, ee ‘ 

. Another proverb: the verb is lacking. : : mar . ; 
ae sei chine. The participle is masc., whereas ‘ Hellas’ is fem. Probably the writer has in mind the Seleucid 
king. 
. ff. The blessings of Messiah’s reign. ; 
ees Quoted by oe Div. Inst. vii. 20. 1 as from the Erythraean Sibyl. 
742. Occurs only in Lact. and seems to be a doublet. Cf. Secrets of Enoch Ixv. 6. 
8. ked by Wilam. as an interpolation. ; : 

i pa fruits. It is best to fread (with Fehr) dé8pev 7’ dxpodpiov. For the fruitfulness of trees cf. 2 Enoch 

‘ oe Cf. Joel iii. 18. A similar idea in Koran, Swra xlvii. 


394 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Boox III, Linrs 754-809 


shall there be any more nor drought throughout the land, (54) no famine nor hail to work havoc on 
the crops. (55) But there shall be a great peace throughout all the earth, (56) and king shall be 
friendly with king till the end (57) of the age, and a common law for men throughout all the earth 
(58) shall the Eternal perfect in the starry heaven (59) for all those things which have been wrought 
by miserable mortals. (60) For He above is God and there is none else. (61) He too shall burn 
with fire the race of stubborn men. : 

(62) But consecrate your minds within your breasts, (63) and eschew unlawful service: serve the 
Living God. (64) Shun adultery and confused intercourse with males. (65) Rear thine own offspring 
and slay it not: (66) for the Eternal will surely be wroth with him who commits these sins. 

(67) And then indeed he will raise up his kingdom for all ages (68) over men, he who once gave 
a holy law (69) to godly men, to all of whom He promised to open out the earth (70) and the world, 
and the portals of the blessed, and all joys, (71) and everlasting sense and eternal gladness. 

(72) And from every land they shall bring frankincense and gifts to the house (73) of the great God : 
and there shall be no other (74) house for men even in future generations to know (75) but only that 
which He has given to faithful men to honour. (76) For mortals call that alone (the house) of the 
great God. (77) And all the paths of the plain and the sheer banks, (78) and the lofty mountains 
and the wild sea waves (79) shall become easy to travel over by foot or sail in those days. (80) For 
nought but peace shall come upon the land of the good: (81) and the prophets of the Mighty God 
shall take away the sword. (82) For they are the judges of mortal men and just kings. (83) Even 
wealth shall be righteous among men: (84) for this is the judgement and the rule of the Mighty God. 

(85) Rejoice, O virgin, and exult : for to thee (86) the Creator of heaven and earth has given ever- 
lasting joy. (87) And in thee shall he dwell, and thou shalt have eternal light. 

(88) And wolves and lambs together shall crop grass upon the mountains, (89) and leopards shall 
feed with kids. (90) Prowling bears shall lie with calves, (91) and the carnivorous lion shall eat hay 
in the manger (92) like the ox, and the tiniest infants shall lead them in bonds, (93) for He shall 
make the beasts upon the earth incapable of harm. (94) Serpents and asps shall sleep with babes, 
(95) and shall not harm them: for God’s hand shall be s¢retched over them. 

(96) Now I will tell thee a very evident sign, that thou mayst understand (97) when the end of 
all things is coming on the earth. (98) When swords in the star-lit heaven (99) appear by night 
towards dusk and towards dawn, (800) and straightway dust is carried from heaven (801) fto earth, 
and all the brightness of the sun (802) fails at midday from the heavens}, and the moon’s (803) rays 
shine forth and come back to earth, (804) and a sign comes from the rocks with dripping streams of 
blood: (805) and in a cloud ye shall see a battle of foot and horse, (806) as a hunt of wild beasts, 
like unto misty clouds. (807) This is the consummation of war which God, whose dwelling is in 
heaven, is bringing to pass. (808) But all must sacrifice to the Mighty king. 

(809) These are the acts of the wrath of God which I, leaving the far-off walls of Assyrian Babylon 


761. race. Another reading is ‘might’ (yévos , uévos @). 

762-6. An exhortation to right living. The lines interrupt, and are possibly out of place. 

762. consecrate your minds. Reading uncertain. MSS. ‘hastening my mind’ (karaomevoavres pas pevas). 
The simplest emendation is, as above, kataomeiaavres éds. 

767-84. Further description of the Messianic kingdom. The passage may refer to the eternal condition of the 
godly, for the Messianic kingdom on earth was not regarded as permanent ; contrast 767-8. 

772. For the offerings of the converted heathen to the Temple, cf. Isa. Ix; Tobit xiti. 11; 1 En. xc. 335.37: 

773-4. Perhaps a reference to the destruction of the Temple on Mount Gerizim, by John Hyrcanus. 

775. but only that which. Lact. Div. Just. iv. 6. 5 reads ddXov for ddd’ 6v, God gave Another to faithful men to 
honour’, and supposes a reference to the Son of God. 

to faithful men. MSS. have musrdv dydpa instead of moors avOpecou. 

776. MSS. have ‘for mortals call him the son of the Mighty God’. For ‘son’ (vidy) it is proposed to read ‘temple’ 
(vadv). It is simpler to read ‘alone’ (ofov). So Mendelssohn. Gfrérer, Hilgenfeld and Fehr regard the line as an 
interpolation. 

777. For the smoothing away of the difficulties of nature cf. Isa. xi. 15, 16, xl. 3; Pss. Sol. xiogit. 

781. For the part assigned to the prophets cf. 1 Macc. xiv. 4l. 

785 ff. Cf. Zech. ii. 10; Isa. liv. 1. 

788 ff. Cf. Isa. xi. 6. Virg. Ecl. iv. 17, 21 f.; Lactantius quotes 788-91, 794 as from the Erythraean Sibyl. 

794. and asps, an emendation of the MS. reading dua ogior, ‘with themselves.’ 

_ 796-808. The signs that are to herald the end. Compare the signs related in 2 Macc. v. I-4 as preceding the 
invasion of Egypt by Antiochus Epiphanes, and in Josephus, ZB. /. vi. 5 as presaging the fall of Jerusalem. > 

8o1. The line is defective and emendations can only be conjectural. 

805. Cf. Tac. HZst. v. 13 ‘visae per coelum concurrere acies’. 

807. the consummation of war. Reading again uncertain. Perhaps ‘the end of all things’ TOUTO TéXos TdvT@Y 
tedéer Geds. So Rzach from 797. eas F 

809-29. Epilogue and credentials. 


Lact. expressly assigns 809-18 to the Erythraean Sibyl, who, as he says, claims to have been born a 
Lai § 1 : t Babylon. 
But it is not easy to see why the Erythraean Sibyl should come from Babylon, and it has been suggested that te 


392 


THE SsIBYLEINE: BOOKS. Boox III, Linz 810—IV,' 27 


(10) impelled by frenzy, and coming as a fire launched forth against H imi I 
caren (12) is as to he saat mortals the i tcties of Hage ee 
13) 4nd mortals throughout Greece shall call me a stranger of another land, (14) bor ; 
and shameless. Others shall call me, born of my mother Circe (15) and my rose oe eee 
(16) a crazy impostor. But when all these things come to pass, (17) then ye shall make mention of 
me, and no man any more (18) shall call me crazy, the prophetess of the Mighty God. (19) For he 
did not reveal to me those things which before he revealed to my parents, (20) but all those things 
which happened first of all God hath (not) detailed to me, (21) but of the later things God hath put all 
in my understanding, (22) so that I may proclaim the things that shall be and that were before 
(23) and tell them to mortal men. For when the world was being swallowed up (24) by the waters, 
and one man only who found favour was left, (25) floating on the waters in a dwelling of hewn wood, 
(26) with beasts and birds, that the world might be replenished again : (27) his daughter-in-law was 
I, and of his blood I came, (28) to whom the first things happened: and now the latter things 

have all been told. (29) So let all these things be accounted true that are spoken of my mouth. 


BOOK IV 


(x) Hear, O ye people of vaunting Asia and Europe, (2) what prophetic strains of truth I purpose 
to pour forth, through the honied speech of my mouth from our shrine. (4) No oracle-monger I of 
a false Phoebus whom vain (5) men have called a god and falsely termed a seer; (6) but the 
prophetess of the mighty God whom men’s hands fashioned not, (7) like to dumb idols of polished 
stones. (8) For He has not as His habitation a stone set up in a temple, (g) dumb and helpless, 
a bugbear of many woes to mortals. (10) But He is one whom none can see from earth, nor measure 
(11) with mortal eyes, seeing He was not fashioned by mortal hand. (12) With all-embracing view 
He beholds all, yet Himself is seen by none. (13) His is the murky night and day, the sun, (14) the 
stars and moon, and sea the haunt of fish; (15) and land and rivers and the source of perennial 
streams, (16) creatures ordained for sustaining life and showers that cause the cornfield fruit to grow, 
(17) and trees and vines and olive trees. (18) He has driven a goad right through my heart (19) to 
tell out exactly all that is happening to men now and all that is to happen, (20) reaching from the 
first generation to the tenth. (21) For He shall vindicate all (22) by bringing it to pass. But do 
thou, O people, hearken in all things to the Sibyl (23) as she pours forth true speech from holy mouth. 

(24) Happy shall those men be throughout the earth who shall truly love the Mighty God, blessing 
Him (26) before eating and drinking, staunch in their godliness. (27) Who, when they see them, shall 


may of the Babylonian Sibyl has been purposely omitted and some lines from the Erythraean added without careful 
adjustment. 
811. The sentence lacks a verb. Instead of ‘mortals’ (@vnrois) it is proposed to read ‘I show’ (paivw). After this 
line some MSS. showa gap. It is suggested that it contained the name Sambethe, who, according to Justin, Cohort. 37, 
was the daughter of Berossus the historian. 
eens According to Virg. Aen. vi. 36, Deiphobe, the Cumaean Sibyl, is the daughter of Glaucus, and possibly of 
ircé. 
819. Compare Plutarch’s account of the Sibyl (De Pyth. Or. vii). 
819-29. These lines are not referred to by Lact., and Alex. regards them as spurious. 
819. for he did not reveal to me. MSS. read ‘for he will not reveal to me’ (dyAaoer). For od Rzach reads és. 
823. Suidas represents the Chaldaean Sibyl as a descendant of Noah, and says she prophesied about the time ot 
Alexander the Great. Epiph. adv. Haer. 26. § 8 says the Gnostics attributed certain books to Noria the wife of Noah. 
Tatian, on the other hand (Orat. c. Graec. 41), says that the Sibyl was not older than Moses. 


1V. 1-24. The Sibyl claims to be the prophetess of the true, invisible, and almighty God. 

1. Hear, xdtre. Most MSS. have ‘weep’ (k)aie). 

2. shrine (ueydpo.o). Mendelssohn’s emendation for ‘great’ (weyddowo) agreeing with ‘mouth’. 

4. Cf. v. 326. Lines 4-7 are quoted in Clem, Al. Proir. iv. 50. 

8. set up in a temple (idpuvOerra). There is a variant ‘dragged to a temple’ (€Acvodévta). 

habitation (oiov). Buresch would read ‘likeness’ (<ixdv’), but the fem. gender of this word would cause a 

difficulty. The writer appears to condemn the ancient Semitic idea of sacred stones as the dwelling-place of a god. 

g. helpless (v@Opev), an emendation for ‘toothless’ (vdév). " 

i1. The end of the line is uncertain in reading. Perhaps read ov’ émddoOn xept Ovnty. 

12. Cf. Frag. i. 8. 

TosGte 111.) 5- : ; 

20. to the tenth. Cf. ii. 15 ff. The MSS. have ‘to the eleventh’ (€vdexdrnv or évdexdrys). But the world’s history 
is regularly divided into ten periods, 

23. as She pours forth. The participle is, however, masculine. 

24-34. The happiness of the godly. ; ‘ 

24-30. Quoted by Just. Coh. 16. The last three lines are also quoted in Clem. Al. Proir, iv. 62. 

26. For the custom of saying grace before meals cf. Arist. Afol. 15. lt was a strict rule among the Essenes 
(Josephus, &. J. ii. 8. 5); and among the Pharisees. Cf. Mishna, Berakhoth iii; Schirer, Jewish People, Div. ii, 


vol. li, p. 117. ; ; ’ 
Me the abhorrence of temples and animal sacrifice is specially Essene. Cf. Lightfoot, Colossians, p. 369 ff 


393 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS» *BoorvlV lanrsvee =<) 


disown all temples (28) and altars, vain erections of senseless stones, (29) befouled with constant blood 
of living things and sacrifices (30) of four-footed beasts. But they shall look to the great glory of 
the one God (31) neither committing dastard murder, nor bartering for dishonest (32) gain, which things 
are altogether evil. (33) Nor do they set their foul affection on another’s bed, (34) [nor on the hateful 
and hideous abuse of males]. 

(35) Whose conversation and godliness and manners other men (36) will never emulate, men whose 
affections are set on shamelessness. (37) But mocking them with ribald jest and laughter, (38) fools 
in their senselessness, they will falsely attribute to them (39) all the dastardly and evil deeds that 
they shall do. (40) For slow of faith is all the race of men. But when (41) the assizes of the world 
and of mortals shall come, which God himself (42) shall hold when he judges ungodly and godly 
alike: (43) then shall he send the ungodly in the fire beneath the murky gloom, (44) and then shall 
they know what grievous impiety they have committed. (45) But the godly shall remain upon 
the fruitful field, (46) when God has given them breath and life and grace. (47) But all these 
things are to be accomplished in the tenth generation. (48) Now I will tell all that is to come to 
pass from the first generation. ; ‘ : 

(49) First of all, the Assyrians shall rule over all mankind, (50) holding the world for six genera- 
tions under their sway, (51) from the time when, since the heavenly God was wroth with (52) the 
cities themselves and all mankind, (53) the sea covered the earth with the outbreak of the flood. 

(54) Them shall the Medes subdue and vaunt themselves on their throne, (5 5) yet their generations 
shall be but two. In their time shall be these mighty works. (56) Darkling night shall fall at the 
middle hour of day: (57) the stars and the moon’s disk shall fail from heaven. (58) And the earth 
shaken by the upheaval of a mighty earthquake (59) shall cast down headlong many cities and 
works of men. (60) And then islands shall peep forth from the depths of the sea. 

(61) But when great Euphrates shall run in torrents of blood, (62) then betwixt Medes and 
Persians the dread din of battle (63) shall arise in war. And the Medes, overthrown by the Persians’ 
spears, (64) shall flee over the broad waters of the Tigris. (65) And the Persians’ might shall be 
supreme in all the world ; (66) yet they shall have but one generation of prosperous kingship. 

(67) Then there shall be all those evil works which men pray to be spared, (68) wars and murders, 
schisms and exiles, (69) the headlong crash of towers and the overthrow of cities, (70) when proud 
Hellas shall sail to the broad Hellespont, (71) bringing grievous doom to Phrygians and to Asia. 

(72) Then into Egypt the many-furrowed land of wheat, (73) famine and failure of crops shall 
stalk for twenty circling years, (74) when the Nile, the cornblade’s nurse, (75) shall hide its black 
water somewhere else beneath the earth. 

(76) There shall come from Asia a king brandishing a mighty sword (77) with ships innumerable ; 
and over the watery paths of the deep (78) he shall journey on foot, and shall cut a path for his ships 
through a lofty mountain peak. (79) Yet craven Asia shall receive him back a fugitive from war. 

(80) Wretched Sicily shall be burned up from end to end (81) by a stream of mighty fire when 
Etna’s flame belches forth. (82) And Croton’s great city shall fall into the deep stream. (83) Hellas 
shall have strife: and men distraught with rage one against another (84) shall cast down headlong 
many cities and shall slay many (85) in battle: and the strife shall be of doubtful issue. 

(86) But when the race of mortals comes to the tenth generation, (87) then the Persians shall 
experience the yoke of slavery and terror. 


28. The reading comes from Justin. In Clement a line is inserted here from Frag. iii. 49 and another after 1303 

34. The line is probably a gloss and is omitted in Q. 

35-46. The impending judgement on the ungodly. 

38. For the thought that the heathen are themselves guilty of the same charges which they bring against the godly 
cf. Tert. AZol. § 9. . 

46. The righteous are to be quickened again for a further life on earth. The line recurs infra line 189, 

47-85. The history of the first nine generations. 

50. generation is evidently a vague term. Assyrian supremacy may be said to have lasted roughly six centuries 
(c. 1250-630 B.C.). The Median empire closed with the defeat of Astyages by Cyrus in 546 B. c. 

56. Possibly an allusion to the phenomenon mentioned in Herod. i. 71. During a battle between the Lydians and 
Medes in 585 B.C. the day suddenly became night. 

65. ‘The conquest of Egypt in 525 B.C. may be said to have given the Persians the empire of the world. 

70. The Athenians sent maritime assistance to the Ionians in their revolt from Persia in 499 B.C. 

72. of wheat. F Or mupdpopoy re Q has aidos érehOn. The subjunctive would be used as future. 

76-79. The expedition of Xerxes 491-490 B.C. Reference is made to the bridge of boats built across the Hellespont 
(Herod. vii. 35-54), and the canal cut through Mount Athos (Herod. vii. 22-8; Thuc. iv. 109; Juv. v. 174). 

82. Possibly Croton is confused with Sybaris, over which, after its Capture, the river Crathis was turned (Herod 
v.45). Some MSS. have ‘a great city of men’ (Bporav) for ‘ Croton’. 

83-5. The Peloponnesian war, or, more probably, the fighting which ended in the Thirty Years’ Truce in 446 B.c 

87. The reference would be to Alexander’s victories, especially at the Granicus (334 B.C.) and Issus (333 B. C.). 


394 


WHE SIBYLLINE: BOOKS. Book IV, Lines 88-129 


(88) But when the Macedonians boast of the sceptre, (89) then Theb i : 
experience capture. (go) And Carians shall ig o the TDysisne sos, a hee 
sand shall envelop the whole of Samos under sandhills, (92) and Delos shall appear no more, but all 
Delos shall disappear. (93) And Babylon mighty to behold but puny in battle hall 
buoyed up by ineffective hopes. (95) Macedonians shall occupy ee and ee BS 
Sony (9°) and Susa shall all flee to the land of Greece. : _ 

97) Posterity shall know a time when silvery eddying Pyramus (98) pushing forward its 
shall come to the holy island. (99) And thou, Baris, eh fall a A eee when ae 
(100) quivers with earthquakes and cities perish. (101) And to the Rhodians there shall come a last 
but crowning disaster. 

(102) Nor shall the might of Macedonia last. But from the west (103) a great Italian war shall 
heeds ee a ae es a ahaa shall serve as slaves under the yoke of the sons of Italy. 

n ou, ill-starred Corinth, shalt one day look on ; ‘thag } 

a shall bend the knee to earth. : ee a 
107) Miserable Laodicea, thee too an earthquake shal in precipi ui 

Bee eee Gibcd ue nectar «ett q all one day raze (108) in precipitate ruin, but 

(109) O fair Lycian Myra, thy quivering earth shall no longer (10) hold thee firm: but falling 
down headlong on the earth, (11) thou shalt.be fain to flee as an exile to another land, (12) {what 
time over the impieties of Patara the Lord (13) shall spread the dark sea wave with thunderings 
and earthquakesyt. 

(14) For thee, too, Armenia, the stress of slavery is in store. 

(15) To Solyma too the evil blast of war shall come (16) from Italy, and shall lay in ruins God's 
great temple, (17) whenever, confident in their folly, they shall cast godliness to the winds (18) and 
commit hateful murders before the temple. (19) And then from Italy a great king, like a fugitive 
slave, (20) shall flee unseen, unheard of, over the passage of the Euphrates; (21) when he shall dare 
even the hateful pollution of a mother’s murder, (22) and many other things beside, venturing so far 
with wicked hand. (23) And many for the throne of Rome shall dye the ground with their blood, 
(24) when he has run away beyond the Parthian land. (25) And a Roman leader shall come to Syria, 
who shall burn down Solyma’s temple with fire, (26) and therewith slay many men, (27) and shall 
waste the great land of the Jews with its broad way. 

(28) And then an earthquake shall destroy Salamis and Paphos together, (29) when the dark stormy 
water shall swamp Cyprus. . 


89. Thebes was captured by Alexander in 335 B.C. 
go. Carians perhaps = ‘mercenaries’. Cf. Plato, Laches 187. 
occupy Tyre. Capture of Tyre 332 B.C. 

91, 92. Cf. iii. 363. Alexandre would place these lines after 96 ; Rzach after 100. 

93. Babylon captured without resistance 331 B.C. 

95. Alexander’s invasion of Bactria. Cf. Strato, xi; Arrian, ili. 29. 

from Bactria. For imé Bdxrpwy it seems necessary to read amo Baxrpor. 

95. Susa surrendered soon after Babylon. 

97, 98. The Pyramus is a Cilician river. This oracle is quoted by Strabo, Geogr. i. p. 53, Xli. p. 536, who in the 
second line has ‘ Cyprus’ for ‘ island’. 

99. thou, Baris. Badt’s conjectural emendation for ‘Sybaris’. Baris was a Pisidian town, mentioned by Pliny 
v.42. The ais strictly long. Another conjecture is KiBvpa, a Phrygian town. 

tor. Cf, viii. 166. 

102. Macedonian Wars beginning in 214 B.C. and ending with the Battle of Pydna, 168 B.C. 

105, 106. Capture of Corinth and Carthage, 146 B.C. 

107. Laodicea. The famous earthquake here in A.D. 60 (Tac. Am. xiv. 27) seems too late. On the strength of 
Sib. iii. 471 Lightfoot (Pxilippians, p. 38) postulates an earthquake in Laodicea about 125 B.C.; but the inference is 

recarious. 

Z 112-13. The reading is uncertain, and the lines are omitted in many MSS. The rendering follows a conjecture 
6 Médov for éuador. ; : 

114. Armenian wars A.D. 43-66, in which latter year Tiridates came to Rome to receive his crown from Nero. 

115-28. Disaster to Jerusalem. Z ; ; 

117, 118. Referring to the internal struggles in Jerusalem during the siege. Cf. Josephus, 2. J. vi. 3. 

118. and commit hateful murders. The reading of the MSS. is corrupt. 

119 ff. Nero died by his own hand in a. D. 68, but there was a persistent belief that he would return. At least three 
false Nero’s arose at different times. 

119. fugitive slave (Spdorns). Some MSS. have ‘star’ (dornp). eee 

121. Nero had his own mother put to death (Suet. Nero xxxiv). Dio Cass. Ixiv. 9 preserves a pseudo-Sibylline 
oracle: éryatos Aiveaday pnrpoktdvos TyeHovevoet. 

123. The year of Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, 

125, The Roman leader is Titus. 


395 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Boox IV, Linges 130-190 


(30) But when a firebrand starting from a deep cavern in the land of Italy (31) shall rekon the 
broad heaven, (32) and burn many a city and consume its men, (33) and clouds of sooty as 7 ee 
the great heaven, (34) and grains fall from the sky like red earth, (35) then recognize the whee O ae 
God of heaven, (36) because they shail destroy the guiltless race of godly men. (37) An bade e 
west shall come the strife of gathering war, (38) ne the exile from Rome, brandishing a mighty 
sword, (39) crossing the Euphrates with many myriads. ‘ 

(40) ee Antioch, te shall call thee no longer a city, (41) when in thy folly Eo fallest 
under Italian spears. (42) And Cyrrhus shall be consumed by pestilence and dreadful stri i E 

(43) Woe to thee, wretched Cyprus, the level sea-wave (44) shall envelop thee tossed up and down 
with wintry blasts. ; oe 

(45) There shall come to Asia great wealth which Rome once (46) stole for herself and nae in 
her rich treasure-house. (47) And twofold and more shall she restore (48) to Asia, and then there 
shall be a surfeit of war. , ; aE 

(49) The cities of the Carians by the waters of the Maeander, (50) with all their battlements exceeding 
fair, shall be destroyed by pinching (51) famine, when Maeander buries her black water. (52) But when 
faith in godliness shall perish from men, (53) and justice is hidden away in the world, (54) fand men, 
becoming renegades} and living on unholy enterprises, (55) commit deeds of shame and acts dastardly 
and evil, (56) and no man takes account of the godly, but even (57) in their senselessness, fond fools, 
destroy them all, (58) rejoicing in acts of violence and turning their hands to deeds of bloodshed ; 
(59) then be sure that God is no more of tender mercy, (60) but gnashing His teeth in wrath and 
destroying at once (61) the whole race of men by means of a mighty conflagration. 

(62) O ill-starred mortals, let not these things be, and (63) drive not the great God to divers deeds 
of wrath ; but have done with (64) swords and moanings and killing of men, and deeds of violence, 
(65) and wash your whole bodies in ever-running rivers, (66) and, stretching your hands to heaven, 
seek forgiveness for your former deeds, (67) and with praises ask pardon for your bitter ungodliness. 
(68) God will grant repentance (69) and will not slay: He will stay his wrath once more if with 
one accord (70) ye practise precious godliness in your hearts. (71) But if with evil mind ye obey 
me not, but delighting in ungodliness (72) ye receive all these words with ill-affected ears, (73) then fire 
shall come upon the whole world, and a mighty sign (74) with sword and trumpet at the rising of the 
sun. (75) The whole world shall hear a rumbling and a mighty roar. (76) And he shall burn the whole 
earth, and consume the whole race of men, (77) and all thecities and rivers and the sea. (78) He shall 
burn everything out, and there shall be sooty dust. 

(79) But when at last everything shall have been reduced to dust and ashes (80) and God shall 
quench the giant fire, even as he kindled it, (81) then God Himself shall fashion again the bones and 
ashes of men, (82) and shall raise up mortals once more as they were before. 

(83) And then the judgement shall come wherein God himself shall give sentence, (84) judging the 
world again. And all who have sinned with deeds of impiety (85) a heap of earth shall cover again, 
(86) and murky Tartarus and the black recesses of hell. (87) But all who are godly shall live again 
on earth (89) when God gives breath and life and grace to them, (90) the godly. +And then all shall 


130-6. The great eruption of Vesuvius which overwhelmed Pompeii, August 23, 24, A.D. 79. Cf. Pliny, Z@. vi. 16. 20. 

130. starting from. For droorpapéeis it is tempting to read (with Alexandre) dracrpapOcis ‘shot out like lightning’, 

139. It was expected that Nero would return from Parthia. 

140, Probably the Syrian Antioch is meant, which revolted several times against Rome. 

141. folly ... Italian spears. The text renders ddpooivns Irddos. So oy. Geffcken reads appocivnar reais with Q. 

142. Cyrrhus a conjecture. MSS. have ‘Scyros’ or ‘ Cyprus’. Alexandre suggests Supinu. 

143. Cf. supra, 129. 

145-8. A Roman defeat. Probably the defeat of Paetus at Randeia in A. D. 62. 

148. The line is omitted in dy. 

153-4. The text has become corrupt. 154 is omitted in some MSS. and in others 153-4 are joined. 

159-61. Quoted by Lact. De Jra Dei 23. 5. 

160. gnashing his teeth, Bpixorra. Lact. has ‘heavy with wrath’, Bpi6ovra. 

165. The stress on complete lustration seems Essene. Cf. iii. 592. 

168. God will grant. cds déce. So Volkmann from @ which reads Geos dé ddoet. has Ceds & eer. 
2 ee reading gives ‘ fire shall be throughout the world wherein this sign is wrought’, ev @ rdde Onpa TéTUKTAL. 

ogdw. 

179-92. The Judgement following on the destruction of the world. The passage up to Igo is quoted in AZ. Const. 
V. 7 as a testimony of the Sibyl to the Resurrection, the New Life, the Judgement. 
. 181. Cf. Ezek. xxxvii. 1-10, 

183 ff. Cf. supra 40-6. 

185. The text in 4%. Const. /.c. runs ‘those mortals, who have sinned with deeds of impiety, the earth shall cover’. 

187. After this there is a weak line inserted only in Q and rejected by Rzach and Geffcken. 

190. then. .. shall behold themselves, rér’ eiadovra éavrovs. The text comes from Ap. Const. & has kdwovra, 


‘ bewail ke elovrau X4pw abtois (or avrois) perhaps ‘shall have themselves to thank’. Possibly the true reading is 
rot Ovovtat Gedy adrov. 
396 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Boox IV, ‘Line 191—V, 39 


behold themselves, + (91) beholding the lovely and pleasant sunlight. (92) Thrice blest the man who 
lives until that time. 


: BOOK V 


(1) Now come, hearken unto the woful chronicle of the sons of Latium. (2) Verily first of all 
after the decease of the kings (3) of Egypt, all of whom a like measure of earth bore down: 
(4) and after the citizen of Pella, under whom the whole (5) East had been subdued and the West 
with its stores of wealth, (6) whom Babylon disillusioned and handed over, a corpse, to Philip, 
(7) famed by no true report a son of Zeus, of Ammon: (8) and after the man of the family and blood of 
Assaracus, (9) who came from Troy, who clave the onrushing fire ; (10) and after many kings and 
warlike wights, (11) and after infants, children of the beast who preys on sheep, (12) there shall 
be a king first of all, who shall sum up twice ten (13) with his initial letter: and in wars he shall 
conquer for long. (14) He shall have his first initial of ten: and so after him (15) shall reign one 
who has the first of letters. (16) Before him Thrace shall cower, and Sicily, and, later, Memphis: 
(17) Memphis hurled headlong by the wickedness of its rulers (18) and of an untamable woman 
who fell upon the wave. (z9) And he shall ordain laws for the people and bring all things under 
his sway. (20) After a long time he shall hand over the empire to another, (21) who shall have 
his first letter of the number of three hundred, (22) and a river's own name, who shall also 
reign over the Persians (23) and Babylon: then he shall subdue the Medes with his spear. (24) Then 
one shall reign who has the letter of the number three. (25) The next king who shall reign shall 
have twice ten for his first letter: (26) and he shall go to Ocean’s farthest (27) water, Tdirecting his 
ebb against the Ausonians}. (28) Then he shall be sovereign who has the letter of fifty, (29) a 
direful serpent causing grievous war, who shall one day put forth his hands (30) on his own family 
and slay them, and shall throw all into confusion, (31) as athlete, charioteer, murderer, and doer of 
a thousand extravagant acts. (32) He shall pierce, too, the hill between two seas, and besprinkle 
it with blood ; (33) Yea, even when he disappears, he shall be malignant. Then he shall return, 
(34) making himself equal to God: but God shall convince him that he is not. 

(35) Three kings after him shall perish at each other’s hands. (36) Then there shall come a 
great destroyer of godly men (37) who displays the letter of seventy. (38) His son, who has 
the initial of three hundred, shall overcome him (39) and take away his power: and after him there 


191. Omitted in dy. 
fo2) Cf, 11: 371. 


V. 1-51. A brief sketch of history till the reign of Hadrian. 
1. hearken. The reading is due to Rzach. MSS. have no verb. $y khewoy re Aativor. 
The first eleven lines recur at the beginning of the twelfth book. ; 
4. The citizen of Pella = Alexander the Great. Cf. Juv. x. 168 ‘Unus Pellaeo iuveni non sufficit orbis’. 
6. Alexander died of fever at Babylon 323 8.c. Clem. Al. Protr. x. 96 quotes the first part of this line as ov 
BaBuday freyEe vexpdv. : ; 
7. After his visit to the temple of Zeus Ammon in 332 B.C. Alexander seems to have persuaded himself that he was 
the son of that god. ; 
g. Assaracus, king of Phrygia and great-grandfather of Aeneas. The restoration of the name is due to Castalio. 
9. Referring to the escape of Aeneas from burning Troy. Text corrupt; restored by Rz. from x:i. 9. 
iI. i.e. Romulus and Remus. ; : } 
12. twice ten. The name is Kaioap (K denoting 20) ; line 14 gives “IovAuos (I denoting 10). 
15. one who has the first of letters. i.e. Avyovaros. 4 
16. References to the Battle of Philippi, the war with Sextus Pompeius, and the struggle with Antony and Cleopatra 
in Egypt. : a ee oa Aa 
18. The desertion of Cleopatra’s fleet at Actium. The parallel line in xu. 22 has t76 Sovpi for em kdpa. 
21. who shall have... three hundred. i.e. TiB<puos. 
23. War between Rome and Parthia A. D. 34-5. 
24. who has... three. i.e. T'atos. 
25. twice ten = K. KaAavdws ismeant. 
26. Claudius’ short-lived expedition to Britain A.D. 43. ; 
27. The reading is uncertain. Ausonia is strictly S. Italy, but is used poetically for the whole country. 
. fifty = N. Népov is meant. 
a ae was one pe Paes neck when he was an infant. Cf. Tac. Azz, xi. II. 
tero’s murder of his mother cf. ili. 121. J 
a. ee eee to Nero’s competing as a charioteer in the Olympian Games. Cf. Juvenal x. 224 ff. 
2. Nero made an attempt to pierce the Isthmus of Corinth, in A.D. 66-7. Cf. 1. 138. 2 7 
hill between two seas. dikvpoy dpos is a conjecture of Rzach from xii. 84: ow have diikpov Vdep. 
33. For the expectation of the return of Nero cf. iv. 119. bn 
34. For the claim of Antichrist to be God cf. 2 Thess. ii. 4; Iren. v. 25.13; Asc. Isa. iv. 6. 
35. Galba, Otho, and es ONE 
i.e. Oveonaciavos the conqueror of the jews. : d 
oh ne rice pean charges Titus with attempting to supplant his father. Cf. Suet. 777. 5, 6. 


397 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Book V, Linzs 40-92 


shall be a sovereign (40) of the letter of four, a cursed man. And next (41) a reverend es of the 
number of fifty. And after him (42) one whose initial signifies three hundred, (43) a Celtic moun- 
taineer ; and he, hot-footed for Eastern war, (44) shall not escape ignoble fate, but shall succumb. 
A foreign dust shall hide his corpse, (45) even one that has the name of the Nemean flower. aoe 
after him another shall reign, (46) a silver-helmed man: he shall have the name of a sea. (47) é 
shall be a most excellent man and shall understand everything. (48) And in thy time, most excellent, 
most noble, dark-haired prince, (50) and in the time of thy scions, all these days shall come. (51) After 
him three shall reign, but the third shall rule late in life. a he 

(52) Thrice wretched I, I am wearied to conceive the message of evil in my heart, (53) I the familiar 
friend of Isis, and the inspired strain of oracles. (54) First of all around the steps of thy price 
temple, (55) frenzied priestesses shall rush, and thou shalt be in evil hands (56) on that day when the 
Nile passes over (57) the whole land of Egypt up to sixteen cubits, (58) so as to flood the whole 
land and drench it with its streams. (59) And the grace of the land shall subside and the glory of 
its face. 

(60) Memphis, thou shalt mourn more than all for Egypt. (61) For thou, who before wast the 
mighty mistress of earth, shalt become (62) miserable, so that even He whose delight is in the 
thunder shall shout (63) from heaven with a loud voice: O Memphis, mighty in strength, (64) thou 
who of old didst boast so loudly to miserable men, (65) shalt mourn wretched and ill-starred, (66) so 
that the eternal immortal God will notice thee in the clouds. (67) Where is thy spirit that has been 
so masterful among men? (68) Forasmuch as thou hast spent thy fury upon my divinely anointed 
servants, (69) and hast launched forth evil upon men that are good, (70) in return for such things 
thou shalt have such a nurse for thy recompense. (71) Thou shalt have no longer any right topenlyt 
among the blessed. (72) Thou hast fallen from the stars: thou shalt not ascend to heaven. 
(73) These things God bade me tell forth to Egypt (74) in the last time when men shall be 
wholly evil. (75) But wicked men exhaust wickedness awaiting (76) the wrath of the immortal, loud- 
thundering God of heaven, (77) and worshipping stones in place of: God, and _ beasts, (78) and 
fearing a motley crowd of deities, which have no speech, (79) no understanding and no hearing, 
such things as it isa shame for me even to mention, (80) each several form of idols which owe their 
being to the hands of mortal men. (81) And from their own labours and miserable devices 
(82) men have taken to themselves gods of wood and stone, (83) of brass and gold and silver too, 
vain gods, (84) lifeless and dumb and smelted in the fire, (85) have they made, putting their trust 
in vain in such as these. (86) +Thmouis and Xouis are in tribulation, Abydos laments,+ (87) and 
(the cities) of Heracles, Zeus and Hermes. (88) And thee Alexandria, famous nurse of cities, (89) war 
shall not leave, nor famine, but thou shalt pay the penalty (go) of thy haughtiness and all thy former 
deeds. (91) Long ages shalt thou be in silence and the day of return thou shalt not see. (92) And 


40. cursed. MSS. untranslatable. It is simplest to emend ré6os dpos to €hOappévos. Compare the imprecation 

Oeiperde. 
i 41. Nepovas, i.e. Nerva, who was over 60 at his accession, and was long remembered as the gentlest of the Emperors. 

42. Tpaiavos born at Italica in Spain. After continual wars in the East he died at Selinus in Cilicia, 

45. The parsley (céA.vov) furnished the wreath which was the prize at the Nemean games. Cf. Pindar, OJ, xiii. 46: 
Vem. iv. 143. 

46. i.e. Hadrian, whose name recalls the Adriatic Sea. 

50. Hadrian had no children. He adopted first L. Verus and then Antoninus. 

51. On this line see Intr. p. 373. 

52-9. A calamity in Egypt. 

53. familiar friend (yrworn): perhaps ‘kinswoman’ (yyer/). A suggestion is ‘Isis, thou shalt know God’ (Ion, 
Ocov yraon) from vii. 66. 

55. rush, difovor: most MSS. ‘increase *, avovor 

60-72. Woes on Memphis. 

67. Cf. the dirge on Babylon in Isa. xiv; also xix. 12 ff. 

68. divinely anointed, perhaps = ‘ Christian’. 

70. The nurse is probably Rome. Alex. would translate ‘foster-child’. 

71. The sense is unsatisfactory. We might read ‘Thou shalt no longer have a right among the clans of the blessed’ 
(ppyrpas for pavepas). 

72. Cf. Isa. xiv. 12, 13. 

73-110. The confusion of Egypt. 

86. Text corrupt in the second half of the line. 

Thmouis and Xouis are towns in Lower Egypt connected with the worship of Amen, 
Abydos is merely a conjectural emendation (kémrer’ ”ABudos). 

87. The word for cities is missing. The three towns are Heracleopolis, Diospolis (= Thebes), and Hermopolis. 

89. The latter part of the line is missing. The restoration is by Alex. 

gi. A gap in the MSS. after this line. 

92. The line is cut short. Supply Neidos drdgev, 


398 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Book V, Lines 93-141 


no more shall the Nile flow for thee with its boon of delicious drink ; i 
» come upon thy field like hail (94) and shall destroy thy land and thy ae a Tiere ae: 
blood and corpses, tbeside thy glorious altars} ; (96) a people of uncouth mind stalwart ee with 
blood, of senseless rage, (97) in full force like the sand to hasten thy doom. (98) ‘And then, O thou 
rich with the wealth of cities, thou shalt be rich with distress. (99) All Asia shall mourn because 
of those gifts of thine from which (100) she joyed to crown her head, now falling upon earth 
(101) And he to whose lot fell the Persians’ land shall war thee down, (102) and killing man by 
man shall crush out thy whole life, (103) so that but a third part shall remain to wretched men. 
(104) And he shall leap on thee with light spring from the West, (105) blockading thy whole land 
and laying it all in waste. (106) But when he reaches his zenith of power, and his boldness knows 
no shame, (107) he shall come fain even to sack the city of the blessed. (108) And then a king 
sent from God against him (109) shall destroy all the mighty kings and the best of the men. (10) And 
so shall the judgement come from the Immortal upon men. 

(11) Woe unto thee, my craven heart, why dost thou provoke me (12) to declare these things unto 
Egypt, even the grievous partition of sovereignty? (13) Go to the East, to the senseless Persian 
tribes, and signify to them the present and that which is to be. 

(15) The stream of the river Euphrates shall bring on a flood (16) and it shall destroy Persians 
and Iberians and Babylonians, (17) and Massagetae lovers of war and trusting in bows. (18) The 
whole of Asia shall blaze with flames of fire as far as the islands. (19) Pergamus, of old so venerable, 
shall perish as a cluster of grapes, (20) and Pitane shall appear among men as a mass of ruins. 
(21) The whole of Lesbos shall sink into the deep abyss to perish. (22) Smyrna shall one day mourn 
rolled down the cliffs ; (23) she that of old was revered and renowned shall perish. (24) The Bithy- 
nians shall mourn their land reduced to ashes, (25) and great Syria and Phoenice with its multitude 
of peoples. 

(26) Woe to thee, Lycia, for all the evils that the sea is devising against thee, (27) invading of its 
own accord thy woebegone land, (28) so as to flood with evil earthquake and bitter streams (29) the 
myrrhless myrrh-breathing land of Lycia. 

(3°) Phrygia, too, shall have grievous wrath on account of the infatuation (31) whereby Rhea the 
(mother) of Zeus came and stayed there. 

(32) The sea shall destroy the family of the Tauri and their barbarian folk, (33) and a devourer 
shall slay the Lapithae throughout their land}. (34) The deep-eddying river shall destroy the 
Thessalian land, (35) even Peneius with its deep stream chasing mortals from the land. 

(37) Poets shall sing well-a-day for thrice-wretched Hellas, when one from Italy shall pierce the 
neck of the isthmus, even the mighty king of mighty Rome, a godlike man, (40) to whom, they say, 
Zeus himself gave birth and our lady Hera. (41) Who courting applause with honied strains uttered 


93-111 are contained (except 98) only in the Paris excerpt, which has besides iv. 179-190 (see Introduction, p. 374). 
At the end of 111 there is a summary in prose of the contents of this passage. 

93. The line is only found in the Paris excerpt, and the word for fields (Sdmos) is omitted. Possibly the Persian is 
Nero representing the Antichrist returning at the head of a Parthian army, cf.147. For the description cf. 1 En. lvi. 5. 
Fehr compares a striking passage in Commodian, Carm. Afol. 825 ff. 

95. beside thy glorious altars. Text again uncertain. Geffck. proposes ‘shall fill full thine altars’. mepurAjoovat 
te Bopovs. 

to1. Reading due to Buresch from Paris excerpt. 

104. Nero is to lead a successful campaign in the West. For spring (dApar) Par. excerpt has ‘chariot’ (Gppart). 

107-10. The lines are quoted in Lact. Div. Just. vii. 18. 5. In 106 read (with Geffcken) dva.dés for andes. 

108. The Messiah is to intervene from heaven to save Jerusalem. ware unmetrical: cdevapss Baciheds exmeppoeis 
€ml TOUTOV. 

IIl1-31. Calamities in various Eastern countries foretold. 

112. The partition of sovereignty would refer to the disputes as to the imperial throne of Rome. 

119. The simile is a little strained. Alex. would read ‘from its foundations’ (8a6pnddv). 

125. Read modvguadoy for MSS. modugutop. arte : 

129. The epithets dyupor, pupirvouy, are apparently chosen to play on the name Myra, the chief city of Lycia. But 
for dyvpov (myrrhless) we might possibly read dpdpay (water-channel). ; : 

130. infatuation (Avcons), a suggestion for ‘ grief’ (Avmns). Rhea is closely connected with Cybele, whose worship 
was attended with great orgies. ee k 

132-6. The whole text is corrupt and only a conjectural restoration 1s possible. In 133 a devourer (Sarrev) is 
a conjecture for ‘ground’ (Sdmedov). In 135 péporas, ‘mortals’, is read for poppas 136 is regarded as a doublet of 
135 and omitted.. It runs, literally, ‘Epidanus claiming (saying) one day to beget the forms of beasts’. _ | 

The Lafithae were a wild tribe living in Thessaly in heroic times, and the Pemezus is the principal river of 


Thessaly. 
137-54. The return of Nero. _ 


138. Cf. 632. The description in the next two lines is bitterly sarcastic. 
140. It was said that Nero’s birth was wrapped in mystery, cf. Suet. Vero 6. 


399 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Book V, Lines 142-188 


with melodious voice (42) shall destroy many together with his ill-starred mother. (43) Then shall 
flee from Babylon a king fearful and shameless (44) whom all mortals and all the best men loathe. . 
(45) For he destroyed many and laid his hands on the womb (46) and sinned against wives and was 
born of abominable parentage. (47) He shall come to the Medes and to the kings of the Persians, 
(48) the first whom he desired and to whom he added glory, (49) making his lair with these evil men 
against the true people. (50) He seized the temple built by God, and burnt the citizens and the 
people who went up to it, whom I have justly sung. (52) For when he died the whole of creation 
was shaken (53) and kings perished, and those among whom the empire remained (54) destroyed the 
great city and the righteous people. 

(55) But when after the fourth year a great star shines, (56) which by itself shall destroy the 
(whole) land, {because of the honour (57) which they first paid to Poseidon god of the seat, (58) then 
shall come a great star from heaven into the divine sea, (59) and shall burn up the deep sea and 
Babylon itself, (60) and the land of Italy on whose account (61) many faithful saints of the Hebrews 
have perished, and the true people. 

(62) Thou shalt be afflicted with evil among evil men, (63) but thou shalt remain utterly desolate 
for whole ages hereafter, . . . . (65) hating thy soil because thou didst love magic. (66) Adulteries 
are with thee and unlawful intercourse with boys, (67) effeminate and unjust, thou wicked city, most 
ill-starred of all. (68) Woe unto thee all unclean city of Latin land, (69) frenzied and {poison- 
loving}, in widowhood shalt thou sit beside thy banks, (70) and river Tiber shall mourn for thee, his 
wife, (71) that hadst -a bloodthirsty heart and a godless mind. (72) Didst thou not know what God 
can do and what are his designs? (73) But thou hast said, I am unique, and none shall bring ruin 
on me. (74) But now God whose Being is for ever shall destroy thee and all of thine, (7 5) and there 
shall be no token of thee in that land, (76) as of old when the Mighty God found for thee thine 
honour. (77) Remain, O lawless one, unique, and, wedded unto flaming fire, (78) make thine home in 
the nether region of Hades where laws are not. 

(79) But now once more, Egypt, I bemoan thy doom. (80) Memphis, thou shalt be in the van of 
troubles, tsmitten in thine ankles}. (81) The very pyramids in thee shall utter a speechless voice. 
(82) Python, thou that of old wast justly called the double city, (83) be thou silent for ages that 
thou mayst cease from thy wickedness. (84) Insolence, storehouse of evil woes, frenzied with much 
lamentation, (85) direful sufferer, full of tears, thou shalt remain a widow for ever. (86) For many 
a year thou wast the sole sovereign of the world. 

(87) But when Barca puts on the white kilt (88) over soiled clothes, may I not live or be born. 


143. Babylon probably means Rome. But it is noticeable that in the Avesta Azhidaka has his seat at Babylon, and 
some have supposed that the Nero myth has borrowed certain features from this source. 

146. abominable, j.apév. Most MSS. read ‘small’, wixpdy, but the correction is certain. It is noticeable in how 
many details Nero and the Antichrist are confused. 

148. Nero desired to transfer his seat of empire to the East. Cf. Suet. Vero 4o. 

150. Nero did not, of course, capture Jerusalem. But his sending Vespasian to the East to quell the Jewish revolt 
was the beginning of the end. 

152. died, @aveovros. MSS. ‘appeared’, mpodavévros. But Nero’s death was followed b i 
(Die 63. 28), and the kings who foidied maul e Galba, Otho, and Vitellius. Ye 

MSS. have ‘ the’ 7 for ‘the whole of’, édy, and the line is left unmetrical. 

155-61. An apocalyptic passage suggested by a notable comet which appeared in A.D, 73 (Plin. Vat. Hist. ii. 25) 
and is supposed to presage the fate of Rome. ‘ 

157. The line is corrupt; perhaps we should read ‘because of the precious things which aforeti 
Poseidon god of the sea’, The arrogance of Babylon (= Rome) is hase toa ised on ie rai 
borne merchandise, cf. Apoc. xviii. 4-20. 

162-78. A dirge on Rome suggested by Isa. xiii. and Apoc. xviii. 

164. The line omitted (‘it shall be, but it shall remain utterly desolatef or ever ’) is evidently a doublet. 

165. magic, pappakin. pe Apoc. xviii. 23. 

169. poison-loving, ¢xidvoxdpys, properly ‘ delighting in vipers’. The wor o 
i es gens oe Cees Xapyns, properly ghting p d may have been suggested by the story 

173. Cf. sanxivesss 

177. A reference to the great fire of A.D. 63. 

179-205. A dirge on Memphis and other Egyptian towns. 

180. smitten in thine ankles, mhyxOcioa Tévoyras (Geffck.) may refer to the system of canals which crossed ancient 
eer haar pa reading gives mAnoOcioa révorros, and it is simple to read with Alex. m\nodcioa Bavovrov, 

181. A reference to the sounding pyramid mentioned in Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxxvi. 58, Juv. xv. 5. 

182. Python = Pithom, the treasure city partially built by the Israelites. The Romans built another city close 
by, called Heropolis. It is Egypt in general rather than Memphis or Python that is now addressed : 

For speechless (dvavdov) the MSS. have ‘ shameless’ (dvaid7). ; 

184. Cf. 1. 231 ff. 

187. Barca, a city of Cyrenaica captured by the Persians in the time of Dari i t i 
Beatie The oracle is probally beara ar bbe pee ee ets The kilt («cumdoovov) was a Persian 


400 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Boox V, Lines 189-238 


(89) O Thebes, where is thy great strength? a savage man (90) shall 

And thou, taking thy sombre garments ni) shalt ae i Kiet He We | 
amends (92) for all that thou didst before in the shamelessness of thine heart. — (93) And they shall 
make grievous lament because of their lawless deeds. 

(94) Syene an Ethiopian hero shall destroy. (95) Teuchira the dark-skinned Indians shall forcibly 
occupy. (96) Pentapolis, thou shalt mourn: fa man of mighty strength shall destroy thee.t (97) O 
Libya, steeped in tears, who shall tell forth thy dooms? (98) And what mortal, Cyrene, shall weep 
piteous tears for thee? (99) Thou shalt not cease thy lament to the time of thine hateful destruction. 

(200) Among the Britains and the Gauls rich in gold (201) the ocean shall roar filled with streams 
of blood: (202) forasmuch as they too committed wickedness against the children of God 
(203) twhen the red king brought against the Sidonians (204) a great horde of Gauls out of Syriay. 
And he shall slay even thee, (205) O Ravenna, and shall rule over thee with bloodshed. 

(206) Ye Indians, be not overbold, and ye stout-hearted Ethiopians. (207) For when the circle of 
the arched Axis, Capricorn (208) and Taurus among the Twins revolve round mid heaven, (209) and 
Virgo is coming forth, and the sun (io) reigns fixing his fire-flashing belt about his brow: (11) then 
there shall be a great celestial conflagration on the earth, (12) and in the battle of the stars a new 
creation shall come forth, so that (13) the whole land of the Ethiopians shall perish with fire and 
moanings. 

(14) Do thou too, Corinth, bemoan the piteous destruction that is in thee. (15) For when with 
their weft of twisted thread the three sister-Fates (16) bring back him that fled by guile to the bank 
of the Isthmus (17) in mid-air that all may see him, (18) who once pierced the rock with ductile 
brass, (19) then he shall destroy thy land and waste it, as it was determined before. (20) For to 
him God hath given strength to do (21) such things as none of all the former kings have done. 

(22) For first of all cutting off with a mighty blow the roots from three heads, (23) he shall give 
them to his mighty comrades to devour (24) so that they shall eat the flesh of the parents of the 
unholy king. (25) For for all men blood and horrors are in store (26) because of the great city and 
the righteous people, (27) brought safe through all, whom Providence exalted. 

(28) O thou unsettled and of evil counsel, beset with evil fate, (29) source of trouble and its great 
end unto men (30) when creation is vexed and again saved by the Fates, (31) O violence, fountain- 
head of evils and great bane unto men, (32) who of mortals hath desired thee, who within him 
hath not been vexed? (33) By thee a king cast down has lost his august life. (34) Thou hast 
ordered all amiss and hast brought on all the flood-tide of evil, (35) and through thee the fair 
plains of the earth have been altered. (36) Throw out these seeds of strife (perhaps they are thy 
last) for our contention. (37) How and what dost thou speak? I will persuade thee, yea, even if 
I blame thee I say it. (38) There was once among men the bright sun-ray, when the beam of the 


193. make lament (kdéyovra), an emendation for ‘see lament’ (8yorra). The ending of lines 192, 193 are trans- 
posed in the MSS. ale) j 

194. Syene, modern Assouan. There was an Ethiopian invasion of Egypt in 24 B.C. 

195. Teuchira, a city in Cyrenaica, afterwards called Arsinoe. : ; 

196. Pentapolis, a district on the coast embracing Cyrene. The text 1s uncertain. 

200-5. Woes on Western peoples. ’ 

200. Britains. MSS. Bpireco. Wilam. suggests Bpvyeoot. ane 

203. Meaning uncertain. Bacvdeds Boing may refer to Vespasian who brought Gallic troops to the campaign in 
Palestine. Or there may be an allusion to the phcenix which reappeared at certain intervals, and if so the reference 
would probably be to Nero. Pea 

205. MSS. ‘thee, Ravenna here’ (ce. . - airn ‘Paévvn). ; 

206-13. A conflagration to occur among the Ethiopians at a certain conjunction of stars. 

206. be not overbold, 2) Gapocire. MSS. ‘fear not’, wy tapBerre. 

207. arched, kuprov, an emendation for rovrovs which gives no sense. 

210, fire-flashing. The word is uncertain. 

214-28. A dirge on Corinth. : ; 

216. Reading uncertain. Ifthe restored text as translated is accepted there is apparently a reference again to Nero. 
In the next line he seems confused with Simon Magus, who, according to tradition, met his death while flying in 
the air. Line 218 would then return to Nero and his attempt to pierce the Isthmus of Corinth. 

nk, dxOnv. have épudry, ‘ voice’. . 

Ne Ch Ae oy ieee 8. The three heads may be the three Flavian Emperors. 

cutting off (oraccdpevos), a suggestion for ‘weighing: (ornadpevos). : 

223. his comrades (érdpos), a conjecture for ‘others (érépous). So peyadous for phos. 

224. For parents (yovéwy) we should perhaps read ‘race (yevéas). The unholy king is aioe k ae 

228-46. A much disputed passage. Hildebrandt sees in it a direct allusion to the Avesta. Fehr regards it as an 
address to Rome. It seems more probable that it refers to the Rabbinic conception of the fall of Adam brought about 
by the envy of the Angels, and of the withdrawal of the Shechinah from earth. But the whole passage is obscure. 

230. by the Fates (Moipas). MSS. have ‘when destiny is again saved 1 TOCopErNs mau Moipns. 

237. Alex. would read ‘If thou hast aught against me, zee it’, ef d€ Te meupeat adda. ary 

401 


1105-2 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Book V, Lines 240-294 


prophets was shed forth in concord. (40) A tongue distilling a fair honied drink to all mortals 
(41) came forth and waxed greater, and reared its gentle crop for all. (42) Therefore, O thou of 
cramped counsel, fountain-head of the greatest of evils, (43) the hooked knife and mourning shall 
come on that day. (44) O thou source of trouble and its great end unto men, (45) when creation is 
vexed and again saved by the Fates, (46) listen to my bitter speech of evil sound, thou bane 
unto men. 

(47) But when the Persian land shall be quit of war (48) and of pestilence and lamentation, then 
there shall be on that day (49) the godlike heavenly race of the blessed Jews, (50) who dwell around 
the city of God at the centre of earth. (51) Building a great ring-wall as far as Joppa (52) they are 
exalted on high up to the darkling clouds. (53) No more shall the trumpet hiss forth the blast of 
war's turmoil, (54) nor shall they perish any more by the fanatic hands of their foes. (55) But they 
shall set up trophies around in an age innocent of harm. : 

(56) Then there shall come from the sky a certain exalted man, (57) whose hands they nailed 
upon the fruitful tree, (58) the noblest of the Hebrews, who shall one day cause the sun to stand still, 
(59) when he cries with fair speech and pure lips. ; 

(60) Let thy spirit within thy breast no longer be vexed, thou blessed one, (61) child of God, 
excellent in wealth, only longed-for blossom, (62) pleasant light, august offshoot, longed-for branch, 
(63) well-favoured Judaea, fair city, inspired in hymns. (64) No longer shall the Greeks’ unclean 
foot run riot in thy land, (65) for they shall have within their breasts a mind that conforms to thy 
laws. (66) But thy noble sons shall encircle thee with honour, (67) and with holy music they shall 
attend thy table, (68) with divers kinds of sacrifices and prayers to the honour of God. (69) All those 
righteous men who from short-lived affliction have endured troubles, (70) shall have a more ample and 
well-favoured rope of /ife. (71) But the evil men who trim to the breeze a lawless tongue (72) shall 
cease to speak one against another, (73) and they shall hide themselves funtil the world pass away}. 
(74) And then shall come from the clouds a rain of flaming fire. (75) No longer shall men gather 
in the blithe corn-blade from the earth. (76) All shall remain unsown and unploughed, until mortal 
men take note of (77) God, the Chief of all, the Immortal and Eternal, (78) and no longer pay homage 
to mortal things, (79) nor dogs and vultures, which Egypt has taught (80) to reverence with vain 
mouths and foolish lips. (81) But the holy land of the godly alone shall bear all these things, 
(82) An ambrosial stream distilling honey and milk shall flow from rock and fountain for all the 
righteous. (84) For they fixed their hope on the one God, the Father who alone is excellent, 
(85) and they held fast to great piety and faith. 

(86) But why, O why, does my wise mind lay this burden on me? (87) Now it is thou, O 
wretched Asia, that I piteously lament, and the race of the Tonians, Carians, and Lydians rich in gold. 
(89) Woe to thee, Sardis: and to thee, lovely Trallis. (90) Woe to thee, Laodicea, fair city, how 
shall ye perish (91) destroyed by earthquakes and reduced to dust. ( 92) To dusky Asia and (the 
race) of the Lydians rich in gold.... 

(93) The shrine of Artemis fashioned (by the citizens) of Ephesus (94) shall one day by yawnings 


240. The tongue was perhaps a comet, a sign of peace and prosperity. pédu orayéovea, ‘distilling ... honeyed’ is 
a conjecture of Alex. for pev orayéovea ¢. (Ww has pev orvyéouca.) 

241. For daive ré read fatvero. 

249. Lact. quotes this line and refers it to the Christians. 

250. For the Rabbinic idea that Jerusalem was the centre of the earth cf. 1 En. xxvi. 1; Jubilees viii. 

255. The text is corrupt, and the emendation proposed is slight. Read dda wépiE orioove’ dkdkw adv Tporata. 

256-9. A Christian interpolation. ‘ 
_ 257. MSS. ‘whose hands he spread out’, of Tahdpas imocer. For ir\woev read frooav. Fehr, reading éapiris 
in 258, renders ‘whose hands the company of the Hebrews spread out’. Blass refers this line to Moses (Exod. xvii. 12), 

258. In the MSS. the verb is in the past, ornoe, Many commentators treat this as referring to Joshua, but manj- 
festly the allusion is to St. Luke xxiii, 43, 44. 

260-85. The coming prosperity of Judaea and the plight of the ungodly. 

Bleek and Gefrérer treat this section as one of the oldest (c. 160 B.C.), but without convincing reason, 

262. Read @dXos for rédos, and épvos for ayvos. 

267. attend thy table. Perhaps ‘set up (émorijoover) thy table’, Referring to the restoration of the Temple 
sacrifices, which was to be one of the features of the new Jerusalem. 

270. Tope is a conjecture (kddwp for caddy: cf. iii. 45). The metaphor would be a nautical one, but it is not very 
convincing, and there is probably a corruption in the text. 

273. until the world pass away. Read (with Rzach) éas ddd\ay6y 6 kéopos for Les kégpos adhayy. 

280. vain mouths, xevois. MSS. ‘new’ (véos), Alexandre suggests ‘ their mouths’ (cropdrecoy €ois). 

286-97. Disasters in Asia following an earthquake. 

: There was a specially severe earthquake in a.D. 17, details of which are given in Tac. Ama. ii. 47; Pliny, Vaz. 
Hist. ii. 86. Twelve cities were destroyed in one night and Sardis suffered most severely. 

292. Obviously there is a gap after this line. It may be filled in with a line like iv. 1of. 

293. The temple of Ephesus survived, and was changed into a Christian Church. 


402 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Book V, Lines 295-341 


ncn Oy ae orn ene ore 
which is no longer inhabited. aaa 97) ence eo 

(98) And then in wrath the Immortal God who dwells in heaven (99) shall hurl from the sk 
a fiery meteor down on the unholy head. i i . 

y y (300) And instead of winter there shall be summer on 
that day, (301) and then indeed shall be autumn’s end to mortal men. (302) For He who thunders 
from on high shall utterly destroy all the shameless men, (303) with thunderings and lightnings and 
flaming thunderbolts, (304) on those who are his enemies, and he shall destroy them as ungodly 
(305) so that dead bodies shall remain on the earth more numerous than the sand. 4 

(306) Smyrna too shall come bemoaning her minstrel (307) to the gates of Ephesus, and she 
shall perish more thoroughly. 

(308) And Cyme, the foolish, with her streams inspired of God, (309) hurled down by the hands 
of godless men, unjust and lawless, (310) shall not so much as put forth a branch toward heaven, 
(Ir) but shall remain dead by its swelling streams. (12) And then they shall groan together 
awaiting an evil doom. (13) They shall know when they have a token wherefore they have 
laboured, (14) that stubborn folk and shameless race of the Cymaeans. (15) Then when they shall 
bemoan their wicked land reduced to ashes (16) Lesbos shall be for ever destroyed by Eridanus. 

(17) Woe unto thee Cibyra, thou fair city, cease thy rout, (18) and Hierapolis, thou land uniquely 
wedded to the god of wealth. (19) Thou shalt have, what thou hast longed to have, gold but 
gold of many tears, (20) burying it in the earth by the streams of Thermodon. (21) And rock- 
clinging Tripolis by Maeander’s waters, (22) left widowed by the billows at night against the shore, 
(23) God’s Providence shall one day make a full end of thee unto the ground. 

(24) May it never befall me to choose willingly the land that is neighbour to Phoebus. (25) One 
day a meteor from on high shall destroy delicate Miletus, (26) forasmuch as she chose the 
deceitful verse of Phoebus, (27) and men’s learned study and prudent counsel. 

(28) Be favourable, Father of all, to the delicate fruitful land, (29) to great Judaea, that we 
may see thy purposes. (30) Her first didst thou know, O God, with thine acts of favour, 
(31) so that she seemed to all mankind to be the object of thy special grace, (32) and to realize 
what a charge she had from thee. 

(33) Thrice wretched me, I long to see the Thracians’ works, (34) and the wall that spans 
two seas, dragged by Ares (35) river-like in the dust like a fishing diver. 

(36) Wretched Hellespont, a son of the Assyrians shall one day yoke thee. (37) {The Thracians’ 
battle shall come and utterly destroy thy might}: (38) and an Egyptian king shall take Macedonia, 
(39) and a barbarian clime shall cast down the might of rulers. (40) Lydians and Galatians, Pam- 
phylians and Pisidians (41) bear rule with all their people armed with bitter strife. 


296. prostrate. Read tmria for rma 8’. 

298-305. Further calamities and reversal of seasons. The section seems misplaced here. 

301. autumn’s end. perdémop’ for MSS. peréreit’. 

306. minstrel, \upoupydy. Geffck.’s emendation for Avxoupyéy. The reference would be to Homer. The idea seems 
to be that in the general distress even the inveterate rivalry between Ephesus and Smyrna would cease. 

308. The people of the Asiatic Cumae were regarded as specially foolish. But the reference to the inspired streams 
would fit in better with the Cumae in Campania. 

310. Read kAjpa mponoer for dppa mpodocet. 

311. swelling (kvpaivovor) for ‘Cumaean’ (xvpjoww). The play on words seems to make this emendation preferable 
to Geffcken’s kvavéouow. 

316. The Eridanus was a river famous in old legends. Here, perhaps, used for the sea. Cf. Virgil’s ‘ Acheloia 

ocula’. 

E 317. Cibyra. Mendelssohn’s emendation for Corcyra. Cibyra was on the borders of Caria and Lycia. 

319. longed to have (emd@nxas). MSS. ‘made? (reroinxas). Gold, xpucdy, is a suggested emendation for Place, xopov. 
It carries on the idea of ‘ wedded to the god of wealth’ (IAovrav puyeioa). 

One of the features of Hierapolis was the Ploutonium, a hole just wide enough to admit a man, reaching deep 

into the earth, from which issued a mephitic vapour. See Ramsay, C7¢ies and Bishoprics of Phrygia, p. 86. 

322. left widowed. Read xnpevdeioa for MSS. kAnpobeica. Should we read ‘ hurled down,’ kappipGeioa ? 

Tripolis was situated on a hill overhanging the Maeander. 

323. Read médovde for 106" Hoe. : 

324. Miletus was not far from the famous temple of Apollo at Branchidae. ; 

327. study = pedérny, a play on Manrov. Miletus was proud of her philosophers, and especially of Thales. 

334. The great wall that spanned the isthmus on which Byzantium stood. _ 

335. like (to’) a suggestion for ‘to’ (ém’). The diver was probably a sea bird. 

336. Xerxes’ bridge across the Hellespont. a A ; recat 

337. Reading uncertain. It is suggested to read Avoivayov for is o€ paxn, and translate “The Thracians’ might 
shail utterly undo Lysimachus’. The reference would be to the death of Lysimachus in the battle of Corupedion in 
281 8.C. His vanquisher, Seleucus, was slain by Ptolemy Keraunos, and he in his turn was defeated and killed by the 
Gauls in 280 B.C. ; P ' 

341. bear rule (kparéovor). Perhaps read xporéovor, ‘resound with din of arms’, 


403 Drd 2 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS, Boox V, Lines 342-404 


(42) Thrice-wretched Italy, thou shalt remain all desolate, unwept. (43) A baleful beast in 
thy luxuriant land shall destroy thee. 

(44) When the broad heaven above is clear}, (45) men shall hear a crash, as of thunder, even 
the voice of God. (46) And even the imperishable fires of the sun itself shall be no more, 
(47) nor shall there be any more the bright moonlight (48) in the last time when God shall 
reign. (49) All things shall become black and darkness shall be over the earth, (50) (and mortals 
shall be blind and beasts evil) and trouble. (51) That day shall last long time, so that (52) men 
will take note of God Himself, the King, the Watcher of all from heaven. (53) Then he shall 
have no pity for those who are his foes, (54) when they spend themselves in sacrificing herds 
of lambs and sheep and lowing bulls, (55) of great calves too with gilded horns (56) to lifeless 
Hermes and gods of stone. (57) But let justice, wisdom, and glory hold sway over the just, (58) lest 
the Immortal God in anger destroy (59) the whole bloodstained race of men and their shameless 
kin. (60) We needs must love God the Father, the Wise, the Everlasting. cf 

(61) There shall be at the last time, about the waning of the moon, (62) a world-convulsing 
war deceitful in guilefulness. (63) And there shall come from the ends of the earth a matricide 
(64) fleeing and devising sharp-edged plans in his mind. (65) He shall ruin all the earth, and 
gain all power, (66) and surpass all men in the cunning of his mind. (67) That for which he 
perished he shall seize at once. (68) And he shall destroy many men and great tyrants, (69) and 
shall burn all men as none other ever did. (70) And those that were fallen he shall raise up 
again through contrary zeal. (71) And from the west shall come much war to men, (72) and 
streams of blood shall flow up to the banks of the deep-eddying rivers. (73) And gall shall 
distil in the plains of Macedoniat .. . (74) alliance, but to the king from the west destructiont. 
(75) And then a wintry blast shall blow throughout the earth, (76) and the plain shall be filled 
again with cruel war. (77) For fire shall rain on mortal men from the fields of heaven, (78) fire 
and blood, water, meteor, darkness, heaven’s night, (79) and consumption in war and a mist over 
the slain (80) shall destroy at once all kings and the best of men. 

(81) Then at last war’s piteous ruin shall be stopped (82) and no man shall fight any more 
with swords or steel, (83) nor with javelins either, for these things shall no more be permitted. 
(84) But the wise people that are left shall have peace, (85) having had trial of evil that later they 
might rejoice. 

(86) Ye matricides, cease from your shamelessness and wicked boldness. (87) Ye that of old 
foully furnished boys for abuse, (88) and set in your houses as harlots those who before were pure 
(89) with wanton violence and punishment and laboured foulness. (90) In thee a mother had 
incestuous commerce with her child, (91) and a daughter became the bride of her own father. (92) In 
thee even kings befouled their ill-starred mouth: (93) in thee evil men even found means to lie with 
beasts. (94) Silence, thou miserable, wicked city, from the revel that thou hadst. (95) For no longer 
under the roof of thy virgin-loving court shall the virgins tend the divine fire. (97) Quenched 
from thee was thine house, desired of old, (98) when for the second time I saw thine house hurled 
(99) headlong down, lapped with fire, by an unholy hand, (400) thine ever flourishing house, the 
temple that guarded thy god, (401) made with holy hands, (402) and such as men from their soul 
and body itself trusted would be ever immortal. 

(403) Not recklessly do they praise a God of senseless earth, (404) nor did a cunning workman 


343. The reading of the MSS. needs some correction. Read eEarondei oe for eEarorécbar. 

344. MSS. unintelligible. Read gora & émmorav alOptos ovpavos edpds Umepbev. 

358-60. Quoted by Lact. De ra Dei, xxiii. 8. 

359. bloodstained (Spordev) a conjecture for ‘life ’ (Biorov). 

361-85. Wars and disasters preceding the end. 

363. The ends of the earth. Either Parthia, or the West conceived of as the scene of 
Antichrist in the form of Nero. A similar description in Testament of the Lord y. Te 

The passage is referred to in Lact. De Morte Pers. ii. 8. 

367. Probably the sovereignty. 

370-3. Friedlieb supposes these lines to be an interpolation. 

373. A gap after this line. The sense was probably, ‘But God shall send from on high to that people help (or 
alliance) ’, “s = 

386-402, Outburst of hatred against Rome. For the description cf. iii. 185 ff. 

395. No good sense can be obtained from the MSS. A somewhat bold emendation is proposed. Read cikérs ya 
mapa oeio réyer huomapbévov aidjs. The reference is apparently to the burning of the Temple of Vesta in A.D, 6 a 
te eeeone burning in A.D, 191). ne 

3098. e Sibyl claims to have seen the Temple at erusalem twi j i 
ee ihe e wits of Veet ee p Jerusalem twice destroyed, and regards its destruction as the 
ce aaa of Herod’s Temple was a dogma deep-rooted in the Jewish mind. Compare the story in 

403. senseless (dppovos) for ‘ vanished’ (aavois), 


404 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Book V, Lines 405-46 3 


among them make a god of stone: (405) no ornament of gold to lead sou f i 
(406) But God, the great Father of ay ee whom is the breath of Goa) core thee bee atts 
reverence with holy sacrifices and hecatombs. (408) But now an obscure unholy king has gone u 
(409) and cast it down and left it without inhabitant (10) with a great multitude and with doeahty 
warriors. (11) But he himself perished when he landed on the mainland from the Eternal Land 
(12) and no such sign has yet been wrought on men (13) that others should think to lay in ruins the 
great city. 

(14) For there has come from the plains of heaven a blessed man (15) with the sceptre 
in his hand which God has committed to his clasp: (16) and he has won fair dominion over all, and 
has restored to all (17) the good the wealth which the former mentook. (18) And he has destroyed 
every city from its foundations with sheets of fire, (19) and burnt up the families of the men who before 
wrought evil, (20) and the city which God loved he made (21) more radiant than the stars and the sun 
and the moon; (23) and he set it as the jewel of the world, and made a temple (23) exceeding fair 
in its fair sanctuary, and fashioned it (24) in size of many furlongs, with a giant tower (25) touching 
the very clouds and seen of all, (26) so that all the faithful and all the righteous may see (27) the glory 
of the invisible God, the vision of delight. (28) East and West have hymned forth the glory of God: 
(29) for no longer are wretched mortals beset with deeds of shame, (30) adulteries and unnatural 
passions for boys, (31) murder and tumult, but rivalry is fair among all. (32) It is the last time of 
the saints, when God accomplishes these things, (33) God the sender of thunder, the Creator of the 
great Temple. 

(34) Woe to thee, Babylon, golden-throned and golden-sandalled, (35) thou who for many a year 
wast queen, sole sovereign of the world, (36) of old so great and cosmopolitan, no more shalt thou lie 
(37) on golden mountains and by Euphrates’ streams. (38) Thou shalt be levelled by an earth- 
quake’s shock: and the dread Parthians (39) have made thee rattle through and through. Keep 
thy mouth with the bridle of constraint, (40) thou race of the Chaldees, and ask not nor care (41) how 
thou mayst rule the Persians or have dominion over the Medes. (42) For because of the empire 
that thou hadst, +thou shalt send hostages (43) to Rome, even those who were in bondage to Asiat. 
(44) Therefore thou thyself, thou haughty queen, shalt come to the summons of thine (45) adversaries 
on whose account thou hast sent ransom, (46) and for thy crooked words thou shalt give a bitter 
reckoning to thine enemies. 

(47) And in the last time the sea shall be dry, (48) and no longer shall ships sail to Italy, (49) and 
great Asia which produces everything shall be water, (50) and Crete a plain. Cyprus shall have 
a great sorrow (51) and Paphos shall lament aloud her grievous fate, so that (52) even Salamis the 
great city shall perceive that she has suffered a great sorrow. (53) Now again the dry land up to the 
sea-shore shall be barren, (54) and swarms of locusts shall waste the land of Cyprus. (55) Ye ill- 
starred mortals, ye shall weep when ye look toward Tyre. (56) Phoenicia, grievous wrath awaits 
thee, till thou fallest (57) with a grievous fall so that the Sirens in very truth should weep. 

(58) There shall be a time in the fifth generation, when Egypt’s destruction shall cease, ( 59) when 
kings ally themselves in shameless marriages. (60) And Pamphylian races shall settle in Egypt, 
(61) and in Macedonia and in Asia and among the Lycians (62) there shall be a world-convulsing war 
with streams of blood in the dust, (63) which a king of Rome and western princes shal] arrest. 


408. The king is Titus. s : 

ail. Text uncertain. Titus lingered for some time in Egypt after the capture of Jerusalem, and there was an 
expectation among the Jews that he would die directly he set foot on {talian soil. Read yépo@ dm dbavarns emiBas yns 
and understand xépo of the mainland of Italy. ; 

414-33. The coming of the Messiah, conceived of as already having occurred. 

420, 421. Quoted by Lact. Div. Just. vii. 24. 6. put } ; an ea 

422. The line is mutilated in the middle. The emendation suggested is kal kdupou KaréOxev Gyadpa, vey T eTroungeEY 
€v O7K@ KAN@ TreptKadréa. ; 

434-46. Woes on Babylon and the Parthians. 

435. Cf. Isa. xlvil. 5. : 

437. The golden mountains are merely a proverbial figure for immense wealth. : : 

439. rattle (kporeiv) for MSS. ‘rule’ (kpateiv). In the latter half of the line the MSS. reading has been kept with the 

i Iteration of dipdy to pipe. , ; 

oe “The text is nee ee Read els ‘Paopny méuers ov kal "Acids Ontevovtas. Augustus, by diplomacy, induced 
the Parthians to restore the Roman prisoners captured at Carrhae. 

444. Reading again uncertain. For éis kpiow read emi k\jouv. 

447-57. Convulsions of nature. : * 

451. lament, aide. Alexandre’s emendation for aifet. 

457. For the Sirens as spirits of lamentation cf. 2 Bar. x. 8. , ore vie 

458. War in Egypt. For ‘when... shall cease’ (8re mavoer’) we should, perhaps, read “when .. . shall come (6r 
eevoe’r )« 

459. Perhaps a reference to Cleopatra and Caesar. ates ae ifs 

461. For Lycians Alex. suggests ‘ Libyans’, referring to Octavian’s capture of Pelustum an Alexandria. 


405 


THE SIBYLLINE BOOKS. Boox V, Lines 464-530 


(64) When a wintry blast distils in form of snow, (65) and a great river and the largest lakes are 
frozen, (66) straightway a barbarian horde shall make its way to the land of Asia, (67) and shall 
destroy the race of the dreaded Thracians as though it were but puny. (68) And then mortals in 
desperation shall devour their own parents (69) in the last stages of famine, and shall consume them 
greedily as food. (70) And from every house beasts shall devour the table (71) and the very birds 
shall devour all mortals, (72) and as a result of grievous war the bloodstained ocean shall be filled 
(73) with the flesh and blood of the insensate men. (74) Then such faintness shall there be through- 
out the earth (75) that one may tell the number of men and the measure of women. (76) Myriad 
shall be the lamentations of the wretched generation about the term (77) when the sun sets never 
to rise again, (78) waiting to be bathed in the waters of ocean. (79) For it has seen the unholy 
villainies of many men. (80) There shall be a moonless darkness even around the great heaven, 
(81) and no slight mist shall envelop the folds of earth (82) a second time. But then God’s light shall 
guide (83) all those good men who have raised their hymns to God. 

(84) Isis, thou goddess thrice ill-starred, thou shalt remain by the streams of Nile (85) alone, frenzied 
but speechless by the sands of Acheron, (86) and no memory of thee shall remain throughout the whole 
earth. (87) And thou, Sarapis, covered with many useless stones, (88) shalt lie a giant corpse in 
Egypt thrice ill-starred. (89) And all who have brought the precious things of Egypt to thee, 
(9°) shall weep for thee bitterly, bethinking them of the Immortal God. (91) They shall know 
thee to be nothing, all who have sung hymns to thee as God. (92) And then one of the priests shall 
say, a linen-clad man, (93) Come, let us set up the fair temple of the true God. (94) Come, let us 
change the grievous custom we have received from our fathers, (95) whereby, performing processions 
and rites to gods of stone and earthenware, they had no sense. (97) Let us turn ourselves and hymn 
the Immortal God, (98) the Father himself who is from everlasting, (99) the Chief of all, the True, the 
King, (500) the Father, Sustainer of souls, the Great Eternal God. (501) And then in Egypt there 
shall be a great and holy temple, (502) and to it the people whom God made shall bring sacrifices. 
(503) To these God shall grant a life without decay. 

(504) But when, leaving the shameless tribes of the Triballi, (505) the Ethiopians tarry to till the land 
of Egypt, (506) they shall begin their evil deeds that all the latter things may come to pass. 
(507) For they shall destroy the great temple of the land of Egypt. (508) And God shall rain griev- 
ous wrath upon them down to earth, (509) so as to destroy all the evil and all the lawless. (10) And 
there shall be no more any sparing in that land (11) because they did not keep that which God 
entrusted to them. 

(12) I saw the threatening of the gleaming sun among the stars, (1 3) and the moon’s grievous wrath 
among the lightning flashes. (14) The stars travailed with war: and God suffered them to fight. 
(15) For instead of the sun long flames rose in revolt, (17) and the two-horned revolution of the moon 
was changed. (16) Lucifer waged battle, mounted on Leo’s back. (18) Capricorn smote the heel of 
the young Taurus: (19) and Taurus snatched from Capricorn his day of return. (20) Orion removed 
the Scales so that they remained no more. (21) Virgo changed her sphere with the Twins in Aries, 
(22) The Pleiad appeared no more: and the Dragon disowned the Belt. (23) Pisces entered into the 
girdle of Leo. (24) Cancer did not stay, for he feared Orion. (25) Scorpio drew up his tail, because 
of savage Leo: (26) and the dog-star perished from the sun’s flame. (27) The might of doughty 
Lucifer burned up Aquarius. (28) Heaven itself was stirred till it shook the warriors, (29) and in 
anger cast them headlong to the earth, (30) And smitten swiftly into the waters of Ocean, (31) they 
kindled the whole earth: and the sky remained starless. 


464-74. A Gaulish invasion. Probably an ancient oracle on the Gaulish inroad into Asia after their repulse at 
Delphi in 279 B.c. 

476-83. A plague of darkness, the righteous only having light. 

476. wretched, dedy, a conjecture for MSS, dey. 

482. The writer has in mind probably the darkness that reigned in Egypt when only the Israelites had light. 
ae eos The conversion of Egypt. Four lines are quoted by Clem. Al. Pro¢r. iy, 50 with slight alterations from 

e ; 

487. So Clem. But the MSS. have ‘stretched on thy stones thou shalt have many toils’, Ai@ou emikeiueve moAG 
poynoes. : 

489. Or perhaps ‘whom the spell of Egypt hath brought to thee’. gacovs 8° Aiyimrov mé6os iyayer eis oe (So RZ, )s 

501. The Temple of Onias at Heliopolis was destroyed by order of Vespasian. 

504-11. Destruction of the Temple followed by God’s vengeance. * 

504. The Triballi, properly a rude tribe living on the borders of Thrace, are here used generally for savages. 

,005- The MSS. tarry is to be kept. But ‘the land of Egypt’ is Alexandre’s emendation (Atyirrou yaiay for 
Atyurroy ny Te), 

512-31. The battle of the stars; cf. Lucan, Phars.i. 72. If the Stars are taken as representing angelic beings, the 
scene 1s parallel to the ‘war in heaven’ in Apoc. xii. 7. Only here all are finally expelled. ‘ 

514. war. A necessary emendation for the MSS. reading, which gives no sense. 

517. revolution (/oi¢os) for ‘trouble’ (dCs), 

525. MSS. uncertain. 


406 


THE ASSUMPTION OF MOSES 


INTRODUCTION 


§ 1. SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE BOOK. 


Tue Assumption of Moses was in all probability a composite work, and consisted of two | 
originally distinct books, of which the first was the Testament of Moses, and the second the 
Assumption. The former was written in Hebrew, between A.D. 7 and 29, and possibly also the 
latter. A Greek version of the entire work appeared in the first century A.D. Of this a few phrases 
and sentences appear to have been preserved in Acts vii. 36, Jude 9, 16, 18, 2 Baruch, Clement of 
Alexandria, Origen, and other Greek writers. The Greek version was translated into Latin not 
later than the fifth century. Of this version a large fragment was discovered by Ceriani in 
~a sixth-century MS. in the Ambrosian library in Milan. 

The book was written by a Pharisaic Quietist and was designed by its author as a protest 
against the growing secularization of the Pharisaic party through its fusion with political ideals and 
popular Messianic beliefs. Its author sought herein to recall his party to the old paths, which they 
were fast forsaking, of simple unobtrusive obedience to the law. He glorifies accordingly the old 
ideals which had been cherished and pursued by the Chasid and Early Pharisaic party, but which 
the Pharisaism of the first century B.C. had begun to disown in favour of a more active rdle in the 
life of the nation. And yet he was full of patriotism; for he looked for the return of the Ten Tribes, 
the establishment of the theocratic kingdom, the triumph of Israel over its foes. But though a patriot ~ 
he was not a Zealot. The duty of the faithful was not to resort to arms, but simply to keep the, 
law, and prepare, through repentance, for the personal intervention of God in their behalf. | 
Accordingly, though he depicts in all its horrors the persecution under Antiochus, he leaves unmen- 
tioned the great achievements of the Maccabean leaders and only once refers to the entire dynasty 
from 165 to 37 B.C.,and that in most disparaging terms. For him the true saints and heroes of the 
time were not Judas and his great brethren, but an obscure group of martyrs—Eleazar and his seven } 
sons, who unresistingly yielded themselves to death on behalf of God and the law. In setting forth 
his ideal saints and heroes our author idealized deliberately the facts of history and represented as 
a single incident two distinct events—a pardonable liberty on the part of an Apocalyptist—not to 
speak of an unconquerable optimist and idealist. His action in regard to the Maccabean movement 
was the natural outcome of his conception of religion, and reflected his attitude towards the present 
dominant form of Pharisaism; for he clearly saw the growing secularization of the religion of his 
time, and perhaps foresaw the doom to which his country was hurrying under such a shortsighted 
and unspiritual policy, and laboured with all his power to stay its downward progress. But all in 
vain. He but played afresh the part of Cassandra. The leavening of Pharisaism with earthly political 
ideals went on apace, and the movement thus initiated culminated finally in the destruction of) 
Jerusalem by the Romans in 70 A.D. 

It adds no little to the interest of the book that it was written during the early life of our Lord, } 
or possibly contemporaneously with His public ministry, and that its conception of spiritual religion | 
as opposed to an alliance of religion with politics generally or with any specific school of politics was | 
essentially one with His.* 


§ 2. THE PRESENT BOOK IN REALITY A TESTAMENT OF MOSES—NOT THE ASSUMPTION, 
WHICH IS PRESERVED ONLY IN A FEW GREEK QUOTATIONS. 


In the lists of Apocryphal books we find mention of a Testament of Moses (Ava@yxy Mavoéws) 
followed immediately by an Assumption of Moses (Avddnyis Movoews). In the ‘List of Sixty 
Books’ and in the Synopsis of Athanasius the number of stichoi is omitted, but this desideratum is 
supplied by the Stichometry of Nicephorus, which assigns to them respectively 1,100 and 1,400 
stichoi. Schiirer conjectured that these designations were titles of two separate divisions of one 


1 This section is mainly taken from my edition of the Assumption of Moses, pp. xiii sq. 


407 


THE ASSUMPTION OF MOSES 


and the same book, the first of which has been preserved, whereas the quotations in the Fathers 
almost all belong to the second. The studies of the present writer have led him to accept this 
suggestion in a modified form. The ‘Testament’ and ‘Assumption’ mentioned in the above lists 
are not to be regarded with Schiirer as ‘two separate divisions of one and the same work’, but as 
two originally independent works subsequently put together and edited as One, om 

Of the Latin fragment of the Assumption (i.e. the Testament), which consisted originally of 
I,100 stichoi, about one-half is preserved.!. Some writers, as Ronsch (Das Buch der Fubrliien, 
pp. 480 sq.), have sought to identify this Testament with the Book of Jubilees. But this is impossi- 
ble; for since 4,300 stichoi are assigned to the Canonical Book of Genesis in the Stichometry of 
Nicephorus, this Testament, if it were identical with the Book of Jubilees, would have run to 5,000 
or 6,000 stichoi and not to 1,100, as it is there stated. Independently of this fact on a variety of 
grounds this identification is inadmissible. 

We shall now give some of the grounds for regarding the Latin version and the Greek fragments 
in the Fathers as belonging to two originally independent works, which were subsequently edited 
together. 

7 1°. The book quoted by Jude, Clement of Alexandria, and later Greek writers,? was wholly 
concerned with the individual destiny of Moses, i.e. his assumption and incidents connected with it. 
This was the original Assumption of Moses. 

2°. The book partially preserved in the Latin version is the ‘Testament’ which was wholly 
taken up with the destinies of the chosen people: it was distinct also from the Assumption of Moses ; 
for according to the Latin version (i. e. the ‘Testament ’) Moses was to die an ordinary death. Thus 
in i. 15 Moses says: ‘I am passing away to sleep with my fathers even in the presence of all the 
people,’ and similarly in x.14. In iii. 13 the Tribes speak of Moses’ death. In these three passages 
the death referred to is obviously an ordinary one, and the same fact was stated in x. 12, before it 
was interpolated by the editor who joined the ‘ Testament’ and the ‘ Assumption of Moses’ into one 
book. In x. 12, i.e. ‘From my death [assumption] until His advent, there will be CCL times,’ 
this word ‘assumption’ was introduced by the final editor into the Testament, which knew nothing 
of Moses’ assumption, in order to prepare the reader for the main subject of the added work, ‘ The 
Assumption of Moses’. 

3°. In the thirteenth section of the Palaea Historica edited by Vassiliev—an O.T. history of 
events from Adam to Daniel—of the portion which deals with the death of Moses, part seems to be 
ultimately derived from the ‘ Testament’ and part from the ‘ Assumption’ properly so called. The 
following lines (pp. 257-58) would form a fitting close to the ‘ Testament’. 

kal eimev Movofs apds "Incobdy (tov) to5 Navi. "Avé\O@per ev T@ dpe. Kal dveXOdvtwy adtéev eldev 
Movojs tip yi tijs émayyedias Kal elrev mpos avrov. KdredOe mpds Tov Aady, Kal dvayyetdov abrots bre 
Moiiojs eredetrnoer. Kai karidOev "Inoods mpos rov Aady, 6 Se Motos Ta téAn Tod Blov éxtioaro. Here 
Moses dismisses Joshua and dies apparently an ordinary death. But according to the Assumption 
proper (see Clem. Alex. Stvom. vi. 15) both Joshua and Caleb were present, when the assumption 


* It is not improbable that the lost half of the Testament dealt with certain revelations made by Moses, and that 
it closed with his disappearance in a cloud, so that his death was hid from human sight. We make this conjecture on 
the ground of the following statement in an old Catena on the Pentateuch (Fabric. Cod. Pseud. VT, ii. 121-2) ‘Est 
quidem in apocrypho mysticoque codice legere, ubi de creatis rebus subtilius agitur, nubem lucidam, quo tempore 
mortuus est Moses, locum sepulcri complexam oculos circumstantium perstrinxisse ita ut nullus neque morientem 
legislatorem neque locum videre potuerit ubi cadaver conderetur’, Here there is an extraordinary disappearance of 
Moses’ body as in Deut. xxxiv. 5, 6 but no assumption. If the writer had been acquainted with the original 
Assumption, in which the details of Moses’ ascension to heaven were recorded, he could not have written in these 
vague terms. 

* On pp. 105-10 of my edition I have shown by an examination of the existing Greek fragments of the 
Assumption proper, that the order of action in it was probably as follows : Ei 

1°, Michael was commissioned to bury Moses. 

2°. Satan opposed the burial on the ground (a) that he was the lord of matter (07 and that a i 
body should be rightfully handed over to him ; (3) oe Moses was a murderer, having wae the Pape 
: a Michael having rebutted Satan’s accusations proceeded to charge Satan with having instigated the serpent to 
empt Eve. 

4°. Finally, all opposition having been overcome, the assumption took place in the presence of Joshua and Caleb 
and in a very peculiar way. A two-fold presentation of Moses appeared: one was Moses in company with angels, 
the other was the dead body of Moses, being buried in the recesses of the mountains. : 

The passages in support of 1° will be found in Severus, Patriarch of Antioch (A.D. 512-19). See Cramer, Caz an 
Ep. Cathol., p. 160; likewise the two anonymous passages op. cz’. on pp. 161, 163; two scholia from Oecumenius 
(¢. 990). In support of 2° Jude 9; Clem. Alex., Adumbrat. in Ep. ludae; Didymus Alex. (309-94); Severus of 
Antioch ; Acta Synodi Nicaen, ii. 20; anonymous passages in Cramer’s Caz, zn Lp. Cathol., pp. 160 161 163 and 
the scholia of Oecumenius. _Jn support of 3° Origen, De Princ. iii, 2. 1. In support of 4° Clem. Alex. Strom 
- a orsen, In los. Hom. ii. 1; Euodius, £4. ad August. 258. All these passages are given in full in my edition, 


408 


INTRODUCTION 


of Moses took place. The words that follow on the above in the Palaea Historica are based 
ultimately on the Assumption proper and deal with the strife of Sammael and Michael over the 
body of Moses, the real Moses in a spiritual form having been borne off to heaven by angels. 

4°. The two books—the ‘ Testament’ and the ‘ Assumption’—were probably put together in 
one work in the first century A.D., since Jude draws upon both in his Epistle. See §10. Josephus 
(Anz. iv. 8. 48), while holding fast to Deut. xxxiv. 5, 6, shows that he is aware of the new claims 
made on Moses’ behalf in the Assumption: védovs aidvidioy trép attod ordyros, apaviCerar katd Tivos 
papayyos. Téypade 52 adrov év rots iepats BiBAous TeOvedra, deioas pr dv brEepBorhy ths wept adrov dperis 
mpos TO Vetoy avtoy dvaxwpijcat ToAujowow eimeiv. Does the account of the Transfiguration point 
in any respect to popular belief in Moses’ assumption ? 


§ 3. OTHER Books OF MOSES. 
i. In Fewish literature. 


(a) Midrash Tanchuma Debarim translated by Wiinsche into German (1882). Pedirath Moshe 
(ne mwa) ed. by Gaulmyn (Paris 1629) with a Latin translation, which latter was republished by 
Fabricius in 1714 and Gfrérer in 1840. Two other recensions of this work were printed by 
Jellinek in his Beth ha-Midrasch i. 115-29, 1853; vi. 71-8, 1877. 

mem mdyn. This Hebrew Apocalypse tells of Moses’ transformation into the form of a fiery 
angel and his ascent through the seven heavens. Since it shows many affinities with 2 Enoch, some 
of its contents will be found under § 4 of the Introduction to that book. 

Another legend dealing with the temporary translation of Moses before his death into heaven 
is preserved in the Midrash Bereshit Rabbati of R. Moses Ha-Darshan published by Jellinek in his 
Beth ha-Midrasch vi, § 22. When translated into heaven the heavenly Jerusalem and the Temple 
were revealed to him, and he was told these would descend to earth after God had gathered Israel 
a second time from the ends of the earth. 

On the above legends see Beer, Leben Mosis nach Auffassung der jidischen Sage, 1863; 
M. Griinbaum, Weue Bettrage sur semitischen Sagenkunde, 183. 

(6) In Greek. Philo’s Vita Mosis; Josephus, Axz. iv. 8. 4, 48. 

BiBros Adyov pvotixSvy Mavoews. This book is mentioned in the Acts of the Nicene Council 
ii. 18. Its contents as there given have their parallels in Rabbinic literature. See Fewish Lncyc. 
ie 53. 

(c) In Arabic and Slavonic. See my edition of The Assumption, p. Vi. 


ii. Zz Christian literature. 

Apocalypsis Mosis in Tischendorf’s Apocalypses Apocryphae. This book is wrongly named and 
belongs really to the Adamic literature. 

Apocryphum Mosis (Anéxpvpov Mwvoéws). According to Euthalius and others Gal. vi. 16 was 
borrowed from this book, but there can be little doubt that the borrowing is just the other way. 


§ 4. THE LATIN VERSION OF THE ASSUMPTION. 


The solitary MS. of this version was discovered in the Ambrosian library in Milan by Ceriani 
and published by him in his Moz. sacr. et prof. 1.1. 55-64 in 1861. This MS, is a palimpsest of the 
sixth century. It consists of eight folios written on both sides. There is no division of words, and 
occasionally whole verses are undecipherable. It is not, as scholars have supposed, the actual work 
of the original Latin translator, but only a fragmentary copy of that version; for our text contains 
duplicate renderings and attempts at a better translation, which were primarily marginal glosses, 
but were afterwards introduced by a copyist into the text ; cf. v. 6, xi. 13, and probably in vi. 3 and 
vill. 5. 

The Latin belongs in style and orthography to the fifth century. Nearly all its chief charac- 
teristics can be paralleled from the fifth-century Bobbio MS. K edited in 1886 by Wordsworth, 
Sanday and White. A full study of our MS. and its idiosyncrasies and critical worth will be found 


in my edition, pp. XXX—XXXVi. 
§ 5. THE LATIN VERSION—A TRANSLATION FROM THE GREEK. 


Of the derivation of our Latin text from the Greek there can be no question. 
Thus (1) Greek words are transliterated, as chedrio i. 17 from kedpow, heremus ili. 11 from 
éphuos, acrobistia Vill. 3 from axpoBvotia. — ; : ; 
(2) Greek forms and idioms survive in the Latin. Thus scene i, 7 = tH oKnv]] : ‘usque nos duci 
captivos’ iii. 13 is an imitation of the Greek €ws 70d nuas alxwadwricOnvat, 
409 


THE ASSUMPTION (OF MOSES 


(3) Not infrequently we must translate not the Latin text, but the Greek which it presupposes 
but which was misrendered by the translator. Thus zam must not be rendered by ‘for’ in ti. 4, 5 5 
Vili. 2,4; x. 11, &c. In vii. 7 ‘ab oriente ad occidentem’ is to be rendered not ‘ from east to west but 
‘from sunrise to sunset’, i.e. af’ #Alov dvaréddovros péxpt Svouévov. The Greek is susceptible of 
either meaning. ; 

(4) Fragments of the Greek version are still preserved: see note on i. 14. 


§ 6. THE GREEK—A TRANSLATION FROM THE HEBREW. 


The view maintained by Hilgenfeld that this book was written originally in Greek has been 
long universally abandoned. The only question at issue now is as to the original being Hebrew or 
Aramaic. Schmidt-Merx, Colani, Hausrath, and Carriére decide for the latter, and Rosenthal for 
the former. Of these scholars only Schmidt-Merx and in a minor degree Rosenthal have treated 
the question seriously. In the Archiv f. wissenschaftl. Erforschung des A. T.1. ii. 111-52 Schmidt- 
Merx show how readily the text admits of retranslation into Aramaic; but this proof is wholly 
inadequate, for the same passages can be just as readily rendered into Hebrew. In two passages, 
however, they urge that the idiosyncrasies of the Latin text can be explained on the hypothesis of 
an Aramaic original but not on that of a Hebrew. The first is i. 10 ‘promitte . . . omnia quae 
mandata sunt ut facias’. Here the position of ‘ut facias’ (which = miyyd) after its object is usual in 


Aramaic sayn5 spans 1 55. But the same order is found also in Hebrew. See Isa. Sabie (Oe: 
2 Chron. xxviii. 10. The second instance of alleged Aramaic order is that in iii. 2 ‘sancta vasa 


omnia’= jind> sown swap. The position of ‘omnia’ is no doubt conformable to Aramaic, but it 
is also possible in classical Hebrew, nba wap v5. Cf. 2 Sam. ii. 9; Jercsut pio iva tr 


Among the positive grounds for a Hebrew original might be enumerated the following : 

1°, Hebrew idiomatic phrases survive in the text. ‘Circumibo’ ii. 7 = anox =I will protect”: 
cf. Deut. xxxii. 10; Jer. xxxi. 22; Ps. xxxii. 10. ‘Dividentur ad veritatem’ v. 2 — 
Nek spon : cf. 1 Kings xvi. 21. ‘In sacerdotes vocabuntur’ vi. 1 = onan-by wp): cf. 1 Chron. 
xxiii. 14. These are pure Hebraisms, and cannot apparently be explained from Aramaic. 


2°. In some cases we must translate, not the Latin, but the Hebrew presupposed by it. Thus in 
i. 7 ‘successor’ = $.dd0xos = nw, which must here be rendered ‘minister’. In i. 13 ‘non coepit’ 


= otk ijp£aro = syn xd, which must here be rendered ‘he was not pleased ’, § did not consent ’. 


3°. Lrequently it is only through retranslation that we can understand the source of the corruptions 
in the text. In iv. 9 we have the impossible text ‘x tribus crescent et devenient apud jfnatost in 
tempore tribum’. Here ‘tribum’ is for ‘tribuum’ and ‘natos’ corrupt for ‘nationes’. Clemen 
renders the text thus emended : ‘zehn Stamme werden immer mehr zu Heiden werden’ Now, to 
translate ‘devenient apud nationes’ by ‘ become heathens’ is highly questionable. But, even if this 
were possible, ‘ crescent et devenient ’ cannot, if the original was Semitic, mean ‘ will become more 
and more’, and it cannot do so in either Greek or Latin. And finally this idea of the Ten Tribes 
becoming heathen is contrary to the beliefs expressed in 4 Ezra xiii. 36-48, and in Philo, Leg. ad 
Caium 31, as to their religious character and their immense numbers in the first century A.D. That 
our author shares in this view is clear from iii. 5-14, where he represents all the Tribes as joining 
in a general confession of sin with the Two Tribes, and all the Tribes in iii. 9 as claiming that 
God had sworn that the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and of Jacob should never fail from the land that 
He had given them, and from x. 8, where all the Tribes are represented as ultimately triumphant. 
We conclude, therefore, that iv. 9 speaks favourably of the Ten Tribes. The verb ‘crescent’ is 
therefore what we might expect. The corruption, therefore, lies in ‘devenient’ and ‘tribuum’. 
The former = xaredeVoovrat = y17', which is obviously corrupt for ya. Next in the phrase ‘in 
tempore tribuum’ we should have the time defined during which this increase took place. From 
Philo, Josephus, and 4 Ezra we know that it was while the Ten Tribes were in exile. Hence 
pba (i.e. ‘tribuum’) is corrupt for omaw or pa =‘captivitatis suae’. This reconstruction of 
the original is not possible from an Aramaic background. 

In i. 13 ‘non coepit’ = od« #péaro, but the text requires a verb of another meaning. Now 
od« jpfato = bwin yb, which can also mean ‘ was not pleased ’. 

For other passages see the notes on v. 5, ¥oOs Vile, xii, 7, 


410 


INTRODUCTION 


o7.  LHE DATE. 


The book was written before A. D. 70; for the temple was to stand till the establishment of the 
theocratic kingdom, i. 17. It was standing when the book was written; for if it had fallen such 
an event could not have been passed over in silence. It could not have been passed over in a book, 
where all the fortunes of the temple, even its temporary profanations by a faithless priesthood, are 
carefully recorded : see ii. 4, 8, 9; iii. 2; v. 3, 43 vi. 1,9; viii. 5. When the temple did fall it left 
an ineffaceable mark on all subsequent literature. 

So far for the latest limit of composition, i.e. A.D. 70. Now as to its earliest. This is 3 B.C.; 
for Herod is already dead, vi. 6, and the War of Varus already past, vi. 9. Thus the limits lie 
between 3 B.C.and A.D. 70. But there are data for a nearer determination. In vi. 7 the statement, 
‘And he (Herod) shall beget children, who, succeeding him, shall rule for shorter periods,’ is true of 
Archelaus alone; for Philip and Antipas reigned longer than their father. Hence the book must 
have been written before A.D. 30. But the limits may be defined still more closely. For the 
prediction that Herod’s sons should rule for shorter periods than their father may be reasonably 
explained from two considerations: (a) from the general expectation that the sons of such a wicked 
king could not long preserve their authority ; but still more (0) from the actual deposition of Arche- 
laus after a short reign of ten years, 4 B.C.-A.D. 6—-an event that would naturally be construed 
by our author in the light of a divine judgement, and suggest to him the prediction that appears in 
our text. Hence, however we may interpret the ‘four hours’ in vii. 1, it may be fairly concluded 
that part of these had already elapsed when the author wrote, and that the earliest limit of com- 
position was A.D. 7. Thus the book was written between the years A.D. 7-30. 


§ 8. THE AUTHOR—A PHARISAIC QUIETIST. 


The school to which the writer of our book belonged cannot be mistaken. (1) He was not a Sad- 
ducee ; for he looks forward to the direct intervention of God on behalf of Israel, and his establishment 
of the theocratic kingdom on earth. He dwells on the future blessedness of the righteous (x. Io, I1). 
Finally, he attacks the Sadducean party in the most bitter terms. (2) He was not a Zealot, as Dill- 
mann and Schiirer suppose, for his complete silence as to the Maccabean rising forms an emphatic 
censure of their appeal to arms. This silence is all the more impressive, as the writer was thoroughly 
acquainted with all the history of the Maccabean movement. Moreover, whilst he evinces clearly 
his aversion to a militant Judaism, he indicates just as clearly his admirations. He will not trust 
an arm of flesh. His ideal hero (ch. ix) was not one who flew to arms on behalf of Israel, but one 
who amid the most bitter persecution in the history of Israel raised no hand in self-defence, but 
committed his cause to God. Ch. x further is wholly against the idea of a Zealot author. The 
theocratic kingdom is here introduced, not by the militant acts of the saints, but by the direct inter- 
vention of God. : 

(3) He was not an Essene—a view that has been advocated by Schmidt and Merx. For the 
entire book is interpenetrated with national hopes and aspirations. The ideal of the Essene was 
individualistic and ethical, and not national. The greatest interest is taken in all the fortunes of 
the temple, ii. 4, 8, 9; v. 3, 43. iii. 2; vi. 1. Such an interest would not be natural in an Essene. 
The author also was much concerned in the character of the temple sacrifices, but the Essene 
disapproved wholly of animal sacrifices. 

(4) From the preceding facts it follows that our author was neither Sadducee, Zealot, nor Essene, 
but a Pharisaic Quietist. He was a Pharisee of a fast-disappearing type, recalling in all respects 
the Chasid of the early Maccabean times, and upholding the old traditions of quietude and resigna- 
tion. 

§ 9, THEOLOGY. 


Good works. On the doctrine of merit or good works, our author’s views are more nearly 
allied to O.T. conceptions than to the legalism of the rabbinic doctrine of man’s righteousness, 
which bulks so largely in Jewish literature from A.D. 50 onwards, and against which the Pauline 
dialectic was so vigorously directed. So far was man’s righteousness from involving merit over 
against God, that the greatest hero of Judaism is represented as declaring : Not for any virtue; 
or strength of mine, but of His good pleasure have His compassion and long-suffering fallen to a 
lot’ (xii. 7). Similarly the election of the nation was not due to any righteousness of its own : oa 
I say unto you, Joshua, it is not on account of the godliness of this people that thou shalt root out the, 
nations ’(xii. 8). This call, therefore, alike of the individual as of the nation was a matter of grace, and 
the covenant relation between God and Israel was based on divine grace and not on human merit. 
But whilst the divine grace is made the absolute pre-condition of Israel’s election and salvation, 

411 


THE ASSUMPTION TG MOSES 


the necessity of works is no less insisted on and moral responsibility affirmed, xii. 10-12: ‘ Those, 
therefore, who do and fulfil the commandments of God shall increase and be prospered ; but those 
who sin and set at nought the commandments shall be without the blessings before mentioned, and 
they shall be punished with many torments.’ There is, however, one passage from which the sense 
of demerit is wholly absent, i.e. ix. 4 sq.: ‘Observe and know that neither did the fathers nor 
their forefathers tempt God, so as to transgress His commands. And ye know that this is our 
strength.’ These words imply that a faithful remnant existed at all times. But even so they intro- 
duce a note of discord into the writer’s theology. . 

Quietism. Ne have touched repeatedly on this characteristic in our author, so that it does 

not call for further notice here. It was typical of the older Pharisees, and. in this respect the tone 
of the book has its affinities with that of the Sermon on the Mount, which essentially exhibits this 
temper. 
Pr he Messianic kingdom. There is no Messiah. This is probably due to the fact that the con- 
ception of the Messiah, as a man of war, was gaining more and more acceptance amongst the 
Pharisees, and was thus of a nature to promote the growing secularization of Pharisaism. No such 
Messiah could be acknowledged by our author. 

The kingdom was to be ushered in by a day of repentance (i. 17). 1750 years after the death 
of Moses, between A. D. 75 and 107 (?) God was to intervene on behalf of Israel—of Israel and not 
merely of Judah and Benjamin. Our author always dwells on the solidarity of the nation. As the 
tribes suffered vicariously for each other’s sins (iii. 5), so the promises were made to the Twelve 
Tribes collectively (iii. 9), and they were all to be glorified together (x. 8). During their kingdom 


Israel's national enemies were to be destroyed (x. 8). Finally, Israel was to be exalted to heaven 


'(x. 9), whence they should see their enemies in Gehenna (x. Io). 


Moses’ unique relation to ¥udaism. Moses was prepared from the foundation of the world to be 
the mediator of God’s covenant with His people (i. 14; iii. 12). Pre-existence is here ascribed to 
Moses, but to him uniquely. In Alexandrian Judaism it was conceived to be the prerogative of 
mankind generally.’ During his life Moses was Israel’s intercessor with God (xi. 11, 17); for forty 
years he suffered many things at their hands in Egypt, the Red Sea, and the wilderness (iii. 11). 
When about to die, he chose Joshua in his stead (x. 15), apparently as the prophet prontised in 
Deut. xviii. 15. His death was an ordinary one (i. 15; iii. 13; x. 12, 14), but no single place was 
worthy to mark the place of his burial ; for his sepulchre was from the rising to the setting sun, and 
from the south to the confines of the north (xi. 8). His relation, moreover, with Israel did not cease 
with death ; he was appointed by God to be their intercessor in the spiritual world (xii. 6). 

‘srael. Israel was God’s own people (i. 12); the world was created in their behalf (i. 12), and 
Moses prepared, before the foundation of the world, to establish the covenant relation between God 
and His people (i. 14), and Jerusalem prepared in like manner to be the centre of the worship of 
Yahweh till the establishment of the theocratic kingdom. 


¢ 


§ 10. INFLUENCE ON THE NEW TESTAMENT. 


Jude was unquestionably acquainted with the Testament of Moses and the Assumption of Moses 
properly so-called. From the latter Jude 9 is derived: 6 3& MuxahA 5 dpydyyedos, bre T® dtaBdr@ 
vaxpwopevos Sueh€éyeto TEpt TOO Mavogws TopaTos, OK érdAUNTE Kplow emeveyKeiy BLacdnulas, GAN elmer" 
"Emitipjoat oor Kvpuos. é . 
ee acquaintance with the Testament of Moses may be reasonably concluded from the follow- 
ing parallels: 


Jude 16 yoyyvorat, pepabcuorpor § vii. 7 querulosi 
Kara Tas émOupias aitav mopevduevor Kal Td oToma vil. 9 et manus eorum et mentes eorum immunda 
avtav AaXel brépoyKa tractantes, et os eorum loquetur ingentia 
Javpalovres tpdcwra, dfedelas ydpw. Vv. 5 mirantes personas cupiditatum et acciplentes 
munera. 


The dcefeis who are mentioned in Jude 4 appear twice in Ass. Moys. vii. 3, 7 (2mpit). The 
classes of evildoers are those who shall be ‘in the last time’, Jude 18, and when ‘ the times shall be 
ended ’, in Ass. Moys. vii. 1. 


' This belief appears in Wisdom and 2 Enoch as the i i is view i 
\ prerogative of mankind generally. This view is chall n 
by Dr. Porter (‘The Pre-existence of the Soul in The Book of Wisdom and in the Rabbinical Writings’ Ne cate 
American Journal of Theolcgy, Jan., 1908, pp. 53-115), but I cannot agree with him. 


412 


INTRODUCTION 


2 Peter i1..13 Hooviy Hyovpevor THY ev Huépa Tpvdyy, 


2 Pete Ass. Moys. vil. 5 omni hora diei amantes convivia. 
ibid. évtpupavres ev Tals dyarais atTOv cvvevwxovpEvoL 


vii. 8 habebimus discubitiones et luxuriam. 


bp. 
x ; H Nhe Cae : A : 
Acts vii. 36 mowujoas tépata Kal onpeia ev TH Atyirrw i. 11 Moyses ... qui multa passus est in Aegypto 


\ 5 a tal “ ° . . . 
kal év "EpvOpa Oardoon Kat ev TH éepnyw érm teooapa- | et in mari rubro et in heremo annis xl. 
KOVTO. | 


| 


For other possible borrowings or parallels see my edition, pp. Ixiv. sq. 


§ 11. BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


(a) CHIEF EDITIONS OF THE TEXT. 
Ceriani, Won. sacr. et prof., 1. 1. 55-64, 1861. 
Hilgenfeld, Novum Testamentum extra Canonem receptum, 107-35, 1876; Messias Judaeorum, 435-68, 1869 
(retranslated into Greek). 
Volkmar, lose Prophetie und Himmelfahrt, 1867. 


Schmidt and Merx, ‘Die Assumptio Mosis’ (Merx, Archiv fiir wissenschaftliche Erforschung des Alten Testa- 
ments, I. i, 111-52, 1868). 


Fritzsche, Libr¢ Apocryphi Vet. Testamentz, 700-30, 1871. 


Charles, The Assumption of Moses... the unemended Text . . . together with the Text in its... critically 
emended Form, 1897. 


Clemen, Zhe Assumption of Moses, 1904. 


(0) CHIEF CRITICAL INQUIRIES. 
Colani, ‘L’Assomption de Moise’ (Revue de Théologie, iv. 65-94, 1868). 
Rénsch, Z/W7T, xi. 76-108, 466-8; xii. 213-28; xiv. 89-92; xvil. 542-62 3 Xxviil. 102-4. 
Rosenthal, Vier apocryphische Biicher, 13-38, 1885. 
Baldensperger, Das Selbstbewusstsein Jesu, 25-31, 1888. 
Deane, Pseudepigrapha, 95-130, 1891. 
De Faye, Les Apocalypses jutves, 67-75, 1892. 
Charles, of. cz¢., pp. xili-Ixv. 
Clemen in Kautzsch, Afok. u. Pseud., 1899. Il. 311-31. 
Burkitt, ‘The Assumption of Moses’ in Hastings’ B.D. iti. 448-50, 1900. 


(c) EDITIONS OF THE BOOK. 
Volkmar, Mose Prophetie und Himmelfahrt ... zum erstenmale deutsch herausgegeben, 1867. inca 
Charles, The Assumption of Moses translated from the Latin sixth century MS., the unemended Text of which ts 
published herewith, together with the Text in its restored and critically emended Form, 1897. 


In this last work (pp. xviii-xxviii) a full bibliography is given ; see also Schiirer®, Gesch. d. jiid. Volkes, ill, 222 sq. 


413 


THE ASSUMPTION VOR Wiest. 


1x The Testament of Moses even the things which he commanded in the one hundred and twentieth 
2 year of his life, that is the two thousand five hundredth year from the creation of the world: 

3 [But according to oriental reckoning the two thousand and seven hundredth, and the four hundredth 

4 after the departure from Phoenicia], when the people had gone forth after the Exodus that was made 

5 by Moses to Amman beyond the Jordan, in the prophecy that was made by Moses in the book Deutero- 

6, 7 nomy: and he called to him Joshua the son of Nun, a man approved of the Lord, that he might be 
8 the minister of the people and of the tabernacle of the testimony with all its holy things, and that he 

9 might bring the people into the land given to their fathers, that it should be given to them according 
to the covenant and the oath, which He spake in the tabernacle to give (it) by Joshua: saying to Joshua 


I. 1. Three lines are wanting. These must not consist of more than forty-eight or forty-nine lines, or less than forty- 
five as the following lines in the MS. show. Now since, as I have shown elsewhere, this book is the actual diadyKy 
Mavoéws or Testamentum Moysi (see p. xlv of my Comm.), and since the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs 
begin always with the title of the Testament (cf. T. Reub. i. 1 dvrlypadov Siadjkns ‘PouBhp, doa evereikaro) so here the 
text most probably ran :— 

‘Testamentum Moysi 
Quae precepit ano vi 
tae elus Cmo et xxmo.’ 

Here I have put gwae and not god since in every case the Testaments have é or éea in this very same context. 

Hilgenfeld restores: ‘ Assumptio Moysis quae facta est anno vitae ejus Cmo et xxmo; Volkmar: Liber profetiae 
Moysis quem scripsit aio aetatis centesimo vicesimo; Rénsch: Liber receptionis Moysi factae anno vitae eius Cmo 
et xxmo ; Clemen: Liber profetiae Moysis, quae facta est anno vitae eius Cmo et xxmo.’ 

Schmidt Merx’s restoration (‘et factum est anno aetatis Moysi centesimo et vigesimo’) will not do here owing to 
its being too short as well as on other grounds. The need of a title such as Testamentum or Assumptio is against 
Volkmar’s and Clemen’s restoration: while the fact that the book is not the Assumption but the Testament is against 
Hilgenfeld’s and Rénsch’s. 

2-4. These verses are an interpolation—apparently made by a Greek scribe and in the West. No Hebrew writer 
would regard himself other than an Oriental, and a Jew is beyond question the author of this book. Hence he could 
not have written verse 3. Nor could a Jew have described Hebron, from which Jacob set out for Egypt, as being in 
Phoenicia. Moses, moreover, could not have spoken of Amman as beyond the Jordan: only a dweller in Jerusalem 
could have so described it. 

2. two thousand five hundredth year. Contrast the dates given in Jubilees (2450 a.M.), Josephus, Azz. viii. 
3. I and xx. Io (2550), Samaritan Pentateuch (3309), LXX (3859), while the Massoretic chronology (2706) seems 
unknown to all the others. But cf. the ‘ Oriental reckoning’ of verse 3 (as restored). 

3. the two thousand and seven hundredth, and the four hundredth. Text = ‘numerus .. muset ... mus 
et .... mus’. I restore (with Clemen) ‘numerus MMmus et bcCmus, et CCCCmus’. 

four hundredth after the departure from Phoenicia. The number of years varies in different authorities ; as 
some give 400 (cf. Gen. xv. 13), others 430. The Zerminus a quo of reckoning also varies. The Samaritan reckoning 
(cf. also LXX, Jubilees, Gal. iii. 17; Josephus, Azz. ii. 15. 2; Ps. Jon. on Exod. xii. 40) embraces in the four 
hundred and thirty years the sojourn of the patriarchs in Canaan. Exod. xii. 40 (Mass. text) states that Israel 
release in Egypt four hundred and thirty years, while Gen. xv. 13 may be interpreted either way. See also 
Acts vil. 6. 

4. Amman—in the tribe of Gad, Onom. Sacr., ed. Wage foo sol tO2 ee 

5. in the prophecy. frvoferdae I take as = profetid. ae occasionally is found for @ in fifth-century Latin. Cf. zz 
scenae for 7 scena, i. 9. 

6. called tohim ... Nun. Cf. Deut. xxxi, Te 

the son of Nun. Text = fliwm Nave, the LXX spelling of the name. 

approved of the Lord. Cf. Acts ii. 22; 2 Tim. ii. 15. 

7. minister of the people. Text = successor plebt, Suadoxos means the chief minister of the king in LXX of 
1 Chron, xvill. 173 2 Chron, xxvi. 11, xxviii. 7; also in Philo, and Josephus, Az¢. xv. 10. In Sirach xlvi. 1 the Hebrew 
equivalent is N19, the special term used in Exod. xxiv. 1 3, Xxxill. 11 ; Num. xi, 28; Josh. i. 1 to describe Joshua’s 
relation to Moses ; also in Num. viii. 26, &c., it is used of service in the tabernacle. Cf. Ass. Mos. x. 15 (note). 

tabernacie of the testimony, i.e. the tabernacle in its aspect of a witness to God’s presence, with the ark and 
ee testimony. In its aspect of meeting-place it was the spot where God spoke to Moses and Joshua, Deut. 

8 bring ... into. So 3 i. i i s i ; ‘ oe : 
LXX, Tae oh nee Deut. xxxi. 7 (Samaritan text, Syriac and Vulgate versions), against ‘ enter’ (Massoretic, 

to their fathers = fatribus. So I emend text ex tribus. 

g. the covenant and the oath. Cf. ii. 7 (restored), iii, 9, xi. 17, xii. ey 

which He spake, Deut. xxxi, TAN 2On23s 

by Joshua. Text = de Lesum, cf. vy. de veges. 

saying to Joshua, resumes verse 6, ‘And he called’. 


414 


II 


CHES ASoUMPTION OF ‘MOSES’ 1. 10-2. 2 


To these words: ‘(Be strong) and of a good courage so as to do with t 
T2 manded that thou mayst be blameless unto God.’ So saith the Lord of the world. For He hath created 
13 the world on behalf of His people. But He was not pleased to manifest this purpose of creation from 
the foundation of the world, in order that the Gentiles might thereby be convicted yea to their own 
14 humiliation might by (their) arguments convict one another. Accordingly He designed and devised 
me, and He prepared me before the foundation of the world, that I should be the mediator of His 
™5 covenant. /And now I declare unto thee that the time of the years of my life is fulfilled and Iam 
16 passing away to sleep with my fathers even in the presence of all the people. And receive thou this 
17 writing that thou mayst know how to preserve the books which I shall deliver unto thee: and thou 
shalt set these in order and anoint them with oil of cedar and put them away in earthen vessels in 
18 the place which He made from the beginning of the creation of the world, that His name should 
be called upon until the day of repentance in the visitation wherewith the Lord will visit them in 
the consummation of the end of the days. 
21 And now they shall go by means of thee into the land which He determined and promised to give to 
2 their fathers, in the which thou shalt bless and give to them individually and confirm unto them their 


hy might all that has been com- 


10. (Be strong) and of a good courage. Text = e¢ promitte. Promitte is due toa corruption in the Hebrew 
WS for #OX, while the e¢ betrays a word lost after verbum hoc =I 7397. Probably PIN was omitted after Mn. 
Clemen’s suggestion, ‘And promise’ has no support in the O.T. text. Moses exacted no promise from Joshua, 
while my restoration is upheld by Deut. xxxi. 7, &c. 

that thou mayst be... unto God. Text = est zdeo, corrupt for ss Deo. Clemen renders ‘as is blameless. 
Therefore thus saith, &c.’, putting a full stop after esz. 
' blameless unto God. Cf. Deut. xviii. 13, &c. 
11. So saith the Lord. God says these words ‘ Be strong’, &c., directly in Deut. xxxi. 23; by Moses, xxxi. 6, 7. 
Lord of the world. Cf. iv. 2 ‘Lord of all . . . who rulest the world’. Cf. xi. 17. . 

12. created the world on behalf of His people. The prevalent Judaistic view from first century A.D. onwards. 
Cf. 4 Ezra vi. 55, 59, vil. 11; 2 Bar. xiv. 18 (note), The still more narrow view that the world was created for 
the sake of the righteous in Israel occurs in 2 Bar. xiv. 19, xv. 7, xxi. 24. Cf. Hermas’ Shepherd, Vs. i. 1. 6, ii. 
4. I, iv, v (for the Church’s sake), The larger view—that it was for the sake of mankind, we find in 2 Bar. xiv. 18; 
4 Ezra vill. 1, 44; Hermas, Wand. xii. 4; Justin Mart. Afol. i. 10 and post-apostolic writers generally. 


13. was... pleased. Text = coefit = S17 which also means ‘ was pleased’. 

purpose. Text = zzceptivnem. 

13, 14. These verses are strongly predestinarian. The Gentiles are fore-ordained to ignorance and blind conjecture, 
while Moses is the chosen agent of the true revelation. 

14. Quoted by Gelasius of Cyzicum in his Comm. Act. Syn. Nic. ii. 18, ‘the prophet Moses being about to depart 
from life, as is written in the book of the Assumption of Moses, summoned Joshua, the son of Nun, and, speaking 
with him, said: kal mpocOedoard pe 6 Ocds 7d KaraBodjs Kéopovr civai pe Tis Stabykyns adrod pecirny.’ 

Moses here is assigned pre-existence as is the Son of Man in 1 En. xliii. 2 (note). Later Judaism, like the 
Alexandrian form of first century A. D., held the pre-existence of all souls alike. See 2 En, xxiii. 5. 

Note that the Latin has ‘ab initio orbis terrarum’ = Gelasius’ mp0 xataBodjs kéopov. 

mediator. Moses is not given this title in the O.T. where indeed the word only occurs once, in Job ix. 33 (LXX), 
but he obviously exercises mediatorial functions in Exod. xx. 19; Deut. v. 2, 5. The title was commonly assigned to 
him by the first century A.D. Cf. i. 14, iii. 12; Gal. iii, 18; Philo, Vt, Mays. iii. 19; Talmud (see Levy, Meuhebr. 
und Chald, Lex. iii. 595, 596). It is implied in Heb. viii. 6, ix. 15, xil. 24. f : 

15. sleep with my fathers. Cf. iii. 13, x. 12, 14; Deut. xxxi. 16; 2 Bar. xliv. 2, Observe there is no 
reference to Moses’ Assumption. Unlike our text, Deut. xxxiv. 5,6 state that his death was witnessed by no one, 
while the Greek fragments of the Assumption make Joshua and Caleb alone view it, and not all the people. 

16. thou. Supply zz to fill the space in the text. Cf. x. II, xi. I. 

the books, i.e. the Pentateuch. - 

17. anoint. Books were thus preserved. Even the heavenly books shown to Enoch, 2 En. xxii. 12, are ‘fragrant 

with myrrh’. : 

from the beginning of the creation of the world. Cf. verse 14. te 

the place, i.e. Jerusalem. Zion is said to be the centre of the earth in Ezek. xxxvili. 12; 1 En. xxvi, 1, xc. 26; 
Jubilees viii; while in Joma 54” the world is said to be created with Zion as a starting-place. _ : 

18. until the day of repentance. This must have been written before A.D. 70, as the existing temple is expected 

to stand until the Theocratic kingdom is set up. : ; 
the day of repentance. A great national repentance was to usher in the new kingdom of God, and was a 
necessary condition to its coming. ‘If Israel practises repentance, It will be redeemed ; if not, it will not be redeemed, 
Sanh. 97». ‘Israel will not fulfil the great repentance before Elijah comes,’ Pirke R. Eliezer, xliii; cf. Mal, iv. 6, and 
Luke i. 16,17; Matt. Syl Ost: ‘Tf all Israel together repented for a single day, redemption through the Messiah 
ould follow’, Pesikta 163°. 
be the visitation, in Feed sense. Cf. Luke i. 79; Acts xv. 14. For the bad sense cf. 2 Bar. xx. I (note). The 
time of visitation, Wisd. iii. 7; Luke xix. 44, is the setting up of the kingdom of God. : 
the consummation, i.e. the time of the kingdom. Cf. 2 Bar. xxvil. 15, xxix. 8. Contrast 2 Bar. xxx, 3. 


II. 1. And now. Supply e¢ zuac in lacuna. _ i, 
2. their inheritance in me. Cf, ‘inheritance in the son of Jesse’, 2 Sam. xx. 1. Or for ‘in me’ read zz eam, a 
Hebrew repetition after 77 gua. 


415 


a) 


THE ASSUMPTION OF MOSES 2. 2—38. 8 


inheritance in me and establish for them the kingdom, and thou shalt appoint them prefectures 
3 according to the good pleasure of their Lord in judgement and righteousness. And it shall come to 
pass five years after they enter into the land, that thereafter they shall be ruled by chiefs and 
4kings for eighteen years, and during nineteen years the ten tribes shall break away. And the 
twelve tribes shall go down and transfer the tabernacle of the testimony. Then the God of heaven 
will make the court of His tabernacle and the tower of His sanctuary, and the two holy tribes shall 
5 be (there) established: but the ten tribes shall establish kingdoms for themselves according to their 
7 own ordinances. And they shall offer sacrifices throughout twenty years : and seven shall entrench 
the walls, and I will protect nine, but four shall transgress the covenant of the Lord, and profane the 
8 oath which the Lord made with them. And they shall sacrifice their sons to strange gods, and they 
9 shall set up idols in the sanctuary, to worship them. And in the house of the Lord they shall work 
impiety and engrave every form of beast, evex many abominations. 
I And in those days a king from the east shall come against them and his cavalry shall cover their 
2land. And he shall burn their colony with fire together with the holy temple of the Lord, and he shall 
3 carry away all the holy vessels. And he shall cast forth all the people, and he shall take them to the 
4 land of his nativity, yea he shall take the two tribes with him. Then the two tribes shall call upon the 
5 ten tribes, and shall march as a lioness on the dusty plains, being hungry and thirsty. And they shall 
cry aloud: ‘Righteous and holy is the Lord, for, inasmuch as ye have sinned, we too, in like manner, 
6 have been carried away with you, together with our children.’ Then the ten tribes shall mourn on 
7 hearing the reproaches of the two tribes, and they shall say: ‘What have we done unto you, 
8 brethren? Has not this tribulation come on all the house of Israel?’ And all the tribes shall mourn, 


appoint. Text = dtttes seems corrupt. 
prefectures. Text = magisteria locorum, i.e. ronapxias. Perhaps we should translate ‘local magistrates’. Cf. 
Deut. xvi. 18 ; 1 Chron. xxiii. 4. 
3. it shall come to pass. There is a gap in the text. 
five years. I supply ‘five’. The conquest of Canaan took five years, Josh. xiv. 10; Josephus, Azz. v. 1. 19. 
eighteen years, i.e. the fifteen judges, and the three kings, Saul, David, and Solomon. 
nineteen years, the nineteen kings of Israel from Jeroboam to Hoshea. This is an anticipation, as verse 4 
returns to the removal of the ark to Jerusalem by David. 
tribes shall break away. Text = abrumpens tib. Read ‘se abrumpent tribus’. 
4. twelve. Text = ‘two’. The reference is to David’s action in 2 Sam. vi. 1, 2. Cf. 1 Kings viii. 1-4. 
tabernacle of the testimony. Text = ‘testimony of the tabernacle’. 
the God of heaven. Cf. iv. 4, v. 3; Gen. xxiv. 7. After the exile this title became frequent. Cf. Ezta v. 11, 
Wil, 0, Oca) anil. 16, )0cc. 
court. Text = Zalam emended to aulam. Cf. Exod. xxvii. 9. 
tower. Text = ferrum emended to ¢turrem. Cf. the tower in 1 En. Ixxxix. 50,67, 73. The text is uncertain. For 
aulam and ferrum Volkmar suggests locum and terram; Haupt portam and forem. 

5. A parenthesis. 

6. twenty years, the twenty sovereigns (including Athaliah’s) of Judah. 

7. Apparently the ‘seven’, ‘nine’, and ‘four’ reigns must be taken successively of three periods, of the advance, 
power, and falling away of Judah. 

The ‘seven’ are Rehoboam, Abijah, Asa, Jehoshaphat, Jehoram, Ahaziah, and Athaliah. The ‘nine’ are Joash, 
Amaziah, Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, Manasseh. Amon, Josiah; while the ‘four’ are Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim 
Jehoiachin, and Zedekiah, ‘ 

four, inserted to complete the twenty. 

transgress. Text = adcedent ad = rpooBnoorra corrupt for rapaBjoovra. Cf. Ezek. xvi. 59, &c. 

the oath. Text = /izem = épov corrupt for épxov. Thus the combination of covenant and oath is restored. Cf. 
Gen. xxvi. 28; also Ass. Mos. i. 9; iii. 9, xi. 17, xii. 13. 

8. idols in the sanctuary. Text = zdo/a scenae. For this form of the ablative cf. i. 9 ‘in scenae’. Rénsch pro- 
poses zdola obscena, comparing LXX of Jer. xxxii. 34 ra pudopara atrar. 

9. form. Text = szmzlitudinem omitted in text after omnem through hmt. For ‘beast . . . many abominations’ 
cf. Ezek. viii. 10, where there is the same apposition. 


III. 1. a king from the east. Nebuchadnezzar, 588-586 B. Cc. 
2. colony. This gives a clue to the date of the Greek or Latin translation as being later than 1 35 A.D., when 
Hadrian rebuilt Jerusalem as a Roman colony. Cf. v. 6, vi. 9. ‘ 
all the holy vessels, 2 Chron. xxxvi. 7. Part had been removed in Jehoiakim’s reign, according to Dan. i. 2: 
Jer. xxvii. 19, 20; while 2 Bar. vi describes the concealment of the vessels by angels, 2 Macc. ii. 4-8 by Jeremiah, 
to preserve them for the future Messianic kingdom. ‘ 
4. march. Possibly the text ducen¢ se is wrong, and is due to a corruption of dyéécovrat, ‘ will be indignant,’ into 
i ee co the simile of the lioness better. i ; 
ungry and thirsty, 2 Bar. Ixxvii. 14. Text adds ‘with our children’. I 
5. Righteous and Holy: 2 Bar. Leal 3, 4. Wek soweg ge fend 
inasmuch as ye have sinned. Judah suffers for the sins of Israel. 2 Bar. Ixxvii. 10: Jere x1. 17 3) Danae = 
1 Baruch ii. 26 ascribe the captivity to the sins of Judah as well. ( : Kitt) 
7. have we done. Text = ‘shall we do’. 
this tribulation. The allusion seems to be to some recent calamity. 


416 


Toe sASSUMP-TION’ OF MOSES 8. 8—s. 3 


9 crying unto heaven and saying : ‘God of Abraham God of Isaac and God of Ja ; f 
covenant which Thou didst make with them, and the oath which Thou aidee Sec os 
10 Thyself, that their seed should never fail from the land which Thou hast given them.’ Then thier 
II shall remember me, saying, in that day, tribe unto tribe and each man unto his neighbour : ‘Is not 
this that which Moses did then declare unto us in prophecies, who suffered many things in Egypt 
12 and in the Red Sea and in the wilderness during forty years: and assuredly called heaven and 
earth to witness against us, that we should not transgress His commandments, in the which he was 
13 a mediator unto us? Behold these things have befallen us after his death according to his declaration 
as he declared to us at that time, yea behold these have taken place even to our being carried away 
14 captive into the country of the east... Who shall be also in bondage for about seventy and seven years. 
1 Then there shall enter one who is over them, and he shall spread forth his hands, and kneel upon his 
2 knees and pray on their behalf saying: ‘Lord of all, King on the lofty throne, who rulest the world, 
and didst will that this people should be Thine elect people, then (indeed) Thou didst will that Thou 
shouldst be called their God, according to the covenant which Thou didst make with their fathers. 
3 And yet they have gone in captivity in another land with their wives and their children, and 
4 taroundy} the gates of strange peoples and where there is great vanity. Regard and have compas- 
5 sion on them, O Lord of heaven.’ Then God will remember them on account of the covenant which 
6 He made with their fathers, and He will manifest His compassion in those times also. And He will 
put it into the mind of a king to have compassion on them, and he shall send them off to their land 
7 and country. Then some portions of the tribes shall go up and they shall come to their appointed 
8 place, and they shall anew surround the place with walls. And the two tribes shall continue in their 
prescribed faith, sad and lamenting because they will not be able to offer sacrifices to the Lord of their 
9 fathers. And the ten tribes shall increase and multiply among the Gentiles during the time of their 

captivity. 

t And when the times of chastisement draw nigh and vengeance arises through the kings who share 
2, 3 in their guilt and punish them, they themselves also shall be divided as to the truth. Wherefore 


8. heaven, an equivalent for ‘God’. Cf. Dan. iv. 23. 

g. the oath. Gen. xvii. 8. Cf. Pss. Sol. xvii. 5; Test. xii Patr., Jud. 22. 

10-13. These verses are the source of 2 Bar. Ixxxiv. 2-5, or else both passages are derived from the same 
original. Cf. Dan. ix. 11-13. 

11. then. Text = cum, which I emend with Schmidt-Merx to zum. 

in Egypt ... years. Cf. Acts vii. 36; 2 Bar. Ixxxiv. 3. 
12. and assuredly called, &c. So I render e¢ ¢estans (testatus et in text) invocabat ... testes. Deut. iv. 26, 
XXX. 19, xxxl. 28; 2 Bar. xix. 1, Ixxxiv. 2. 
mediator. See i. 14 (note). 
13. Behold these. Text = guae corrupt for ecce ea. Cf. 2 Bar. Ixxxiv. 5. 
after his death, de zsto = ‘after him’. Cf. Job xxi. 21. : ; ; 

14. Seventy and seven years. Perhaps this number is to be taken as implying an indefinite period. Cf. Gen. 
iv. 24; Matt. xviii. 22. In any case it is a modification of Jeremiah’s prophecy of the seventy years’ captivity, Jer. 
Xxv. II, 12, xxix. 10, which Dan. ix. 24 reinterprets as being seventy weeks of years, i.e. 490. Merx suspects a play 
on “TY = 77 and Mt M73Y, ‘strange service’, i.e. ‘idolatry,’ which is often denoted by ? }. 


IV. 1. one, i.e. Daniel; Dan. ix. 4-19. 

2. elect people. Cf. Isa. xlil. 1, &c. ; 

3. taroundt. Text = cvca. Read perhaps ‘go about in the gates’. ; 

vanity. Text = mazestas = peyadevtns corrupt for paraéryns, i.e. an idol. Cf. Ps. xxxi. 6; also 2 Kings 
KVIoUG es Jekeulle p55 X13 

4. Dan. ix. 18, 19; 2 Bar. xlviii. 18. : 

6. Cyrus. Cf. 2 Chron, xxxvi. 22, 23; Ezra i, 1-4. ‘ 

8 not be able to offer sacrifices. For the low value set on the worship of the restored temple, cf. 2 Bar. 
‘not as fully as in the beginning’, Ixviii. 5, 6 (Hag. ii. 33 Ezra iii. 12). The sacrifices were unacceptable, cf. the 
‘polluted bread’ of Mal. i. 7; 1 En. Ixxxix. 73. The objection here indeed is not an Essene one to sacrifice as such, 
but to the imperfection of the worship of God’s people so long as they were subject to heathen powers. God would 
restore their glory and freedom when they repented, i. 17, but on no other condition, 1x5, Aes 

g. multiply among the Gentiles during the time of their captivity. Text= + devenient apud natost in tempore 
+tribumt. Devenient cannot refer to a going up to Jerusalem, nor can apud mean anything but among’ OF with : Now 
devenient = N17", which is an easy corruption of 131 = multiplicabuntur and natos is corrupt for zationes. tribum, i.e. 
tribuum = DOI, which Rosenthal takes to be corrupt for DDSY = tudictorum. But I prefer to emend to ona ov 
Daw, captivitatis suae, comparing Josephus, Awz. xi. 5.25; 4 Ezra xili. 36-48 ; Philo, Leg. ad Caium, 31. Clemen’s 
rendering ‘werden immer mehr (crescunt et devenient) zu Heiden werden’ is quite impossible. 


i = 20M; 1 i i ho had encouraged 
Sieh h the kings. Text = de reges, cf. de Jesum, 1. 9. These kings are the Seleucidae w 
oe ailiae of the parent and worship, and later, in the person of Antiochus, punished the apostate nation. Cf. 


Bae ee to the truth. Already under the Seleucid domination the enormities of the Sadducean priesthood 


reacted upon the stricter scribes and led to a religious awakening and the formation of what was later known as the 


Pharisaic party. See 1 En. xc. 6,7 (note). 
1105-2 A417 1 


THE ASSUMPTION OF MOSES 5. 3—6. 5 


it hath been said: ‘They shall turn aside from righteousness and approach iniquity, and they 
shall defile with nelnigns the house of their worship,’ and [because] ‘they shall Ste erie 
4 strange gods.’ For they shall not follow the truth of God, but some shall pone : ea a bp 
5 (very) gifts which they offer to the Lord, who are not priests but slaves, sons of sla be sean 
in those times shall have respect unto desirable persons and receive gifts, an ibe ah ge- 
6 ment [on receiving presents]. And on this account the colony and the borders of their : : a 
shall be filled with lawless deeds and iniquities: those cahies Bice depart from the Lord shall be 
judges: they shall be ready to judge for money as each may wish. t 
I Then fers shall be mised oe unto them kings bearing rule, and they shall call themselves priests of 
2 the Most High God: they shall assuredly work iniquity in the holy of holies. And an insolent king 
shall succeed them, who will not be of the race of the priests,a man bold and shameless, and he shall 
3 judge them as they shall deserve. And he shall cut off their chief men with the sword, and re 
4 destroy ¢iem in secret places, so that no one may know where their bodies are. He shall slay the 
5 old and the young, and he shall not spare. Then the fear of him shall be bitter unto them in their 


3. hath been said = /atwm fuit emended by Schmidt-Merx from factum fuct. _ , ’ ‘ defil 

This saying is pieced together from the O.T., e.g. Ezek. iii. 20, ‘turn . . . righteousness’; xliv. 7, ‘defile . . 
worship.’ Cf., too, Pss, Sol. i. 9, viii. 26. ‘They will go. . . gods,’ Deut. xxx. 16. _ 

[because]. Text = guéa, which may, however = ‘that’ introducing a new quotation. a 

3, 4. These verses cannot refer to the Maccabean high-priests. They did not go astray after strange gods. pera 
they were of true priestly descent (1 Macc. ii. 1-5), and not sons of slaves. They are referred to in vi. I, and so their 
mention here would be premature. But the statements suit Jason and Menelaus exactly, the Hellenizing priests who 
preceded the Maccabees. Cf. 2 Macc. iv. 13, 19, 20,v.8. A decisive factor in the identification is the statement ‘who 
are not priests but slaves, sons of slaves’. Menelaus was not of the tribe of Levi, but a Benjamite, 2 Macc. iil. 4, iv. 23. 
Cf. the implication in 1 Macc, vii. 14 that other high-priests had belonged to non-Aaronic families. Moreover they 
were the nominees and absolute tools of Antiochus, 2 Macc. iv. 7-9, 23-9. Josephus, Az/. xiii. 10. 5 mentions, but only 
to deny, the slander that Hyrcanus’s mother had been a captive under Antiochus. Cf. the Talmud also for the tale. 

5. And many. So | emend ‘qui enim magistri sunt’ = D'270, i.e. ‘the many’ or ‘the Rabbis’. Text adds- 
“doctores eorum’, a gloss on the word in the latter meaning. : 

shall have respect unto desirable persons and receive gifts and pervert. The text reads ‘erunt 
mirantes personas cupiditatum et acceptiones munerum et pervendent’, which is un-Semitic. Acceptiones is an easy 
corruption of accipientes, after which, taken as a noun, munerum could stand. _Now leaving for the present cupzdi- 
tatum \et us pass on to the next clause. This runs pervendent zustitias. This phrase does not occur in Jewish 
literature, but we find, 1 Sam. viii. 3 ‘acceperunt munera et perverterunt iudicium’ = LXX eAduBavoy Spa kat éfexhwov 
dikadpara, DBWID HO") TN’ ANP". Hence I accept Wieseler’s emendation pervertent. We have now ‘erunt mirantes 
personas cupiditatum et accipientes munerum et pervertent iustitias’. Now if we compare Deut. xvi. 19 we find ovk 
exkAwvovat Kpiow ovb€ emeyvdaaorra mpdcwmov ovdé Ajovrat ddpa, TINY MBN-Ny Dye Wan xb bavi non NS, which is 
exactly what we have arrived at above. The original of our text could be reconstructed from this verse save that 
instead of 1°51 we should use WI. Cf. 2 Chron. xix. 7 otS¢ Oavpdoa mpdcwmov ovdé daBeiv dépa (LXX), DID NwD4 
NY -npD, 

We have still to consider cupiditatum. Clemen compares Dan. ix. 23, x. II, 19. He might have added 
Ezek. xxiii. 6, W2 “N32, And yet in none of them have we a real parallel. Accipiendo poenas I have bracketed 
as an explanatory gloss. 

6. those who wickedly depart from the Lord shall be judges. There is a curious dittography in the text here: 
‘a deo ut qui facit erunt impii iudices’, ‘a domino qui faciunt erunt impii iudices’: the first and inferior version was 
intended to be deleted. For gud faciunt erunt impid read gui factunt impie erunt and the text is restored = 
DAY VT Oywan Aw. Cf 2 Sam. xxii. 22 Vulg. ‘non egi impie a Deo meo,’ ‘dN AY xb and Ass. Mos. 
xi. 17 ‘sl. . . impie fecerunt’. ; 

they shall be ready to judge for money. Text = ‘erunt in eam post iudicare’, ‘inerunt in campo iudicare’, 
The second version of the doublet gives the right clue. J campo = év ayp@ corrupt for év dpytpe = ADDI. 

VI. 1. kings bearing rule, i.e. the Maccabees like Judas, Jonathan, and Simon, though not technically styled 
kings. Cf. ‘king of the west’, vi. 8. 

they shall call themselves priests of the Most High God. Jonathan became high-priest in 153 B.C., and the 
office was declared to be hereditary in the Maccabean family in 141-B.C. 

call themselves. Text = iz... vocabuntur,a Hebraism. Cf. 1 Chron. xxili. 14 (LXX). 

priests of the Most High God. This title was claimed by the Maccabean prince-priests. Cf. Ps. cx, a hymn to 
Simon. ‘Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek.’ 

shall assuredly work iniquity. Text = facient Jacientes, a Hebraism. 

2. an insolent king, Herod the Great, 37-4 B.c. He was only half a Jew, Josephus, Avs. xiv. 15. 2, the son of 
Antipater of Idumea, though Nicolas of Damascus claimed a Jewish origin for Antipater. 

judgethem. Herod cut off the Maccabean family, the Sadducean aristocracy, and according to vi. 4, 5 oppressed 
the nation at large. The Pharisees and the Essenes did not suffer under him, 
oF 3: a chief men. Herod on becoming king executed forty-five of the Sadducean nobles (Awd¢. xv. 1.2; Bell. 

ua. 1. 18. 4). 

destroy. I read stinguet for singuli corrupt. Hilgenfeld emends into sefe/iet, which is weak. I have omitted ‘et 
corpora illorum’ before ‘ut nemo sciat’. 

secret places. These secret murders are mentioned in Azz. xv. 10, 4. 

4. young,and he. Perhaps, we should read ‘ young he’, &c. Cf. Deut. xxviii. 50. 

5. Cf. 2 Macc. vi. 3 for the phraseology. 


418 


THE ASSUMPTION OF MOSES 6. 6—7. 7 


6 land. And he shall execute judgements on them as the Egyptians executed upon them, during 

4 thirty and four years, and he shall punish them. And he shall beget children, (who) succeeding him 

8 shall rule for shorter periods. Into their parts cohorts and a powerful king of the west shall come 

g who shall conquer them: and he shall take them captive, and burn a part of their temple with fire, 
(and) shall crucify some around their colony. 

t And when this is done the times shall be ended, in a moment the (second) course shall be (ended) 

2, 3 the four hours shall come. They shall be forced.... And, in the time of these, destructive and 

4 impious men shall rule, saying that they are just. And these shall stir up the poison of their minds, 

being treacherous men, self-pleasers, dissemblers in all their own affairs and lovers of banquets at 

5, 6 every hour of the day, gluttons, gourmands.... Devourers of the goods of the (poor) saying that 

7 they do so on the ground of their justice, but zz reality to destroy them, complainers, deceitful, 

concealing themselves lest they should be recognized, impious, filled with lawlessness and iniquity 


6. thirty and four years. Herod reigned for thirty-four years after Antigonus’s death, and thirty-seven after he 
had been declared king by the Romans. ' 

7. children... shorter periods. The text is defective : ‘(p)roducet natos (qui su)ccedentes sibi breviora tempora 
donarent’ (we must read dominarent). Herod’s sons are to reign for shorter periods than their father. This is true 
of Archelaus only, as Antipas reigned forty-three years and Philip thirty-seven. So that this book must be earlier than 
A.D. 30, i.e. thirty-four years from Herod’s death in 4 B.C. ; unless we suppose that the author is thinking of Archelaus 
and Agrippa, who alone had close connexion with Jerusalem. 

8. Into their parts cohorts. Text = ‘in pares eorum mortis’, emended into ‘in partes eorum cohortes’. 

a gee: king of the west. Varus, governor of Syria, quelled a Jewish rebellion in 4 B.C. (Azz. xvii. Lo. 9, 
io. If. 1). . 
who. Text = guia corrupt for guz. 

g. burn a part of their temple. The soldiers of Varus’s lieutenant Sabinus did such damage that the repairs were 

not completed till Nero’s reign (A7#. xx. 9. 7). 
crucify some. Varus crucified 2,000 (Az. xvii. 10. 10). 


VII. 1. the times shall be ended. We have now arrived at the date at which the author is writing, and so leaves 
obvious historical allusions for obscure predictions and enigmatical symbols. The text is often doubtful. 


(second) ... (ended). Text defective, ‘. .. etur cursus a...’ Merx reads seguetur not Jinietur, and 
Hilgenfeld aevz not alter. 
>. The text, which defies translation, is: ‘ Coguntur secund...ae... pos... initiis tribus ad exitus villi propter 
initium tres septimae secunda tria in tertia duaeh...ra...tae.’ For attempted restorations see my Comm., p. 78. 


3-10, The identification of the persons here attacked is much disputed. They cannot be the Herodian princes, as ver. 10 
would suit none of them. Nor can they be the Pharisees. Their worst enemies never accused them of open unblushing 
gluttony and profligacy. Matt. xxiii. 25 mentions only their secret ‘ extortion and excess’. (Colani ingeniously suggests 
that the Jewish doctors at Jabne and Usha after A.D. 135 are meant. But he requires too late a date for the book.) 
Nor yet can verses 3, 4 be assigned to the Sadducees, and 6—I0 to the Pharisees. ‘This division is not justified by the 
text. The Roman procurators, again, are excluded by phrases like ‘ Do not touch me lest thou shouldst pollute me’, 
and ‘concealing themselves lest they should be recognized’. The most probable explanation is that the Sadducees 
are meant. The play on P°¥, the priestly aloofness of ver. 10, and their rule (the Sanhedrim, which was almost 
entirely Sadducean, was the virtual ruling power under the Romans from A.D. 6 till 70). The close parallels with the 
attacks on the Sadducees in the Psalms of Solomon seem to clinch the matter. 
_ in the time of these. Text = de his = émi rovrwv (?). Perhaps translate “some of these’ = ék rovray. 
destructive. Cf. verse 5. : 
impious, could not be said of a Pharisee. bate ; , a 
shall rule. Cf. ver. 8, also for the Sadducean constitution of the Sanhedrim Pss. Sol. iv. I ov kdOnoat BeByA€ ev 
cuvedplo. 
seine that they are just, a play on opty ‘Sadducees’ and DPS * just’. saying. I read dicentes for 
-entes corrupt. 
Soar oh lacie Dare I take zram animorum suorum = dupoy rev Kapdiev adrev = map noo, where 72M should have 
been rendered iévy = poison. This gives a good sense, but the change of axzmorum into amicorum (so Clemen) does not. 
treacherous. Pss. Sol. iv. 27 dad avOponev Sodl@y Kat apapradav. 
self-pleasers. Probably the Hebrew original was misread DMSY, ‘of themselves ’, instead of DOSY, “of the 
mighty.’ The designation ‘ pleasers of the mighty ’ would then be parallel to dvOpemdpecot, Pss. Sol. iv, used of the 
Sadducees. : at } 
dissemblers. Text = /ictz. Cf. Pss. Sol. iv. 7 ev vmokpioet. 
5. This verse of seven lines is undecipherable, except for omis. | ; 
6. Devourers of the goods of the {poor). Cf. the charge against the Sadducees in Pss. Sol. iv. 11, 13, 15, 233 
xii. 2, 4; also the charge in Matt. xxiii. 14; Mark xii. 40; Luke xx. 47. 
(poor). Text = { paupe)rum. 2 
justice, misericordiam. The Hebrew APIS is often thus rendered, here mistakenly. The caado ee e 
proverbially severe (Ant. xx. 9.1) as the Pharisees were merciful in judgement (Aut. xiii. 10. 6). See also Pss. Sol. 
ree destroy them. Text = et exterminatores, corrupt for z/ exterminarent. 
deceitful. Cf. Pss. Sol. iv. 4, 12, 14. ’ f tan tee , : pace Sy Saar Cf also i 
concealing themselves, &c. Cf. Pss. Sol. iv. 5 €y vukrt Kat ey drroxpupors duapTaver @s OX OPwpeVOs. . also f Te 
impious .. - iniquity. For tapdvopot and dpaprwAoi as epithets of the Sadducees see Ryle and James, Psalms 


of Solomon, Introd. xlv—xlviil. aie bs 


THE ASSUMPTION OF MOSES 7. 8—8. 5 


8 from sunrise to sunset: saying: ‘We shall have feastings and luxury, eating and drinking, and we 

y shall esteem ourselves as princes.’ And though their hands and their minds touch unclean things, yet 

10 their mouth shall speak great things, and they shall say furthermore: ‘Do not touch me lest thou 
shouldst pollute me in the place (where I stand’)... 

81 And there shall come upon them a second visitation and wrath, such as has not befallen them from 
the beginning until that time, in which He will stir up against them the king of the kings of the 
earth and one that ruleth with great power, who shall crucify those who confess to their circumcision : 

2 and those who conceal (it) he shall torture and deliver them up to be bound and led into prison. 

3 And their wives shall be given to the gods among the Gentiles, and their young sons shall be operated 

4 on by the physicians in order to bring forward their foreskin. And others amongst them shall be 
punished by tortures and fire and sword, and they shall be forced to bear in public their idols, polluted 

5 as they are like those who keep them. And they shall likewise be forced by those who torture them 
to enter their inmost sanctuary, and they shall be forced by goads to blaspheme with insolence the 
word, finally after these things the laws and what they had above their altar. 


from sunrise to sunset, not ‘from East to West’ as the phrase in Greek might also mean. 

8. shall esteem ourselves. Text = ef putabimus nos. Possibly fotabimus, ‘we shall drink,’ but os is against this. 

princes. Text adds ‘we shall be’. An intrusion due to the difficulty of zos. 

O.though yet. Lext =e 7. pez, “Av Hebraism, (Gf 1 Samet i 

mouth ... speak great things. Dan. vii. 8, 20; Jude 16. 

9, Io. For this combination of priestly aloofness with an unclean and worldly life, cf. Pss. Sol. i. 8; ii. EAS 
Viil. 13 ; xvii. 17. 

1o. Isa. Ixv. 5. Four lines are defective at the end of to. 

VIII-IX. This ‘second visitation’ is too accurate an account of Antiochus Epiphanes’ persecution to refer to any 
other calamity, or to have been a bare prediction, e.g. of Bar Cochba’s suppression in A.D, 136. Strangely enough 
there is a gap in the history between V and VI of this book, where an account of Antiochus’s devastation is required. 
It is equally out of place here. Thus we have a clear case of transposition by the final editor. Cf. 1 En. xci-xciii. 
V ends with the Hellenizing priests under Antiochus, VI begins with the Maccabean princes. Such a tragic time 
would not be omitted in a work like this, still less could the greatest desecration of the temple have been overlooked 
when minor injuries to it are mentioned, e.g. ii. 4, 8, 9; iii. 2; iv. 7,8; v. 3, 43 vi. 1, 9. 

VIII. 1, a second visitation. So ix. 2. The final woes would not be so described. The text has ... Za (or Ze) 
only. Fritzsche restores ¢azta. I read altera with Merx. 

such as has not, &c. Dan. xii. 1; cf. Jer. xxx. 7; 1 Macc. ix. 27; Matt. xxiv. 21; Rev. xvi. 18. ‘from the 
beginning’, a@ saecudo, which is nearer the Syriac (= a diebus saeculorum) of Dan. xii. 1 than the LXX or Theod. 
Compare am’ apxns koopov, Matt. xxiv. 21. 

king of the kings of the earth, used of Artaxerxes in Ezra vii. 12, so naturally here of the despot Antiochus IV. 

one that ruleth. Text = foftestatem. I read fotentatem. 
: crucify ... circumcision. Cf. 1 Macc. i. 48, 60, 61; 2 Macc. vi. 10, viii. 4. For the crucifying cf. Joseph. 

mt. XM. 5. 4. 

2. conceal. Text = necantes. I read celantes. Possibly we should read secanfes, ‘circumcise’, or even negantes 
‘refuse to confess’. 5 f 

3. Wives shall be given to the gods, &c. For the cult of Venus see 2 Macc. vi. 4. But ais donabuntur may be 
corrupt for dsdonabuntur (Haupt). Then translate ‘ will be distributed among the Gentiles’. 

their young sons, &c. Cf. 1 Macc. i. 15; Joseph. Amz. xii. 5.1, Cf. 1 Cor. vii. 18. 
4. tortures. Cf: 2 Macc. vi. 28, vii; Joseph. Azz. xii. 5. 4. 
fire. 2 Macc. vi. 11. 
bear in public their idols. 2 Macc. vi.7. For the carrying of idols cf. Amos v. 26: Isa. xlvi. 7: i 
polluted, &c. The rendering is Ree and diffeutt d 6; Isa. xlvi.7; Epist. Jer. 4, 26. 
like. Text = Jariter = also ‘likewise’ in the next verse. 
. inmost sanctuary of the heathen temples which the Jews were compelled to build. Cf. wt F 
ee KVeb 4 Ort ae be the Holy Pd : Z Hes CR re pate 
the word = 6 Aéyos = 1377, which in late Hebrew (Jer. Shabb. vii. 10°, &c.) and Aramaic = ‘the person’ of God. 
the laws and. I read /eges ef for text e¢ leges. 
what . . . above their altar, i.e. the sacrifice upon it, Matt. xxiii. 18. Clemen states that under altarium we 
are to understand 1’. But this latter word simply means the raised platform in the Synagogue from which prayers 
were said and the Lawread. There is no ground, so far as I am aware, for ever connecting the two ideas. See Religion 
and Worship of the Synagogue, Box and Oesterley, 309 sqq. = Schiirer’, ii. 450. The expression favours our inter- 
preting the inmost sanctuary of the Temple. 

IX. The historical references seem to be to 2 Macc. vi. 18 (Eleazar the Scribe) and vii (the seven brothers, sons of 
the widow), who went to the tortures rather than eat swine’s flesh ; while in 1 Macc. ii. 29-38 we are told of those who 
fled to the secret places of the wilderness, to avoid the ‘ unclean visitation’ (Ass. Mos. ix. 2) of Antiochus. For the cl 
ees with 1 and 2 Maccabees see the notes. : ies 

his piecing together of details has a purpose. The author intentionall i i 
thus by implication censures the Maccabeantaptisie with its methods and eee BR boop ae 
of the Chasids, as evidenced by the passages quoted above, by way of suggesting and urging their stricter fe a re 
ene idee is not ‘ Let us war’, but ‘ Let us die rather than transgress’. Aas 
e Chasids’ temporary coalition with the Maccabees, 1 Macc. ii. i i 
a pees co laes w thei old attitude of non-resistance. But by mee! of the Pree a ee 
the Psalms of Solomon show, was being leaven : paic ae : Bee » a 
ee ony by he cee si ened with patriotism and earthly political ideas. Our author must have 


420 


a es 


9: 


2 


THE ASSUMPTION OF MOSES 9. 1—10. 4 


Then in that day there shall be a man of the tribe of Levi, whose name shall be Taxo, who having 
seven sons shall speak to them exhorting (them): ‘Observe, my sons, behold a second ruthless (and) 
unclean visitation has come upon the people, and a punishment merciless and far exceeding the first. 


3 For what nation or what region or what people of those who are impious towards the Lord, who 


4 have done many abominations, have suffered as great calamities as have befallen us? 


Now, there- 
fore, my sons, hear me: for observe and know that neither did the fathers nor their forefathers 


5 tempt God, so as to transgress His commands. And ye know that this is our strength, and thus we 
6 will do. Let us fast for the space of three days and on the fourth let us go into a cave which is in 


7 


a 


the field, and let us die rather than transgress the commands of the Lord of Lords, the God of our 
fathers. For if we do this and die, our blood shall be avenged before the Lord. 

And then His kingdom shall appear throughout all His creation, 

And then Satan shall be no more, 

And sorrow shall depart with him. 

Then the hands of the angel shall be filled 

Who has been appointed chief, 

And he shall forthwith avenge them of their enemies. 

For the Heavenly One will arise from His royal throne, 

And He will go forth from His holy habitation 

With indignation and wrath on account of His sons. 

And the earth shall tremble: to its confines shall it be shaken : 

And the high mountains shall be made low 

And the hills shall be shaken and fall. 


1. day there shall be. I read ave erit for text dicente. 
of the tribe of Levi. Thus the Chasid movement emanated from the priestly tribe. Our author seems to identify 
the Eleazar here with the Eleazar of 2 Macc. vi. 18, who was one of the chief scribes, and, according to 4 Macc. v. 3, 
a priest. 
Taxo. Professor Burkitt has offered the right interpretation. Taxo is a mistake for Taxoc = Tafox = pIDIN, 


which by Gematria = sspdx, Eleazar. Cf. 4 Macc. i. 8. This interpretation strengthens the argument for a dislocation 
of the text. 

seven sons. The widow of z Macc. vii (following on the martyrdom of Eleazar in vi. 18-31) and 4 Macc. has 
seven sons. Mattathias had five, 1 Macc. ii. I. 

shall speak. I read dicet, for text dicens. 

2. second. . . unclean visitation, under Antiochus, with its ceremonial defilement and moral abominations. The 
first was under Nebuchadnezzar. See chapter iii. 

far exceeding. I read eminens for eminent, text. 

3. Cf. Joseph. Azz. xii. 3. 3- 

4. neither did the fathers, &c. Text = ‘nunquam temptans deum nec parentes nec proavi eorum’. Clemen 
restores ‘neither did I nor the fathers’, supplying ego to agree with /empians, which, however, is corrupt for 
temptantes. Cf. the consciousness of fulfilling God’s law in the Psalms. The sense of sin is markedly absent at 
times: here with regard to the nation. ; { 

6. fast, here a sign not of repentance but of desperate resolution. For fasting cf. Dan. vi. 18, ix.3; 2 Bar. v. 7, 
&c.; 4 Ezra v. 20, &c. f 

let us go into a cave. Cf. 1 Macc. i. 53, il. 315 Joseph. Avz. xii. 6.2; Heb. xi. 38; also 2 Macc. vi. 11, x. 6. 
let us die rather than transgress. For this typical and earnest motto of those persecuted under Antiochus, 
cf. 2 Macc. vii. 2; 4 Macc. ix.1; also for the resolve, 1 Macc. ii. 37; 2 Macc. vi. 19; Amd. xil. 6.1. 
7. avenged. Cf. the seven brethren, 2 Mace. vii. 17, 19, 31, 35-7: 


X. 1-10. These verses form a hymn of ten stanzas with three lines each. There are three main divisions, 1-2, 3-6, 
7-10. Note that the kingdom and the angel appear in the first division, but God Himself arises in the second. 
1. His kingdom. Cf. the ‘kingdom of God’ in Mark and Luke; Pss. Sol. xvil. 4. There is no mention of a new 
heaven and a new earth here. 
Satan seems to be here the head of the kingdom of evil. But 2» suggests that he is the adversary of Israel. 
sorrow, &c. Cf. Isa. xxxv. 10; Rev. xxi. 4. pa baer 
2. hands... filled. Cf. Exod. xxviii. 41, xxix. 9; Lev. xxi. 10; Test. Levi viii. ro. Here it signifies the delega- 
tion of power as warrior not as priest. 
the angel. Michael. Cf. Dan. xiii, He is Israel’s patron angel. : 
chief, Michael is at the head of the forces of heaven, Rev. xii.7. Here he avenges Israel, but in ver. 7 God does 
so. Thus 3-10 (which belong to the text) are inconsistent with I-2, an Insertion, as the felicity of ver. 1, contrasted 
with the terror of 4-6, also shows. 
3-6. Signs to accompany God’s coming. 
3. the Heavenly One. Cf. il. 4, Iv. 4. 
He will go forth, &c. Mic.1. 3; Isa. xxvi. 21; 1 En, 1. 3. 
from His holy habitation. Deut. xxvi. 15 ; Isa. Ixili. 15. 
4. high mountains... made low. Isa. xl. 4; 1 En. i. 6. ! ; : 
and the hills shall be shaken and. | read ‘et colles concutientur et’ for ‘et concutientur et convalles’. The 
mountains would not be shaken after being made low, nor could the valleys fall. We require a hill after the high 
mountains. Cf. Isa. xl. 4. It is easy to exolain convadles = MYP3 corrupt for MYII as in LXX of Isa. xl. 12. 


421 


THE -ASSUMPTION: OF MOSES 0; 3-13 


5 And the horns of the sun shall be broken and he shall be turned into darkness ; 
And the moon shall not give her light, and be.turned wholly into blood. 
And the circle of the stars shall be disturbed. 
6 And the sea shall retire into the abyss, 
And the fountains of waters shall fail, 
And the rivers shall dry up. 
For the Most High will arise, the Eternal God alone, 
And He will appear to punish the Gentiles, 
And He will destroy all their idols. 
8 Then thou, O Israel, shalt be happy, 
And thou shalt }mount upon the necks and wings of the eagle, 
And they shall be endedj. 
g And God will exalt thee, 
And He will cause thee to approach to the heaven of the stars, 
yIn the place of their habitationf. 
ro And thou shalt look from on high and shalt see thy enemies in Ge(henna), 
And thou shalt recognize them and rejoice, 
And thou shalt give thanks and confess thy Creator. 
11,12 And do thou, Joshua (the son of) Nun, keep these words and this book; For from my death 
13 [assumption] until His advent there shall be CCL times. And this is the course of the times which 


—~T 


5. The MS. has ‘sol non dabit lumen et in tenebris convertent se cornua lunae et confringentur et tota convertit se 
in sanguine’. The order seems wrong. The darkening is always connected with the sun, and only with the moon 
in conjunction with it. Cf. Joel ii. 10; iii. 15; Eccles. xii. 2. See also Isa. xiii. 10; Matt. xxiv. 29; Mark Xill, 24 5 
Luke xxiii. 45; Acts ii. 20; Rev. vi. 12, ix. 2. Again, ‘non dabit lumen’ is used only of the moon, Ezek. xxxii, a 
Matt. xxiv. 29; Mark xiii. 24. Thirdly, ‘turned into blood’ is only used of the moon, Joel ii. 31; Acts ii. 20; Rev. 
vi. 12. Thus I alter the text to 

‘ (Et) cornua solis confringentur et in tenebras convertet se ; 
Et luna non dabit lumen et tota convertet se in sanguinem.’ 
citclemelext: 07775. 
6. fountains ... fail. Cf. Pss. Sol. xvii. 21; Test. Levi iv. 1; 4 Ezra vi. 24. 
fountains ...andrivers. Cf. Rev. viii. 10, xvi. 4. 
dry up. I read exarescent for MS. expavescent. 
7-10. God punishes the Gentiles, destroys their idols, makes Israel triumph over Rome, and exalts them to heaven. 


7. Eternal God. Cf. Deut. xxxiii. 27 D4) mdy. ga and probably 8? are based on verse 29 of that chapter. 

alone, i.e. without help of Michael or Messiah. Cf. 4 Ezra v. 26, vi. 6. 

destroy ... idols. Cf. 1 En. xci. 9. tie 

8. Israel to triumph in this world over Rome. 

Then thou... happy. Deut. xxxiii. 29. 

tmount upon the necks. So Deut. xxxiii. 29 in LXX Syr. Vulg. Targ. Onk., Targ. Jon., Jarchi. Modern scholars, 
however, render ‘tread upon their high places’. For ‘necks’ cf. Baruch iv. 26; also for the idea Josh. x. 24. An 
older form of the Eagle Vision, that in 4 Ezra xi sqq. may here be in the mind of the writer. Now line 2 is too long . 
and line 3 too short. Formerly I accepted Dr. Cheyne’s suggestion that des luctus tuc (cf. Isa. Ix. 20) was lost after 
tmplebuntur. Clemen suggests dies aguilae; but neither accounts for the irregularity noted, and there is no loss of 
letters in the MS. Hence | propose that there has been simply a transposition of cervices e¢ alas (i.e. alae) from line B 
to 2, Then ef mpleduntur = gai ovvtedeoOnoovra, perdentur or delebuntur. Hence: 

‘And thou shalt go up against the eagle 
And its necks and wings shall be destroyed.’ 
g. Israel to be exalted to heaven. : 

to approach. Text = huerere, i.e. YI. 

the heaven of the stars. Cf. Pss. Sol. i. 5 iaOnoay os ray dotpoy, and Jer. li. (xxviii. in LXX) 9. Cf. ‘the 
stars of heaven’, Isa. xiv. 13 (LXX), or ‘the stars of God’ (Heb.), which, however, Targ. Jon. renders ‘the people of 
God’. Here, however, there is no metaphor, but a description of Israel transfigured and glorified after the final 
judgement. Cf. 1 En. civ. 2, 6. 

tIn the place of their habitation.t Text = loco habitations eorum. Eorum suits neither ‘stars’ nor ‘thee’. 
The parallelism also requires ‘and He’ to commence the clause. There I read D’pm ‘and He will establish’ for 
Dy3 ‘in the place’, and D2 JAW ‘thy habitation among them’ for D1W% ‘their habitation’, and render: 

‘And He will establish thy habitation among them.’ 

Cf, 1 En. civ. 2; 4, 6. 

10, Shalt look. I read conspicies for consfiges, text. 

shalt see. I read wédebis for vides, text. ab 

Gehenna. MS. has ¢erram = yj, i.e. N) or %) transliterated as in Josh. xviii. 16 (LXX), &c. Gehenna is 
called ‘the valley ’ in Jer. ii. 23; iii, go, and so 037 need not be restored. Clemen thinks ‘in terra’ can be sup- 
ported by Isa. Ixvi. 24, but the cases are not parallel. - 

In earlier times (Isa. Ixvi. 24; 1 En. xxvii. 2, 3, liv. I, 2, xc. 26, 27) Gehenna was considered the place of punish- 
ment for faithless Jews, who should be tormented there in full view of the righteous. But in N.T. times it had come 
to be thought of as the future abode of all the wicked. Cf. 4 Ezra vii. 36, 

11. this book. Cf. i. 16, xi. 1. 
12. [assumption]. The original here told only of Moses’ death, not his assumption. Cf. i. 1 5 and x15, _ The 
addition is due to the editor, who combined this ‘ Testament of Moses’ with another work, the ‘ Assumption of Moses’. 
422 


THE ASSUMPTION OF MOSES 10. 14—11. 16 


14, 15 they shall pursue till they are consummated. And I shall go to sleep with my fathers. Wherefore, 


Joshua thou (son of) Nun, (be strong and) be of good courage; (for) God hath chosen (thee) to be 
minister in the same covenant. 


1 And when Joshua had heard the words of Moses that were so written in his writing all that he 

2 had before said, he rent his clothes and cast himself at Moses’ feet. And Moses comforted him and 

3, 4 wept with him. And Joshua answered him and said: ‘Why dost thou comfort me, (my) lord 
Moses? And how shali I be comforted in regard to the bitter word which thou hast spoken which 

has gone forth from thy mouth, which is full of tears and lamentation, in that thou departest from 

5, 6 this people? (But now) what place shall receive thee? Or what shall be the sign that marks (thy) 
7 sepulchre? Or who shall dare’to move thy body from thence as that of a mere man from place to 

g place? For all men when they die have according to their age their sepulchres on earth ; but thy 
sepulchre is from the rising to the setting sun, and from the south to the confines of the north : all 

9, 10 the world is thy sepulchre. My lord, thou art departing, and who shall feed this people? Or who 
tris there that shall have compassion on them and who shall be their guide by the way? Or who shall 
pray for them, not omitting a single day, in order that I may lead them into the land of ¢hezr fore- 

12 fathers? How therefore am I to foster this people asa father (his) only son, or as a mistress her 
daughter, a virgin who is being prepared to be given to the husband whom she will revere, while she 
guards her person from the sun and (takes care) that her feet are not unshod for running upon the 

13 ground. (And how) shall I supply them with food and drink according to the pleasure of their 
14 Will? For of them there shall be 600,000 (men), for these have multiplied to this degree through 
1s thy prayers, (7) lord Moses. And what wisdom or understanding have I that I should judge or 
16 answer by word in the house (of the Lord)? And the kings of the Amorites also when they hear 
that we are attacking chem, believing that there is no longer among them the sacred spirit who 


CCL times, i.e. 250 year-weeks, or 1,750 years. Thus from the Creation (2,500 years before Moses’ death) to the 
final judgement will be 4,250 years or 85 jubilees. Cf. Sanh. 97°, which gives the same date for the Messiah’s coming. 
13. of the times. MS.=-... horum’ emended to ¢emporum. 
14. Moses expects an ordinary death, a sleep with his fathers in Sheol. 
15. (be strong and) be of good courage. MS. forma te. 1 have restored with Schmidt-Merx ‘confortare et - 
firma te’. Seei. 10 (note). Cf. Deut. xxxi. 6, 7, 23. 
(for) ... (thee). I supply 7am ze after firma te. 
minister. See i. 7 (note). Is Joshua thus the prophet promised in Deut. Xvlil. 15? 
XI. 1. Moses’ feet. I emend MS. fedes meos to pedes Monse. 
4. comfort me... be comforted. I read ‘solaris . . . solabor’ with Schmidt-Merx for MS. ‘celares .. .- 
celabor’; Volkmar emends to ‘zelaris . . . zelabor’. 
For the mourning at his departure, cf. 2 Bar. xxxiii. 3, Ixxvii. 2; 4 Ezra xii. 44. 
depart = die, as in 2 Bar. xiv. 19, xv. I, xliii. 2, &c. 
this people. Text = plebe ist (a). 
5. (But now) what, &c. Text is defective. sit 
7. Baldensperger thinks this verse is directed against the Christians, as Christ’s body was moved from the cross to 
the sepulchre. 
from thence. I restore zmde for 27 e. 
that of a (mere) man. I restore hominis for homo. 
8. all the world is thy sepulchre. Cf. Thuc. ii. 43 waca yy Tapos. 
9. thou art departing. 1 restore abis for ab his MS. 
Il. pray. Cf. xii. 6. 
not omitting. Text = ec patiens = ovde rraptets. 
single. MS. = uno corrupt for unum. 
forefathers. I restore afavorum for A raborum, Ewald Amorreorum. 
12. foster. MS. = potero (hanc plebem) = Svvicopat (rdv Nady TovTOY) = (atm oyn) Soy where Sow is corrupt for 


badax = ‘nourish’. 5 . 
*“as a mistress her daughter, a virgin. Text =‘ tanquam tfiliam dominam virginemt.’ If«vptay ( = dominam) can 
be applied to persons as Volkmar supposes and mean ‘legitimate’, ‘his own’, then the difficulty is solved. But the repeti- 


tion of canguam is against this view. It seems to require a parallel noun in the nominative such as domina. And was 


koptos ever applied in the above sense even to things? Failing this we might with Fritzsche read filiam domina, ie EME 
or since xupia alone may be suspicious in this sense domina virginem may = 723 ndy3 corrupt for M27 N2¥3, 
‘mistress of the house’. 
to be given. I restore dari for tali MS. 
whom. I restore guem for guae. 
revere. Cf. Sirach xxvi. 28. sd 
guards her Ld eevee a rao ve 5 
a ee et gui to e lacuna. 
Soe lee will, si ad voluptatem voluntatis for MS. = voluntatem voluntatis. Ct. Eph. 1. 5. 
14. 600,000. | I insert D before C mz/za, from Exod. xil. 37. 
men). I restore vz7d in lacuna in MS. ; ' 
15. (of the Lord). I restore Domint in lacuna after domo in MS. 
16. among them. I read secum for semet MS. AriNae eee 
sacred spirit... manifold. Cf. mvetpa. . + aytov. +s moAupeoes, Wisd, vil. 22. 


423 


THE ASSUMPTION OF MOSES Tl) 16— 129 


was worthy of the Lord, manifold and incomprehensible, the lord of the word, who was eee 
all things, God’s chief prophet throughout the earth, the most perfect teacher in the world, [that he 
17 is no longer among them], shall say “Let us go against them. If the enemy have nw rie 
wrought impiously against their Lord, they have no advocate to offer prayers on their behalf to ie 
Lord, like Moses the great messenger, who every hour day and night had his knees fixed to the 
earth, praying and looking for help to Him that ruleth all the world with compassion and me oad 
18 ness, reminding 77m of the covenant of the fathers and propitiating the Lord with the oath. o1 
they shall say: “ He is not with them: let us go therefore and destroy them from off the face of the 
19 earth.” What shall then become of this people, my lord Moses?’ 
12 1,2 And when Joshua had finished (these) words, he cast himself again at the feet of Moses. And 
Moses took his hand and raised him into the seat before him, and answered and said unto him : 
3» 4 ‘ Joshua, do not despise thyself, but set thy mind at ease, and hearken to my words. All the nations 
which are in the earth God hath created and us, He hath foreseen them and us from the beginning 
of the creation of the earth unto the end of the age, and nothing has been neglected by Him even to 
5 the least thing, but all things He hath foreseen and caused all to come forth. (Yea) all things 
which are to be in this earth the Lord hath foreseen and lo! they are brought forward (into the 
6 light.... The Lord) hath on their behalf appointed me to (pray) for their sins and (make interces- 
7 sion) for them. For not for any virtue or strength of mine, but of His good pleasure have His com- 
8 passion and longsuffering fallen to my lot. For I say unto you, Joshua: it is not on account of the 
9 godliness of this people that thou shalt root out the nations. The lights of the heaven, the founda- 
tions of the earth have been made and approved by God and are under the signet ring of His right 
to hand. Those, therefore, who do and fulfil the commandments of God shall increase and be prospered : 
11 but those who sin and set at nought the commandments shall be without the blessings before men- 
12 tioned, and they shall be punished with many torments by the nations. But wholly to root out and 
13 destroy them is not permitted. For God will go forth who has foreseen all things for ever, and His 
covenant has been established and by the oath which... 


worthy of the Lord. Cf. Wisd. iii. 5. 

lord of the word, a unique expression. 

faithful in all things. Num. xii. FG Le Dalite 2: 

God’s chief prophet. Text = divinum... profetem = ondyn N23 = ‘ the prophet of God’. 

[that he... them]. A dittography from above. 

17. wrought impiously against. Text = impie fecerunt in=2 Ww", perhaps corrupt for 2 yw. Cf. v. 6 (note). 

no advocate to offer prayers. Tiis is the function of Jeremiah especially (for Moses cf. ver. 14), e. g. 2 Macc. 
xv. 14; 4 Baruch ii. 3; 2 Bar. il. 2 (note). 

Moses. MS. wrongly adds ‘was’. r 

looking for help... world. MS.=‘intuens homini potentem orbem,’ &c. omini is clearly a corruption. 
Hilgenfeld suggests ommnipotentem orbem. But it is better to read omnzs and orbis, ‘potentem omnis orbis.’ 
Schmidt-Merx suggest ‘omni potent(ia tenent)em orbem ’. 

XII. 2. Cf. Sifre Piska 140 on Num. xxvii. 28, ‘Thereupon (Moses) raised him (Joshua) from the ground and placed 
him beside himself on the chair.’ 

3. thyself. I restore ze for e/, MS. 

4. A word of comfort against the time of Israel’s tribulation. God made Israel and the nations, and foresees the 
destinies of both. Therefore all that befalls must tend to the same end (Israel’s benefit, i. 12). 

caused all to come forth. I read ‘promovit Cuncta’ for MS, ‘provovit cum ezs’; provovit may, however, be 
corrupt for Draenovit = mpozyvo = YT, which again may be corrupt for IW, praedestinavtt. 

6. appointed me to (pray) for their sins. This is a real Jewish idea and not borrowed from Christianity. Cf. 
Jeremiah (see xi. 17 above); also Enoch, 2 En. Ixiy, 5 (MSS. A,B), the righteous forefathers, Philo, De Execr. ix 
(ii. 436). Contrast 2 En. liii.1. The text is defective. 1 supply orvarem and implorarem. 

7. Strength. I read /frmitatem for MS. tnfirmitatem. 

of His good pleasure. Text = lemperantius = émekéotepov. emetk&s in both its occurrences in the O.T, 
= oN, the verb, so that I have rendered it ‘of His good pleasure’ in the text, though a closer rendering of the 
Hebrew would be ‘He was pleased that His compassion, &c., should fall to my lot’. Cf. for this doctrine of the 
divine election, Rom. ix. 11, 12, to privilege, and Gal. i. 15, to service. According to the Tanchuma Pikkude 3, God 
does not determine beforehand whether a man shall be righteous or wicked, but puts this in the power of the man. 
See 2 En. xxx. 15. 

8. not on account of the godliness, &c. Cf. Deut. ix. 4, 5,6; Ezek. xxxvi. 22, 32. The nation is so evil and. 
needs such frequent chastisement, that its selection by God must be due not to merit but to the Divine purpose. Yet 
the world was created on behalf of Israel, i. 12; and it is God’s foreknowledge, not His purpose, that is dwelt on in 
Kia 5s 13: 

9. lights. Read /umina for text omnia. 

foundations. Read fundamenta for text JSirmamenta. 

and approved. I read e¢ Drobata for ut provata. 


A signet ring. Read annulo for nullo. Cf. Jer. xxil. 24 drooppdyiopa emt TS xetpos rhs Sekas pov, also Sirach 
bern 


lo, God. Read De? for 7, MS. 


II. shall be without the blessings. Read carebunt bona (nom. plur.) for carere bonam. But Schmidt-Merx 
may be right, who retain the text and retranslate rois yap duaprdvovow . . éori vorepeiy Tov ayabar. 
12. destroy. I read extinguat for relinguat. 


424 


tabepQOK Or Tre SECRETS OF ENOCH 


INTRODUCTION 


§ 1. SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE Book. 


THE Book of the Secrets of Enoch has, so far as is yet known, been preserved only in Slavonic. | 
For the sake of convenience it will in this edition be designated shortly as ‘2 Enoch’, incontradistinction 
to the older book of Enoch which is designated as ‘1 Enoch’. 

This new fragment of the Enochic literature came to light through certain MSS. which were 
found in Russia and Servia. My attention was first drawn to this fact when editing the Ethiopic or 
1 Enoch by an article by Kozak on Russian Pseudepigraphic Literature in the Fahro. f. Prot. 7; heol., 
pp. 127-158 (1892). As it was stated in this article that there was a Slavonic Version of the Book 
of Enoch hitherto known through the Ethiopic Version, I applied to the late Professor Morfill for 
help, who procured printed copies of two of the MSS. in question. When once I had before me 
Professor Morfill’s English translations of these texts, it did not take much study to discover that 
Kozak’s statement was devoid of foundation. The Book of the Secrets of Enoch was, as it soon | 
transpired, a new pseudepigraph, and not in any sense a version of the older and well-known Book | 
of Enoch. In some respects it is of no less value, as we shall see in the sequel. 

2 Enoch in its present form was written somewhere about the beginning of the Christian era. 
Its final editor was an Hellenistic Jew, and the place of its composition was Egypt. 

Written at such a date, and in Egypt, it was not to be expected that it should exercise a direct | 
influence on the writers of the New Testament. On the other hand, it occasionally exhibits striking 
parallelisms in diction and thought, and some of the dark passages of the latter are all but inexplicable 
without its aid. 

Although the very knowledge that such a book ever existed was lost for probably twelve 
hundred years, it nevertheless was much used both by Christian and heretic in the early centuries. 
Thus citations appear from it, though without acknowledgement, in the Books of Adam and Eve, 
the Apocalypses of Moses and Paul (A.D. 400-500), the Sibylline Oracles, the Ascension of Isaiah 
and the Epistle of Barnabas (A.D. 70-90). It is quoted by name in the later portions of the 
Testaments of Levi, Daniel, and Naphtali. It was referred to by Origen and probably by Clement 
of Alexandria, and used by Irenaeus, and a few phrases in the New Testament may be derived 
from it. 

But it was not only on Christian literature that the influence of 2 Enoch is manifest. A 
Hebrew book entitled ‘the Book of Enoch’ (qn 1p) and twice ‘the Book of the Secrets of Enoch’ 
(unt pm app) in the Zohar exhibits very close affinities with 2 Enoch. R, Ishmael, a martyr of 
the Hadrianic persecution, is claimed to be its author, but its composition belongs most probably to 
a later date. It is, however, possible, that this Hebrew Book of Enoch has preserved in some cases 
the Hebrew original, from which apparently portions of 2 Enoch are derived. But the influence of 
» Enoch is not confined to this Hebrew Book of Enoch. Traces of it are found also in the 
apocalyptic fragment published by Jellinek, Beth ha-Midrasch vi. 19-39, and also in the Zohar.’ 


§ 2. THE Two SLAVONIC VERSIONS. 


The two versions of the Slavonic redaction of the book of Enoch from which the following 
translations have been made“are : } et 

1, The complete version, published by Mr. A. Popév in the Transactions of the Historical and 
Archaeological Society of the University of Moscow, vol. iii. (Moscow, University Press, 1880). The 
MS. isa South Russian recension, dating from the second half of the seventeenth century and belongs 
to Mr. A. Khludov. It is in many places so corrupt that emendation in the Ape of the Greek 
text is impossible. This version is marked by the letter A in Morfill’s translation. 


1 ‘sh Encyc. i. 677 sqq- ’ i yk ; 
z ae Lee EW an en of the above version in a MS. in the public library of Belgrade according to 


Morfill (Gen. Editor). 
* iz N- Forbes 425 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF age 


2. The incomplete version, published by Novakovi¢ in the sixteenth volume of the literary 
magazine Stdrine (Agram, 1884). The MS. is a Servian recension dating from the sixteenth 
century, and is in the Public Library at Belgrade. It is marked B in Morfill’s translation. In 
order to spare biblical students the confusion inseparable from the omission of the division of the 
paragraphs into verses and from a disposition of the paragraphs themselves in any way different 
from that to which they are already used, I have adopted that arrangement of paragraphs and verses 
which both Morfill and Bonwetsch employed in their translations. It must be pointed out, however, 
that in the complete version (A) there are only sixty-three, while Morfill and Bonwetsch both divide 
the same quantity of text into sixty-eight paragraphs ; that in the incomplete version (B) there is no 
division into paragraphs; that in neither A nor B is there any division of the paragraphs into verses," 
and that in neither A nor B® are the titles of the paragraphs in brackets, as indicated in Morfill’s 
translation. (N. ForBEs.) Translator of the appended text . 


§ 3. THE LANGUAGE AND PLACE OF WRITING. 


1. Part of this book—possibly the main part—was written for the first time in Greek. This is 
shown by such statements, (1) as xxx. 13, ‘And I appointed him a name (i.e. Adam) from the four 
component parts: from East, from West, from South, from North.’ Adam’s name is here derived 
from the initial letters of the Greek names of the four quarters, i.e. dvaroA, ddors, Apxtos, peonuBpia. 
This fancy was first elaborated in Greek, as this derivation is impossible in Semitic languages. 
(2) Again, the writer follows the chronology of the LXX. Enoch is 165 years old when he begat 
Methuselah. According to the Hebrew and Samaritan chronologies he was 65. Josephus also 
(Anz. i. 3. 3), it is true, adopts the LXX chronology. (3) In 1. 4 the writer reproduces the LXX 
text of Deut. xxxii. 35 against the Hebrew. (4) The writer frequently uses Sirach, and often 
reproduces it almost word for word: cf. xliii. 2, 3—Sirach xxiii. 7; x. 20, 22, 24: also xlvii. 5 
—Sirach i. 2: also li. 1, 3—Sirach vii. 32; ii. 4: also lxi. 2—Sirach xxxix. Qe swalsou ly. 2-—— 
Sirach xvii. 3, 5. (5) Ixv. 4 seems to be derived from the Book of Wisdom vii. 17, 18.;).So0-far as 
we can judge, it was the Greek Versions of Sirach and Wisdom that our author uscd. 

Some sections of this book may have been written originally in Hebrew. (See § 4 ad fin.) 

2. This book in its present form was written in Egypt, and probably in Alexandria. This is 
deducible from the following facts. (1) From the variety of speculations which it holds in common 
with Philo and writings which were Hellenistic in character or circulated largely in Egypt. -Thus 
the existent was created from the non-existent, xxiv. 2; xxv. 1: cf. Philo, de Justt. 7; souls were 
created before the foundation of the world, xxiii. 5: cf. Philo, de Somno, i. 22; de Gigantibus gt 
Wisdom viii. 19, 20. Again, man had seven natures or powers, xxx. 9: cf. Philo, de Mundi Op. 40. 
Man could originally see the angels in heaven, xxxi. 2: cf. Philo, Quaest. in Gen. xxxii. There 
seems to be no resurrection of the body, |. 2 ; Ixv.6: so the Book of Wisdom and Philo taught. Finally, 
swearing is reprobated by both, xlix. 1, 2: cf. Philo, de Spec. Leg. ii. 1. (2) The whole Messianic 
teaching of the Old Testament does not find a single echo in the work of this Hellenized Israelite: 
of Egypt, although he shows familiarity with almost every book of the Old Testament. (3) The 
Phoenixes and Chalkydries, xii—monstrous serpents with the heads of crocodiles—are natural products 
of the Egyptian imagination. (4) The syncretistic character of the account of the creation, XXv-xxvi 
undoubtedly betrays Egyptian elements. ‘ 


§ 4. RELATION OF THE BOOK TO JEWISH AND CHRISTIAN LITERATURE, 


In the Book of Adam and Eve of the fifth century we find two passages drawn from our book 
which are quotations in sense more than in words. Thus in I. vi we read : ‘ But the wicked Satan .. . 
set me at naught, and sought the Godhead, so that I hurled him down from heaven.’ This is drawn 
from xxix. 4,5: ‘One from out the order of angels (i.e. Satan, cf. xxxi. 4)...conceived an 
impossible thought, to place his throne higher than the clouds above the earth, that he might 
become equal in rank to My power. And I threw him from the height.’ Again in the Book of 
Adam and Eve, I. viii: ‘When we dwelt in the garden . .. we saw his angels that sang praises in 
heaven,’ This comes from xxxi. 2: ‘I made the heavens open to him, that he should see the angels 
singing the song of victory.’ See notes on xxxi. 2 for similar view in Philo and St. Ephrem. 


: This division into verses was necessarily made by the General Editor when he edited this book in 1896. 
_ ” The bracketing of the titles in A was due not to the translator but to the editor, for they have no claim to being 
original. They are not given in Sokolov’s text which was used by Professor Morfill, nor are they found in B. A few 


titles do appear in B, but with one exception these consist merely of ‘Entry of En i 
C 10ch into 
Enoch into the second heaven’, &c. (Gen. Editor), : . eens Alea 


426 


INTRODUCTION 


Again in I. xiv of the former book the words: ‘The garden, into the abode of light thou longest for, 
wherein is no darkness, and I. xi: ‘That garden in which was no darkness,’ are probably derived 
from 2 En. xxxi, 2: ‘... the gloomless light’ seen by Adam in Paradise. 

Next in the Apocalypse of Moses (ed. Tischend. 1866) p. 19 we have a further development of a 
statement that appears in our text regarding the sun: see Apoc. Mos. xxxvi. 1-3 under ‘ The Books 
of Adam and Eve’ in this volume. 

In the anonymous writing De montibus Sina et Sion 4, we have most probably another trace of 
the influence of our text in this century. In this treatise the derivation of Adam’s name from the 
initials of the four quarters of the earth is given at length. This derivation appears probably for the 
first time in literature in xxx. 13 (see note). ; 

_ In the fourth century there are undoubted indications of its use in the Apocalypse of Paul (ed. 
Tischend. 1866). Thus the statement, p. 64, odrés éorw 6 mapdderoos, évOa . . . d€vdpor TappeyeOn (sz) 
paton, év @ exavenravero TO mvEdya TO dy.ov is beyond the possibility of question a Christian adaptation 
of 2 Enoch viii. 3: ‘And in the midst of the trees that of life, in that place, whereon the Lord 
rests, when He goes up into Paradise.’ Again the words, p. 64, ek tis pl(ys adrod e&jpxero 
.. . Bep, peptGpevov eis réccapa épbypara, and p. 52, woramol réccapes ... péovtes weAr Kal ydAra kal 
édavov kat otvoy, are almost verbal reproductions of our text, viii. 5: ‘Two springs come out which 
send forth honey and milk, and their springs send forth oil and wine, and they separate into four 
parts. With two characteristic features of hell in this Apocalypse, i.e. otk jv éxel PGs and 6 Tvpivos 
norapos (pp. 57, 58) we may compare x. I of our text: ‘And there is no light there ... anda fiery 
river coming forth.’ 

In the early part of the third: and in the second century there is the following evidence of the 
existence of our text. Thus in the Szbylline Oracles, ii. 75 dppavixois xnpas rt éemidevopevois TE 
napdcxov, and 88 oi xelpa mevynrevovow Spe€ov are too closely parallel to li. 1, ‘Stretch forth your 
hands to the orphan and to the widow (B),’‘ Stretch out your hands to the poor (A),’ to be accidental. 

In Irenaeus contra Haer. v. 28. 3 we have the Jewish speculation in our text, WKS ee 
reproduced to the effect that as the work of creation lasted six days so the world would last 6,000 
years, and that there would be 1,000 years of rest corresponding to the first sabbath after creation. 
See text, xxxiii. 1, 2 (notes). 

There is a direct reference in Origen’s de Princip. i. 3. 2 ‘Nam et in eo libello. .. quem Hermas 
conscripsit, ita refertur: Primo omnium crede, quia unus est Deus, qui omnia creavit atque composuit : 
qui cum nihil esset prius, esse fecit omnia. . .. Sed et in Enoch libro his similia describuntur.’ Now 
since there is no account of the creation in 1 Enoch, Origen is here referring to 2 Enoch xxiv-xxx. 

The fragment of the Apocalypse of Zephaniah preserved in Clement, Strom. v. 11. 77 is likewise 
to be traced to our text: cf. xviii. 1 (note). 

During the years A.D. 50-100 our text seems not to be without witness in the literature of that 
period. Thus in the Ascension of Isaiah, vii. 16 we read with regard to the angels of the sixth 
heaven: ‘Omnium una species et gloria aequalis, whereas the difference between the angelic orders 
in the lower heavens is repeatedly pointed out. Now in our text, xix. 1, it is said of the seven bands 
of angels present in the sixth heaven that ‘there is no difference in their faces or behaviour or 
manner of dress.’ 

In 4 Ezra vii. 97 the words ‘incipiet vultus eorum fulgere sicut sol’ are found in i. 5 ‘ Their faces 
were shining like the sun’. 

With 2 Baruch iv. 3 ‘I showed it (i.e. Paradise) to Adam before he sinned ', compare XXXL. 

In the Epistle of Barnabas xv. 4 th héyer 16° Suverehevev ev && jucpats. toBro Aéyer OTL ev 
éEaxirxiArtous éreow ovvtedécer Kvpios ta ovyTavta. yap huégpa rap’ adr onuaiver xtdla érn, we have 
an exposition of the rather confused words in our text, XxXxii. 2—xxxiii. In xv. 5-7, however, the 
writer of this Epistle does not develop logically the thought with regard to the seventh day ; for the 
seventh day on which God rested from His works should in accordance with the same principle of 
interpretation as in xv. 4 have been taken as a symbol of a thousand years of rest, i.e. the millennium. 
In xv. 8, however, this writer shows his return to our text by his use of the peculiar phrase ‘the 
eighth day’: ov ra viv odBBara [euol| dexrd, GAAG OD TeTOINKA, EV @ karamavoas TO TavTa apxnv Nie pas 
dyddns Tonow, 6 éatw Gddov Kdopov apxyv. It may not be amiss here to point out that in the next 
chapter, in verse 5, 1 Enoch (Ixxxix. 56, 66) is quoted as Scripture. The fact, therefore, that 
Barnabas does not quote our text as Scripture may point to his discrimination between the two 
books of Enoch to the detriment of the latter. Again in this Epistle, xviii. 1, the words 6d0! dvo 
cioly ... 7] Te TOO Pwrds Kal # Tod oxdrovs seem to be derived from our text, xxx. 15, 2 phere? showed 
him the two ways, the light and the darkness.’ Though the Two Ways are often described in 
early literature (see note On Xxx. 15), only in Barnabas are they described in the same terms as in 
our text. 


427 


THE BOOK OF THE SECKEUS Ol 2 oer 


In the New Testament the similarity of thought and diction is sufficiently large to establish a 
close connexion if not a literary dependence. With St. Matt. v. 9, ‘Blessed are the peacemakers, 
compare lii. 11, ‘Blessed is he who implants peace.’ With St. Matt. v. 34, 35, 37, ‘Swear not at 
all: neither by the heaven... nor by the earth... nor by Jerusalem, ... but let your speech be, 
Yea, yea: Nay, nay,’ compare xlix. 1, ‘I swear not by any oath, neither by heaven, nor by earth, 
nor by any other creature which God created... . If there is no truth in men, let them swear by 
the words, “ yea, yea,” or “nay, nay.”’ (See notes.) a ; 

With vii. 20, ‘ By their fruits ye shall know them,’ compare xlii. 14, ‘In their works are known 
those who lie evilly.’ The words ‘ Be of good cheer, be not afraid’ St. Matt xiv. 27, are of frequent 
occurrence in our text, i. 8; xx. 2; xxi. 3, &c. With StaMattexxv 34, ‘Inherit the kingdom 
prepared for you from the foundation of the world,’ compare ix. 1, ‘This place (i.e. Paradise) 
O Enoch, is prepared for the righteous .. . for eternal inheritance. Next with John xiv. 2, ‘In my 
Father's house are many mansions, compare lxi. 2, ‘In the great time (to come) -. + are many 
mansions prepared for men, good for the good, bad for the bad.’ With Acts xiv. 15; iVe should 
turn from these vain things unto the living God, who made the heaven and the earth, compare ii. 2, 
‘Bow not down to vain gods . . . who made neither heaven nor earth.’ In the Pauline Epistles there 
are several parallels in thought and diction. With Col. i. 16, ‘ Dominions or principalities or powers,’ 
compare xx. I, ‘Dominions, orders, and governments’: with Eph. iv. 25, ‘Speak ye truth each 
one with his neighbour,’ compare xlii. 12, ‘Blessed is he in whom is truth that he may speak 
truth to his neighbour.’ For other Pauline parallels with our text see my edition, pp. Xxxix—xli. 
With Heb. xi. 3, ‘The worlds have been framed by the word of God, so that what is seen hath not 
been made out of things which do appear,’ compare xxv. 1, ‘I commanded... that visible things 
should come down from invisible, and xxiv. 2, ‘I tell to thee... all that I created from non- 
being, and visible things from invisible.’ With Rev. i. 16, “ His countenance was as the sun shineth, 
compare i. 4, ‘Their faces were shining like the sun’: with ix. 1, ‘There was given to him the key 
of the pit of the abyss, compare xlii. 1, ‘The key-holders and guards of the gates of hell.’ With 
Rev. iv. 6,‘A glassy sea,’ compare iii. 3, ‘A very great Sea greater than the earthly sea.’ This 
sea in the first heaven, however, may be merely ‘the waters which were above the firmament’ 
(Gen. i. 7). With Rev. x. 5,6,‘And the angel... sware...that there shall be time no longer,’ 
compare lxv. 7, ‘Then all time shall perish, and the years,’ &c.: xxxiii. 2,‘ That... there should 


be... a time of not-counting, endless, with neither years, nor months, &c. 
Finally, in the T. Lev. iii. 2 we have avenging powers in the third heaven: éy avT® eiol TdvTa Ta 
TvEevpata TOV emaywyan eis Exdlknow Tov dvopav,... ob taxdevres eis tucpay kploews, Townoar exdixnow ... 


Tots mvevpact THs TAdvys. With these compare the angels of punishment in the third heaven in x. 3 
With the statement from Enoch in T. Dan v. 5: 6 Tay mvevpdrwv Ths movnpias. “Avéyvev yap ev BiBro 
"Evdx 708 dixatov, dre 6 dpxov tudv 6 Satavas eoriy we might compare xviii. 3, ‘These are the Grigori 
(i.e. "Eypnyopot) who with their prince Satanail rejected the Lord of light.’ In the T. Naph. iv. 1-2 
the authority of Enoch is claimed by the writer as follows: "Avéyvor ev ypapy "Evédy, bru kalye 
dpeis anoorncecbe and Kuplov, mopevduevor Kard macay dvoplav eOvdv, kal Toujoete Tacay movnptav 
Yodcpwr. 2. kal ema€er kvpros tuiv aixuarwolar .. . &ws avardcet KUplos TavTas buas. This may be a loose 
adaptation to later times of 2 Enoch xxxiv. 2, 3. The quotation in T. Sim. v. 4 is probably derived 
from the same source, and also that in T. Benj. 9 drovod d& Kal mpdéers od Kadds ev tpiv €recOat, and 
Adyav "Evdx rod dixalov' sopvedcere yap mopvelav Lodduwr, cal amwrciobe Las Bpaxd (so B S}, and 
practically c). The words in T. Jud. xviii. 1-2 dvéyvev év BiBdrors ’Evayx rod dixatov (so B A S},’but not 
a), doa Kaka mouoere ev tals éoxdras fuepars. prdrdgacde ody, réxva pov, amd Tis mopvelas may likewise 
be founded upon it. The loose and inaccurate character of the quotations may in part be accounted 
for as follows. 

Although it is a matter of demonstration that a considerable part of the book was written 
originally in Greek, it seems no less sure that certain portions of it were founded on Hebrew 
originals. Such an hypothesis seems necessary Owing to the above Enochic quotations which appear 
in the Testaments of the XII Patriarchs. For the fact that the latter work was written in Hebrew 
obliges us to conclude that its author or authors drew upon Hebrew originals in the quotations from 
Enoch. I have not attempted in the present work to discriminate the portions derived from Hebrew 
originals. For such a task we have not sufficient materials, and what we have, moreover, have not 
been preserved with sufficient accuracy. 

But there is further evidence in this direction. Many of the most notable statements regardin 
Enoch in 2 Enoch are to be found in later Hebrew writings. Now it is hardly conceivable that these 
traditions were borrowed from a Greek source. We must assume that their source is native to 
Judaism, and that 2 Enoch is an outstanding and comparatively early representation of this tradition. 
This tradition appears in various forms in ies ae of Enoch’ (qn 15D), sometimes called the 

42 


INTRODUCTION 


“Sepher Hekalot’ (i.e. the ‘ Book of the Halls’), the ‘Life of Enoch’ (pn "n), and the Hekalot 
Rabbati. We shall deal here only with the first and point out a few of the many points in which 
this work draws on 2 Enoch or rather upon the Hebrew source behind 2 Enoch. 

In this work R. Ishmael (of the time of Hadrian) ascends through the six heavens and is 
received by the Metatron, i.e. Enoch, at the entrance to the seventh. Enoch tells him how he was 
translated (iii—v, vii—xvi) in a fiery chariot to heaven in order there to bear witness against his wicked 
contemporaries: how God transfigured him and made him like one of the archangels (cf. 2 Enoch 
Xxii. 6°-10): how he had been instructed in the mysteries of creation, in things past and to come 
(cf. 2 Enoch xxiv—xxxiii. 2): how God abode under the tree of life, when Adam was driven forth from 
Paradise (cf. 2 Enoch viii. 3): how Adam and his contemporaries saw the heavenly glory till the fall 
of the angels (cf. 2 Enoch xxxii. 2). In xviii-xxii the seven heavens are described, the courses of 
the sun, moon, and stars. Even the three heavens mentioned in 2 Enoch xxi. 6—xxii. 1— only in the 
A recension as the eighth,ninth, and tenth, i.e. Muzaloth, Kuchavim, Aravoth—are reproduced here, but 
with a difference: Muzaloth and Kuchavim are placed below the seven heavens and Aravoth above 
them. This Jewish work was published by Jellinek, B. H. 1873, v. 170-190; and under the title 
mba sap at Lemberg in 1864 and Warsaw in 1876.! 

Again we find a large amount of material has been borrowed from 2 Enoch by the 47'p mba 
which is printed in Jellinek’s B.A.J7., 9 sqq. This work tells of Moses’ ascent to heaven, after 
Metatron has transformed his body into a fiery figure like to that of the angels. In the first 
heaven Moses sees waters, and also windows by which are let in and out all the things pertaining 
to human life and its needs. In the second heaven he sees the angels who control the clouds, the 
winds, and the rain; in the third, the angels placed over vegetation ; in the fourth, those over the 
earth, sun, moon, stars, planets, and spheres. The seventh heaven, we observe, is called “Arabot’. 
Moses is also privileged to view hell and Paradise. The angel Gabriel conducts him to hell. ‘ There 
he sees the manifold torments and punishments of the different classes of sinners, those who were 
envious of their fellow men and bore false witness against them; women who exposed their charms 
to young men; sinners who committed adultery, theft, and murder; those who perjured themselves ; 
those who desecrated the Sabbath, despised the learned, and persecuted orphans ; those who com- 
mitted sodomy and idolatry, or cursed their parents ; those who took bribes, put their fellow men to 
shame, delivered up their brother-Israelite to the Gentile, and denied the oral law; those that ate 
all kinds of forbidden food; usurers; apostates, and blasphemers; those who wrote the ineffable 
name of God, and those who ate on Yom Kippur.’ In Paradise among other things Moses sees 
the guardian angel of Paradise sitting under the tree of life; also ‘the fountain of life welling forth 
from beneath the tree of life and dividing itself into four streams, and four rivers flowing under 
each throne, the first of honey, the second of milk, the third of wine, and the fourth of pure balsam.’ ! 


§ 5. DATE AND AUTHORSHIP. 


The question of the date has to a large extent been determined already. The passages 
presupposed by the Zestaments of the XII Pairiarchs must be of a pre-Christian date. These 
passages may belong to an older form of the Enoch tradition than 2 Enoch. 2 Enoch in its present 
form was written probably between 30 P.C. and A.D. 70. It was written after 30 B.C., for it makes 
use of Sirach, 1 Enoch, and the Book of Wisdom (see my edition pp. xxv. sq.), and before A.D. 70 ; 
for the temple is still standing. We may, therefore, reasonably assign its composition to the 
period A.D. [-50. ; 

The author was a Jew who lived in Egypt, probably in Alexandria. He belonged to the 
orthodox Hellenistic Judaism of his day. Thus he believed in the value of sacrifices, xlii. 6 ; 
lix. 1, 2; Ixvi. 2; but he is careful to enforce enlightened views regarding them, xlv.. 3; 43. Ixt.4, 5; 
in the law, lii. 8,9; and likewise in a blessed immortality, 1. 2; Ixv. 6, 8-10; in which the righteous 
shall wear ‘the raiment of God’s glory’, xxii. 8. In questions affecting the origin of the earth, sin, 
death, &c., he allows himself the most unrestricted freedom and borrows freely from every quarter. 
Thus, Platonic (xxx. 16, note), Egyptian (xxv. 2 note), and Zend (Iviii. 4-6 notes), elements are 
adopted into his system. The result is naturally syncretistic. 


§ 6. SOME OF THE AUTHOR'S VIEWS ON CREATION, ANTHROPOLOGY, AND ETHICS. 


God in the beginning created the world out of nothing, xxiv. 2.2. (For a detailed account of 
each day’s creations see xxv-xxx.) In this creation He made seven heavens, xxx. 2, 3, and all the 


1 See Jewish Encyc. i. 676-7, whence this account is derived. 
2 Or else formed it out of pre-existing elements, xxv. I, where we have an adaptation of the egg theory of the 


universe. 


429 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENGGH 


angelic hosts—the latter were created on the first day—and all animal and plant life, and finally man 
on the sixth day. After His work on the six days God rested. on the seventh. This six days of 
work followed by a seventh of rest is at once a history of the past and a forecasting of the future. 
As the world was made in six days, so its history would be accomplished in 6,000 years, and as the 
six days of creation were followed by one of rest, so the 6,000 years of the world’s history would be. 
followed by a rest of 1,000 years. On its close would begin the eighth eternal day of blessedness 
when time should be no more, xxxii. 2—xxxiii. 2. . “a 

As regards man, all the souls of men were created before the foundation of the world, xxiii. 5, 
and also a future place of abode in heaven or hell for every individual soul, xlix. 2; lviii. 5; Ixi. 2. The 
age was resolved for man’s sake, Ixv. 3 (B). When Wisdom made man of seven substances, XXX. 8, 
at God’s command, God gave him the name Adam from the four quarters of the earth—dvaroaj, 
dvous, dpxtos, weonySpla—xxx. 13. Man’s soul was created originally good, and while in the Garden he 
could see the angels in heaven, xxxi. 2.. Free-will. was bestowed upon him, and the knowledge of 
good and evil. He was likewise instructed in the Two Ways of light and darkness, and then left to 
mould his own destiny, xxx. 15. But the incorporation of the soul in the body with its necessary 
limitations biased its preferences in the direction of evil, and death came in as the fruit of sin, XXX., 16. 
Men and angels will be judged and punished for every form of sin!, xl. 12,13; xlvi. 3; Ixv. 6; but 
the righteous will escape the last judgement, Ixv. 8; Ixvi. 7; and will be gathered in eternal life, 
Ixv. 8, and will be seven times brighter than the sun, Ixvi. 7, and they will have no labour, nor 
sickness, nor sorrow, nor anxiety, nor need, and an incorruptible paradise shall be their protection 
and their eternal habitation, Ixv. 9,10. As for sinners, hell is prepared for them as an eternal 
inheritance, x. 4,6. And there is no intercession of departed saints for the living, liii. 1. 

In an ethical regard there are many noble sentiments to be found in our author, but generally 
in a very unliterary form. The Slavonic Version is, no doubt, partially to be blamed here. I will 
append here an outline of a man’s ethical duties with sundry beatitudes according to our author. 
Every man should work ; for blessed is he who beholds the labour of his own hands, but cursed is 
he who looks to undo the labours of another, lii. 7,8. And men, likewise, should be impartially just ; 
for blessed is he who executes a just judgement, xlii. 7. And men should also practise charity and 
beneficence. They should not hide their silver in the earth, but assist the faithful man in his affliction, 
li. 2, and stretch out their hands to the orphan, the widow and the stranger, li. 1, and give bread to 
the hungry, and clothe the naked, and raise the fallen,and walk without blame before the face of the 
Lord, ix. Furthermore, men should not swear either by heaven or earth or by any other creature 
which God made, but by a word, yea, yea, or nay, nay, xlix. 1; neither should they avenge them- 
selves, l. 4, nor abuse and calumniate their neighbour, lii. 2; but endure every affliction and every 
evil word and attack for the sake of the Lord, 1. 3; li. 3. Moreover, they should shun pride: for 
God hates the proud, Ixiii. 4; and walk in long-suffering, in humility, in faith and truth, in sickness, 
in abuse, in temptation, in nakedness, in privation, loving one another till they depart from this 
age of ills, Ixvi.6. Finally, whereas one man is more honourable than another, either on the ground 
of cunning or of strength, of purity or wisdom, of comeliness or understanding, let it be heard 
everywhere that none is better than he who fears God, xliii! 2, 3. 





§7. ON THE VALUE OF THE Book IN ELUCIDATING CONTEMPORARY AND LATER 
3 : RELIGIOUS THOUGHT. ; 
See my edition, pp. xxix—xlvii. n &.B P phy. 


§ 8, BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


Charles and Morfill. _ Lhe Book of the Secrets of Enoch, translated from the Slavonic by W. R. Morfill, M.A. 
and edited with Introduction, N otes, and Indices, by R. H. Charles, Oxford, 1896. 


Bonwetsch. Das slawische Henochbuch Abhandlungen der Géttinger Gesellsch. der Wi h. ilol.-hi 
Klasse, Neue Folge, Bd. i, No. 3). Berlin, oe : . 2ST eae 


Harnack. Gesch. der altchristl. Literatur, II, i. 564 sq. 
Charles. Hastings, B. D. i. 708-11. 

Encyc. Bib. i. 225-8. 

Encyc. Britt™ 
Littmann. /ew7sh Encyc. v. 181-2, 


? Observe that men will be specially punished for ill-treatment of animals, lvili. 4-6. 


430 


Li 


(ree ewok Or Vith SkCRETS OF. ENOCH 


A 


Of Enoch’s life and dream. 


THERE was a wise man, a great artificer, and the Lord conceived love for him and received him, 
that he should behold the uppermost dwellings and be an eye-witness of the wise and great and 
inconceivable and immutable realm of God Almighty, of the very wonderful and glorious and bright 
and many-eyed station of the Lord’s servants, and of the inaccessible throne of the Lord, and of the 
degrees and manifestations of the incorporeal hosts, and of the ineffable ministration of the multitude 
of the elements, and of the various apparition and inexpressible singing of the host of Cherubim, and 


of the boundless light. 


A 


At that time, he said, when my 165th year 
was completed, I begat my son Mathusal. After 
this too I lived two hundred years and completed 
of all the years of my life three hundred and sixty- 
2 five years. On the first day of the first month I 

was in my house alone and was resting on my 
3 couch and slept. And when I was asleep, great 

distress came up into my heart, and I was weep- 
ing with my eyes in sleep, and I could not 
understand what this distress was, or what would 
4 happen to me. And there appeared to me two 
men, exceeding big, so that I never saw such on 
5 earth ; their faces were shining like the sun, their 
eyes too were like a burning light, and from their 
lips was fire coming forth twith clothing and 
singing of various kindst in appearance purple, 
their wings were brighter than gold, their hands 
whiter than snow. They were standing at the 
head of my couch and began to call me by my 
6name. And I arose from my sleep and saw 
clearly those two men standing in front of me. 
7 And I saluted them and was seized with fear 
and the appearance of my face was changed from 
8 terror, and those men said to me: ‘ Have courage, 
Enoch, do not fear; the eternal God sent us to 


I. 2, 3. Cf. 1 En, Ixxxili. 3, 5. 
5. faces... Sun. 
eyes, &c. : 
fire coming forth. Cf. Rev. ix. 17; x1. 5. 


kinds’. fie 
various (B), i.e. differing from one another. 
their wings > B. 


Cf. xix. 1; Rev. i. 16; 4 Ezra vii. 97. 

Dan. x. 6: cf. Ezek. i. 13; Rev. i. 14; xix. 12. 

The next clause is corrupt. 
of various kinds (A). The text has razdayaniya = ‘of distribution’. 


whiter than snow. Cf. 1 En. cvi. 2,10; Apoc. Petri. 


7. appearance. . changed. Dan. v. 6, 9, Io. 
8. Have courage. 


do not fear. 


B 


Now behold the books of the secret of God, the 
revelations of Enoch. 


At that time when three hundred and sixty- 11 
five years were fulfilled to me, on a certain day 2 
of the second month I was alone in my house. 

I was in great trouble, weeping with my eyes, 3 
and was resting, asleep on my couch, and there 4 
appeared to me two very big men, such as I have 
never seen on earth—their faces shone like the 5 
sun, their eyes zere like burning candles, out of 
their mouths was fire coming forth, their clothes 
and singing were various, and their arms like 
golden wings—at the head of my couch, and 
called upon me by my name. 


And I having awoken from my sleep and stood 6 
up tat my coucht bowed down to them and 7 
covered my face from terror. 

And the two men spoke to me: ‘ Have courage, 8 
Enoch, do not fear, the Eternal Lord hath sent 


Emend to raz(d)niya = ‘of different 


Cf, Matt. xiv. 27. The LXX renders thus the Hebrew ‘fear not i 
Cf. 2 Kings i. 15; Ezek. ii. 6; 1 En. xv. I. 


431 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH els =m 


A 


thee, and lo! thou shalt to-day ascend with us 

9 into heaven, and thou shalt tell thy sons and all 
thy household all that they shall do without thee 
on earth in thy house, and let no one seek thee 

ro till the Lord return thee to them. And I made 
haste to obey them and went out from my house, 
and made to the doors, as it was ordered me, and 
summoned my sons Mathusal and Regim and 
Gaidad and made known to them all the marvels 
those ex had told me. 

How Enoch 


The Instruction. instructed his 


sons. 


21 Listen to me, my children, I know not whither 

2 I go, or what will befall me; now therefore, my 

children, I tell you: turn not from God before 

the face of the vain, who made not Heaven and 

earth, for these shall perish and those who 

3 worship them, and may the Lord make confident 

4 your hearts in the fear of him. And now, my 

children, let no one think to seek me, until the 
Lord return me to you. 


Of Enoch’s assumption; how the angels took 
him into the first heaven. 


It came to pass, when Enoch had told his sons, 
that the angels took him on to their wings and 
bore him up on to the first heaven and placed 
2him on the clouds. And there I looked, and 

again I looked higher, and saw the ether, and 
3 they placed me on the first heaven and showed 
me a very great Sea, greater than the earthly 
sea. 


31 


Of the Angels ruling the stars. 

They brought before my face the elders and 
rulers of the stellar orders, and showed me two 
hundred angels, who rule the stars and their 
2 services to the heavens, and fly with their wings 

and come round all those who sail. 


41 


ascend with us. 
g. sons. 
Io. Regim. See lvii. 2, 


Cf. iii, 1, &c. 


Gaidad. Gen. iv. 18 (LXX) gives this as the son of the Enoch who is Cain’s grandson. 


II. 1. know not whither. 


Cf. vil. 5. 
2. turn not from God. 


I Sam. xii. 20. 


vain gods ... who made neither heaven nor earth (B). 


ii. 18; Jub. xii. 2, ade 


3. Make confident, &c. Prov. xiv. 26. 








B 


us to thee, behold to-day thou shalt go up with 
us on to the heavens. 

Tell thy sons and thy household all that they 9 
must do in thy house, and let no one seek thee, 
till the Lord return thee to them. 

And I listened and went out, summoned my 10 
sons Mefusailom and Regim, and told them all 
that those two men had spoken to me. 


And behold, my children, I know not whither 2 1 
I go, nor what will befall me, and now, my chil- 2 
dren, turn not away from God, walk before the 
Lord's face and observe his judgements, and bow 
not down to vain gods, to gods who made neither 
heaven nor earth, they shall perish. 

Keep your hearts true to terror of the Lord, 3 
and now, my children, let no one seek me till 4 
the Lord return me to you. 


Enoch’s ascent on to the first heaven. 

And it happened when I had spoken to my 31 
sons, and the two men summoned me, and took 
me on to their wings and carried me up on to the 
first heaven and set me down there, 


and brought 4 1 
me before the face of the elder, the ruler of the 
stellar orders, and he showed me all their courses, 
and their passages from year to year, and he 
showed me two hundred angels, and he showed 
me there a very great sea, greater than the earthly 2 
sea, and angels were flying with their wings. 


I En, Ixxxi. 5, 6; xci. 1 mentions them, but not by name. 


So B rightly omits. 


Cf. Acts xiv. 15; Jer. x. 11 3; also Ps. xcvi. 5; Isa. 


III. 1. In 1 En. xiv. 8 the clouds invite and the winds raise Enoch. 
2. the ether = the firmament of Asc. Isa. vii, 9, i.e. the first heaven. 


3. a very great Sea. Cf, Rev. iv. Olt xven2s 


In Test. Levi ii. 7 this sea lies between the first and second heavens. 


IV. 1, the elders, staréishina = ‘elder ’, 1. one set in command over, 


the rulers of the stellar orders. 


two hundred angels. 


s. For another account of these see 1 En, Ixxxii, 9-18, 20, 
of B, which makes the elder, or special angel, of the stars act as guide to Enoch in the first heaven. 
In 1 En, vi. 5 this is the number of the apostatizing angels. 


Note the divergence 


432 


Tie BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF:ENOCH 5. 1—8, 4 


A | B 
Of how the Angels keep the store-houses of the | 
snow. 
51 And here I looked down and saw the treasure- | He showed me the store-house of cloud, whence 5 1 


houses of the snow, and the angels who keep | it goes up and goes out, and showed me all the 
2 their terrible store-houses, and the clouds whence | treasure-houses of snow and cold, and terrible 


they come out and into which they go. angels guarding the treasure-houses, 


Of the dew and of the olive-oil, and various 
flowers. 


G1 They showed me the treasure-house of the and he6 1 
dew, like oil of the olive, and the appearance of | showed me the treasure-houses of the dew, like 
its form, as of all the flowers of the earth; further | olive oil, and angels guarding their treasure- 
many angels guarding the treasure-houses of | houses, and their clothing like all the flowers of 
these things, and how they are made to shut | the earth. 
and open. 


Of how Enoch was taken on to the second | 
heaven. Enoch’s ascent to the second heaven, 

7 « And those men took me and led me up onto | And the two men placed me ¢hence and carried 7 1 
the second heaven, and showed me darkness, | me up on to the second heaven, and showed me 
greater than earthly darkness, and there I saw | there prisoners kept of the measureless judgement, 
prisoners hanging, watched, awaiting the great | and I saw the condemned weeping, and I spoke 2 

2 and boundless judgement, and these angels were | to the two men who were with me: ‘Wherefore 
dark-looking, more than earthly darkness, and | are these tormented?’ and the two men said to 
incessantly making weeping through all hours, | me: ‘These are the Lord’s apostates, not listen- 3 
and I said to the men who were with me: | ing to the Lord’s voice, but taking counsel of 

3 ‘ Wherefore are these incessantly tortured?’ they | their own will.’ 
answered me: ‘These are God’s apostates, who | 
obeyed not God’s commands, but took counsel 
with their own will, and turned away with their And I was very sorry for them. And the 4 
prince, who also zs fastened on the fifth heaven. angels bowed down to me and said tome: ‘Man 

4 And I felt great pity for them, and they saluted | of God, would that thou mightst pray for us tc. 
me, and said to me: ‘Man of God, pray for us to God !’ 

5 the Lord’; and I answered to them: ‘Who am And I answered them: ‘ Who am I, a mortal 5 
I, a mortal man, that I should pray for angels? | man, that I should pray for angels? who knows 
who knoweth whither I go, or what will befall | whither I go or what will befall me or zo pray 





me? or who will pray for me?’ for me?’ 
Of the assumption of Enoch to the third heaven. The ascent on to the third heaven. 
8: And those men took me thence, and led me And the two men placed me thence and carried 8 1 


up on to the third heaven, and placed me there; | me up on to the third heaven and set me down 


V. 1. treasure-houses of the snow. Job xxxviii, 22; cf. 1 En. Ix. 17, 18—in the second heaven according to 
Test. Levi iil. 2. 
store-house of cloud (B). Cf.1 En. lx. 19. A seems corrupt. 


VI. 1. treasure-house of the dew. Cf. 1 En. Ix. 20, 

VII. 1. darkness... prisoners... watched, awaiting the great and boundless judgement. Cf. 2 Pet. 
ii, 4; Jude 6, and possibly Test. Levi iii. 2, The angels who sinned with women are imprisoned under the earth in 
1 En. x as in 2 En. xviii. 7; those who sinned by ambition are imprisoned in the second heaven. See, however, 
xviii. 4 (note). } ; ; 

3. took counsel with their own will. Cf. Isa. xlvi. Io. 


ir prince = Satanail, xviii. 3. ck Kf 
fith ieeven: These angels had originally been in the fifth heaven, see xvull, But it is hard to see why their 


leader alone should be imprisoned there, when they are reduced to the second. See xxix. 3-5 (notes). 
4. The angels ask Enoch to intercede for them, as in I En. xi. 4. 
Man of God. Deut. xxxi. I. 
5. Cf. 1 En, xv. 2. 


VIII. 1. Paradise is here in the third heaven, as in 2 Cor. xii. 2, 4. 


1105-2 433 F f 


9 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 8, 1—9. 1 


A 


and I looked downwards, and saw the produce 
of these places, such as has never been known for 
2 goodness. And I saw all the sweet-flowering 


B 
in the midst of Paradise, and a place unknown in 


| goodness of appearance. 


trees and beheld their fruits, which were sweet- | 


smelling, and all the foods borne dy them bubbling 
3 with fragrant exhalation. 


Lord rests, when he goes up into paradise; and 
this tree is of ineffable goodness and fragrance, 
4 and adorned more than every existing thing; and 
on all sides z¢ zs in form gold-looking and 
vermilion and fire-like and covers all, and it has 
produce from all fruits. 
5 at the earth’s end. 
corruptibility and _ incorruptibility. 
springs come out which send forth honey and 
milk, and their springs send forth oil and wine, 
and they separate into four parts, and go round 
6 with quiet course, and go down into the paradise 
of Eden, between corruptibility and incorrupti- 


And in the midst of | 


the trees that of life, in that place whereon the | \ 
| place, at which God rests when he goes up into 


Its root is in the garden | 
And paradise is between | 
And two | 


bility. And thence they go forth along the earth, | 


and havea revolution to their circle even as other | 
And here there is no unfruitful tree, | 


7 elements. 

8 and every place is blessed. And ¢here are three 
hundred angels very bright, who keep the garden, 
and with incessant sweet singing and never-silent 
voices serve the Lord throughout all days and 
hours. And I said: ‘How very sweet is this 
place, and those men said to me: 


_ The showing to Enoch of the place of the 
righteous and compassionate. 


= 


righteous, who endure all manner of offence from 
those that exasperate their souls, who avert their 
eyes from iniquity, and make righteous judge- 
ment, and give bread to the hungering, and cover 
the naked with clothing, and raise up the fallen, 
and help injured orphans, and who walk without 
fault before the face of the Lord, and serve him 


unknown in goodness of appearance (B), 

2. all the sweet-flowering trees, &c. 
all the foods. 

3. in the midst of the trees that of life. 
Jewish Apocalypse cf. 1 En. xxv. 4, 5; Rev. ii. 7 
Iren. i.5,2. Epiphanius, Hae. 66, p. 
in that place whereon the Lord rests. 


This place, O Enoch, is prepared for the | 
| Enoch, is prepared for the righteous, who suffer 





i 


Cf, Gen. tgs a En, six 
Cf. ‘twelve manner of fruits ’, Rev. xxii. 2. 

For the ‘tree of life’ see Gen. ii. 9. For this familiar feature in 
; xxii, 2, 143 4 Ezra vii. 53; viii. 52; Test. Levi xviii. 11. 
278, bans the doctrine as Manichaean. 


Every tree sweet-flowering, every fruit ripe, all 2 
manner of food perpetually bubbling with all 
pleasant smells, and four rivers flowing by with 
quiet course, and every growth is good, bearing 
fruit for food, and the tree of life is at that 3 


Paradise, and that tree is ineffable for the good- 


_ ness of its sweet scent, and another olive tree 5 


alongside was always discharging the oil of its 
fruit. 


And there is no tree there without fruit, and 7 
every tree is blessed. And the angels guarding 8 
the Paradise are very bright and serve the Lord 
all days with incessant voice and sweet singing. 


‘And I said : ‘How very sweet is this place !’ 


And the two men answered me: ‘ This place, 


offence in their lives and spite in their souls, and 
avert their eyes from injustice and make righteous 
judgement, to give bread to the hungering, to 
clothe the naked and cover them with a garment, 
to raise the fallen, and help the wronged, who 
walk before God’s face and serve him alone ; now 


i.e, the like of which is not known anywhere else. 


2; Apoc. Mosis xxxviii. 4. 


See also 


91 


Cf. Apoc. Pauli (ed. Tisch., p. 64) d€vdpor mappeyebn @paiov, év & émava- 
kal 6 Opdvos rod cod Smov Hv TO Evdov THs Cons everpenicero, 


maveto 7) mvedpa Gytov, and Apoc. Mosis xxii. 4 
“the ends of the earth,’ 1 En. xxxiii, it 


5. between corruptibility and incorruptibility, i.e. at the earth’s end. Cf, 
to which Enoch proceeds from the garden of righteousness. 
four rivers (B). These are taken over into the Apoc. Pauli (ed. Tisch., p. 52), and also into the Koran xlvii, where, 
however, a river of incorruptible water replaces the river of oil. The writer seems to be bringing into one organic 
conception what were originally two different conceptions—the earthly and the heavenly Paradise. The former was 
the older idea: Gen. ii, 8-17; 1 En, xxxii. 3-6; Ixxvii. 3. The latter occurs in 1 En, lx, 8, bin ix, 19. 
another olive tree (B). Cf. xxii. 8 ; Evang. Nicod. ii. 3. 


IX. I. prepared for the righteous. Cf. Matt. xxv. 34; also r En, Ix, 8 (note), 
avert their eyes from iniquity. Ps, cxix, 37. 
make righteous judgement. Ezek. xviii. 8. 
give bread, &c. Ezek. xviii. 7; cf. Tob. iv. 16; 4 Ezra ii, 20; 
help injured orphans. Cf, Isa. i. WS NOBEL Sy 116) 
walk without fault. Luke i, 6, 


Or, Sibyll. ii, 83 ; viii, 404-5 and esp. Matt. xxv. 35-9, 


434 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 9. 1—I0. 6 
A B 


alone, and for them is prepared this place for | for these is this place prepared for an eternal 
eternal inheritance. inheritance.’ 


Here they showed Enoch the terrible place and 
various tortures. 


10: And those two men led me up on to the And the two men lifted me up thence, and 10 1 * 

Northern side, and showed me there a very | carried me up to the north of the heaven, and 

2 terrible place, and there were all manner of | showed me there a very terrible place, all torture 
tortures in that place: cruel darkness and un- | and torment ; at that place there was darkness 2 
illumined gloom, and there is no light there, but | and gloom, and there is no light there, but fire 
murky fire constantly flameth aloft, and ¢here is | and flame, and obscurity comes down at that 
a fiery river coming forth, and that whole place | place and there zs cold and ice and dungeons, and 3 
is everywhere fire, and everywhere ¢here zs frost | cruel relentless angels carrying arms and _tor- 

3 and ice, thirst and shivering, while the bonds are | menting without mercy. 
very cruel, and the angels fearful and merciless, 
bearing angry weapons, merciless torture,and I And I said: ‘ How very terrible is this place. 4 

4 said: ‘ Woe, woe, how very terrible is this place, And the two men answered me: ‘This place, 
and those men said tome: This place,O Enoch, | Enoch, is prepared for the dishonest, that work 
is prepared for those who dishonour God, who | godless things on earth, who make witchcraft 
on earth practise sin against nature, which is | and sorcery and boast of their works, who steal 5 
child-corruption after the sodomitic fashion, | men’s souls secretly, who sever a binding yoke, 
magic-making, enchantments and devilish witch- | who grow rich by doing violence, from the pro- 
crafts, and who boast of their wicked deeds, | perty of the others, who being able to feed, kill 

5 stealing, lies, calumnies, envy, rancour, fornica- the hungering through famine, and being able to 
tion, murder, and who. accursed, steal the souls | clothe the naked, took away their clothes, who 
of men, who, seeing the poor take away their recognized not their creator, but bowed down to 
goods and themselves wax rich, injuring them | vain gods: for all these is this place prepared 
for other men’s goods ; who being able to satisfy | for an eternal inheritance.’ 
the empty, made the hungering to die; being 

6 able to clothe, stripped the naked; and who 
knew not their creator, and bowed down to 
soulless (sc. lifeless) Gods, who cannot see nor 
hear, vain gods, who also built hewn images and 
bow down to unclean handiwork, for all these is 
prepared this place amongst these, for eternal 
inheritance. 


an 





eternal inheritance. Cf. Heb. ix. 15. 


X. 1-6. The idea of evil in heaven is foreign to modern thought, but we find Satan presenting himself in 
heaven in Job i. 7, 8, while Eph, vi. 12 speaks of ‘the spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places’. Rev. xil. 
7, 8, 9 represents the end of this state of things. Satan is cast down and henceforth limited to the earth, xii. 12. 
The older view is found in Test. Isaac 146, 147; Test. Jacob 153, but was later banished from both Christian and 
Jewish thought. o 

2, darkness, &c. Cf. Apoc. Petri 12; Apoc. Pauli, pp. 57 and 62. 

gloom (B). ’g/a can also mean fog. 

fiery river. In 1 En, xiv. 19; Dan, vii. 10 this idea is connected with God’s holiness, but here it connotes 
punishment, like the Greek Pyripnlegethon. Cf. Rev. xix. 20; xx. 10, 14, 15; xxi. 8; Or. Sibyll. ii. 196-200, 252-3, 
286; iii. 843 vill. 411; Apoc. Petri 8; Apoc. Pauli, p. 57. Clem. Alex. Exc. Theod, 38 combines the two ideas. 

fire... and frost andice. Cf. 1 En. xiv. 13, where God’s dwelling is described. 

3. For angels of destruction, cf. 2 Sam. xxiv. 16; 2 Kings xix. 35; 1 Chron. Xxi. 15; and probably Sirach xxxix. 28. 
Int En. lili. 3, 4; lvi. 15 Ixii, 115 Ixiii. 1, a class of evil angels whose sole function is to punish first appears, and the 
idea seems already a familiar one. Cf. Rev. ix. 11, 15 (Apollyon) ; xvi. In Matt. xiii. 49, however, good angels cast 
the wicked into the furnace of fire. For later occurrences of the view cf. Test. Levi iii. 3; Apoc. Petri 6, 8. Test. 
Abraham A. xii follows our text closely. 

4. prepared, &c. Contrast Matt. xxv. 41. f 

4, 5. For the sins cf. Rev. xxi. 8; Apoc. Petri 17; Test. Isaac (ed. James, p. 148). One is too gross to appear in 
the text. re 

5. souls of men. Cf. Rev. xviil. 13. he : wn 

6. Cf. Lev. xix. 45 xxvi. 13 Or. Sibyll. v. 77-85 ; vill. 378-81 ; 395-8 ; Fragut. i. 20-2; iil. 21-45. 


iP) 


435 Bt 


11 


12 


I 


nN 


Ww 


a 


~t 


nN 


[S>) 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH Iiyi-=i233 


A 
Here they took Enoch up on to the fourth 
heaven where is the course of sun and 
moon. 


Those men took me, and led me up on to the 
fourth heaven, and showed me all the successive 
goings, and all the rays of the light of sun and 
moon. And I measured their goings, and com- 
pared their light, and saw that the sun’s light is 
greater than the moon’s. Its circle and the 
wheels on which it goes always, like a wind 
going past with very marvellous speed, and day 
and night it has no rest. Its passage and return 
are accompanied by four great stars, awd each 
star has under it a thousand stars, to the right 
of the sun’s wheel, avd dy four to the left, each 
having under it a thousand stars, altogether eight 
thousand, issuing with the sun continually. And 
by day fifteen myriads of angels attend it, and 
by night a thousand. And six-winged ones 
issue with the angels before the sun’s wheel into 
the fiery flames, and a hundred angels kindle 
the sun and set it alight. 


Of the very marvellous elements of the sun. 


And I looked and saw other flying elements 
of the sun, whose names ave Phoenixes and 
Chalkydri, marvellous and wonderful, with feet 
and tails in the form of a lion, and a crocodile’s 
head, their appearance zs empurpled, like the 
rainbow ; their size zs nine hundred measures, 
their wings are like those of angels, each has 
twelve, and they attend and accompany the sun, 
bearing heat and dew, as it is ordered them from 
God. Thus ¢he sun revolves and goes, and rises 
under the heaven, and its course goes under the 
earth with the light of its rays incessantly. 

XI. 1. fourth heaven. 
and Michael who offered daily sacrifice. 

the successive goings .. . of sun and moon. 
2. The sun has sevenfold more light, &c. (B). 

the wheels (‘the chariots’, B). 

dav and night it has no rest. 

3, 4. Not in 1 En. e BRowrseet 567: Paratan 

be Ct. t En, Ixxy, 4. 


XII. 1. Phoenixes and Chalkydri. 





This is the only reference to these creatures in literature. 


B 


Enoch’s ascent on to the fourth heaven. 


And the two men lifted me up thence, and 111 
carried me up on to the fourth heaven, and showed 
me all the courses and goings and all the rays of 
the light both of the sun and of the moon, their 
measurements and their goings, and I saw their 
goings. 

The sun has sevenfold more light than the 2 
moon and their circles are the chariots on which 
each of them rides just as the wind goes, and ever 
going and returning they have rest neither by 
day nor by night. 

And / saw four great stars on the right of 3 
the sun’s chariot and four on the left going with 4 
the sun always, and angels going before the sun’s 
chariot. 


Flying spirits, each having twelve wings, and 12 x 
each of the angels that rolls the chariot has twelve 
wings, carrying dew and heat, when the Lord 
commands them to descend on to the earth with 
the sun’s rays. 


This, according to Chagiga 12", contained the heavenly Jerusalem, the temple, the altar, 


Cf. 1 En, Ixxii-ixxviii. 
Ciatehae xsi 372 
Cf. 1 En. Lxxii, 5, Ixxiii. 2, Ixxv. 3, Ixxxii, 8. 
i nod 7. lx xiis7. 


The phoenix was 


always solitary, Tac. Az, vi, 28. Jewish authorities find a reference to the phoenix in Job xxix. 18, where they render 
21ND ‘as the phoenix’ and not ‘as the sand’, The fable was believed in by 1 Clem. ad Cor. xxv; Tertullian, de Res. 


Carn, xiii, &c. 


phoenix is, e.g. a ‘ satelles Phoebi’ (33, cf. xii. 2 here), it 


Chixvesie 


The poem De Phoenice of the pseudo-Lactantius has many apparent references to our text. The 
: t greets the sun at rising (43-50) and claps its wings (51-4). 
For the two different legends in the Talmud about the phoenix’s origin see Hamburger, &.-£. fiir den 
Lalmud, 5o8-9, and on the question generally, Lightfoot, &c., on 1 Clem. ad Cor. 


XXV. 


Chalkydri, seemingly a transliteration of XaAxidpar, brazen hydras or serpents. These are classed with the 
Cherubim in 1 En, xx. 7,and so = the Seraphim of Isa. vi. 2,6. These then were perhaps conceived as winged dragons, 


as the analogy of the animal-like forms of the Cherubim in Ezek. i. 5-11 would lead us to suppose. 
an object of reverence or a symbol of healing occurs in Num. xxi. 8, 
in a physically bad sense in Num. xxi. 6; Deut. viii. 15; Isa. xiv. 29, xxx. 6 


in Rev. xii. 9. 
in the four living creatures of Rev. iv. 6-8. 
feet and tails ... of a lion. 


‘ us The Serpent as 
2 Kings xviii. 4; Matt. x. 16; John iii. 14; 
; and morally as a designation of Satan 


9; 


It is significant that neither Cherubim nor Seraphim occur in the N.T.; their characteristics are fused 


The Cherubim’s feet in Ezek. i. 7 are like calves? feet. 


2. each has twelve, i.e. twice as many wings as the angel of xi. 4. 


bearing heat and dew. Contrast 1 En. Ix. 20.. 

3. goes under the earth. 
fourth heaven. See xiv, 2 (note). 

incessantly. Cf. ‘always’, xi. 2. 


This seems to conflict with xxx. 3, where the sun’s goings would appear to be in the 


436 


Pie ebook Ory THE SECRETS OF ENOCH -18/ 21542 


A 


The angels took Enoch and placed him in the 
east at the sun’s gates. | 


Those men bore me away to the east, and 
placed me at the sun’s gates, where the sun goes 
forth according to the regulation of the seasons 
and the circuit of the months of the whole year, 
and the number of the fhours} day and night. 
2 And I saw six gates open, each gate having 

sixty-one stadia and a quarter of one stadium, 

and I measured ¢hem truly, and understood their 

size Zo be so much, through which the sun goes 

forth, and goes to the west, and is made even, 
4 and rises throughout all the months, and turns 

back again from the six gates according to the 
5 succession of the seasons; thus. the period of the 
whole year is finished after the returns of the four 
seasons. 


13: 


They took Enoch to the West. 


And again those men led me away to the 
western parts, and showed me six great gates 
open corresponding to the Eastern gates, opposite 
to where the sun sets, according to the number 
of the days three hundred and sixty-five and a 
2 quarter. Thus again it goes down to the western 

gates, and draws away its light, the greatness of 

its brightness, under the earth; for since the 

crown of its shining is in heaven with the Lord, 
3 and guarded by four hundred angels, while the 
sun goes round on wheel under the earth, and 
stands seven great hours in night, and spends 
half z¢s course under the earth, when it comes to 
the eastern approach in the eighth hour of the 
night, it brings its lights, and the crown of 
shining, and the sun flames forth more than fire. 


14: 


The elements of the sun, the Phoenixes and 
Chalkydri broke into song. 


Then the elements of the sun, called Phoenixes 
and Chalkydri break into song, therefore every 
bird flutters with its wings, rejoicing at the giver 
of light, and they broke into song at the 
command of the Lord. 

2 The giver of light comes to give brightness to 


15:1 


XIII. 1. the sun’s gates, i.e. the six of the next verse. 


this chapter. 
2-5. Corrupt. 


5. four seasons. Cf, xl. 6. 


XIV. 1. three hundred and sixty-five and a quarter. 


but refused to recognize it from national prejudice. 


2. In t En. Ixxii. 5 the sun returns after sunset through the north to the east to rise again. 
during the night the sun, which revolves through the fourth heaven xi, xxx. 3, goes under the earth. 
light at night, as its crown is taken from it, and its own I}: 
The crown 1 


Light of the Universe, Apoc. Mosis xxxvi. 3. 


3. stands. We should expect “ceases from shining’; 


see why there should be sevev hours. 


XV. 1. See xii. 1 (note). ; 
therefore every bird . . . light. 





B 


And the two men carried me to the East of 13 1 
the heaven and showed me the gates through 
which the sun goes up at the appointed seasons 
and after the completion of every month and 
after the shortening to the lengthening of the days 
and nights, six great gates, and the greatness of 2 
the proportions of those gates, and I could not 
comprehend their greatness; and of those through 
which the sun goes up and goes over to the West 3 
through the first gates it goes out forty-two 
days, through the second gates thirty-five, 
through the fourth gates thirty-five days, through 
the fifth thirty-five, through the sixth gates . 
at the going out of the season the years finish at 5 
the returns of the seasons. 


And the two men carried me up to the West 141 
of the heaven and showed me six great open 
gates after the Eastern entrance and opposite it, 
through which (sc. gates) the sun goes down there 
after the going up from the Eastern gates and 
according to the number of days, thus it goes down 2 
through the Western gates. When it goes out 
from the Western gates, four angels take the crown 
and carry it up to the Lord, and the sun turns its 3 
chariot and goes out without light, and they put 
the crown on it again a¢ the Eastern gates. 


Cf. 1 En, Iyxii. 2-37, which is no doubt the original of 


Two of the four are dealt with in 1 En. Ixxxii. 15-20. 


The writer of 1 En. Ixxii-Ixxxii knew of the solar year, 


In our text, however, 
It is without 


ght is under the earth. The sun cannot shine before the 
s the added light bestowed by God. 

B has ‘goes without light’. ; 
spends half its course, i.e. apparently the seven hours, which are not hours of fixed duration. 


But it is hard to 


A parenthetic reference to the songs of birds at sunrise. 


437 


16 


w 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 15. 2—I16. 6 


A 


the whole world, and the morning guard takes 
shape, which is the rays of the sun, and the sun 
of the earth goes out, and receives its brightness 
to light up the whole face of the earth, and they 
showed me this calculation of the sun’s going. 
And the gates which it enters, these are the 
great gates of the computation of the hours} 
of the year; for this reason the sun is a great 
creation, whose circuit das¢s twenty-eight years, 
and begins again from the beginning. 


~ 


They took Enoch and again placed him in the 
east at the course of the moon. 

t Those men showed me the other course, that 
of the moon, twelve great gates, crowned from 
west to east, by which the moon goes in and out 
of the customary times. It goes in at the first 
gate to the western places of the sun, by the first 
gates with ¢/zrty-one days exactly, by the second 
gates with thirty-one days exactly, by the third 
with thirty days exactly, by the fourth with 
thirty days exactly, by the fifth with thirty-one 
days exactly, by the sixth with thirty-one days 
exactly, by the seventh with thirty days exactly, 
by the eighth with thirty-one days perfectly, by 
the ninth with thirty-one days exactly, by the 
tenth with thirty days perfectly, by the eleventh 
with thirty-one days exactly, by the twelfth with 
3 twenty-eight days exactly. And it goes through 

the western gates in the order and number of the 
4 eastern, and accomplishes the three hundred and 


to 


sixty-five and a quarter days of the solar year, | 


5 while the lunar year has three hundred and fifty- 
four, and there are wanting ¢o 7¢ twelve days of 
the solar circle, which are the lunar epacts of 
the whole year. [Thus, too, the great circle con- 
6 tains five hundred and thirty-two years.] The 
quarter of a day is omitted for three years, the 
fourth fulfils zt exactly. Therefore they are taken 
outside of heaven for three years and are not 
added to the number of days, because they 


XVI. 1. Twelve great gates. 


2. This account cannot possibly apply to the moon, but a 


B 


The two angels showed me this disposition of 15 3 


the gates by which it goes up and goes out. 
These gates the Lord made for the taking of time 
and counting of the years for the sun. 


And they showed me the other lunar disposi- 
tion, all its courses, and the two men pointed 
out to me all its circuits, and they pointed out 
to me its gates, twelve eternal gates to the East, 
through which the moon enters at the usual 
seasons, thus also through the Western gates 
after going round and according to the number 
of the Eastern gates. 


Thus it goes down also through the Western 
gates, and completes the year; therefore it goes 
in the year with three hundred and sixty-four 
days complete, and therefore it is called outside 
heaven, and the years are not reckoned in the 
number of the days, because the seasons of the 
year change. 


These are the same as the gates of the sun in Xdli, Xiv. 
pplies perfectly to the sun, which must therefore be - 


understood as the subject. The numbers when added together = 365, which accords with the statement in verse 4 


that a solar year = 3651 days, while in verse 
5. 364 days complete (8B). 
twelve days. More exactly ii}. 


[Thus, too, the great cycle contains five hundred and thirty-two years]. 
They arose obviously from a marginal gloss. The writer in this 
t 532 years is produced by multiplying 
This great cycle is called the Dionysian or 
espect of the new moons and the dominical letters, it is 
ble and immovable feasts would occur on the same d 
year of the preceding cycle. 
It is obvious that any reference to such a cycle here is an intrusion. 


they have no real connexion with the context. 
chapter does not get beyond the Metonic cycle, 


Great Paschal Period. 


the week and month as in the corresponding 
of Aquitaine, c. A.D, 457- 
6. the quarter, &c. Explanation of leap year. 
because theyt change the time, &c. 

7. with its light (B). 
Ixxiii ; ‘ to the lights’ (A) seems meaningless. 


whereas the great cycle of 
together the Metonic cycle of 19 years and the Solar cycle of 28 years. 
As it includes all the variations in r 
consequently a period in which Easter and all the mova 


5 we proceed to the lunar year which amounts to 354 days. 
This seems to be an error for 354 (A). 


I have bracketed these words as 


3 


: c. Hopelessly corrupt. 
This seems to imply that her light is not borrowed from the sun as is ta 


438 


; ay of 
This cycle was first proposed by Victorius 


ught in I En. 


161 


2 


3 


~ 
oO 


6 


7 


8 


17: 


18: 


iS} 


Lo) 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 16. 6—18; 3 
A | B 


tchange the time of the years to two new months | 
towards completion, to two others towards | 
diminutionf. And when the western gates are | And when they +finish the West 

finished, it returns and goes to the eastern to the | gates and it goes catered Eastern ith Te 
lights, and goes thus day and night about the oht ete ir 
heavenly circles, lower than all circles, swifter Bhi their circle goes around like the heaven 
than the heavenly winds, and spirits and elements | and their chariot, on to which the wind mounts 


Be angels flying ; each angel has six wings. It | in its course, and flying spirits draw along their 
as a sevenfold course in nineteen years. chariot, six wings to each angel 


Of the singings of the angels, which it is im- 
possible to describe. This is the lunar disposition. 


In the midst of the heavens I saw armed ; And in the midst of the heaven I saw armed 
soldiers, serving the Lord, with tympana and | troops serving the Lord on cymbals and organs 
organs, with incessant voice, with sweet voice, | with incessant voice. And I was delighted listen- 
with sweet and incessant vorce and various sing- | ing to them. 
ing, which it is impossible to describe, and which 
astonishes every mind, so wonderful and marvel- 
lous is the singing of those angels, and I was 
delighted listening to it. 


Of the taking of Enoch on to the fifth heaven. Enoch’s ascent on to the fifth heaven. 


The men took me on to the fifth heaven and And the men carried me up on to the fifth 
placed me, and there I saw many and countless | heaven, and I saw there many troops, Egoroi, and 
soldiers, called Grigori, of humai appearance, | their appearance was like the human appearance 


and their size was greater than that of great | and their size greater than that of great giants 
giants 








A 
and their faces withered, and the silence of their mouths perpetual, and there was no service on the 
fifth heaven, and I said to the men who were with me: ‘ Wherefore are these very withered and 
their faces melancholy, and their mouths silent, and wherefore is there no service on this heaven ?’ 
And they said to me: These are the Grigori, who with their prince Satanail rejected the Lord of 


each angel has six wings. The moon’s attendant angels have szx wings, as the sun’s attendant creatures had 
twelve (xii. 2). 

8. The reference is to the Metonic cycle, which consists of a period of nineteen solar years, after which the new moons 
happen on the same days of the year once more. As nineteen solar years = 6,939:186 days = 235 lunar months = 
nineteen lunar years and seven months, the solar and lunar years can be reconciled by intercalating seven lunar 
months at the close of the 5th, 8th, 11th, 13th, 16th, and 19th years of the cycle. 


XVII. armed soldiers. The purpose for which they are armed is given in Test. Levi iii. 3, where, however, they 
are in the third heaven, not the fourth. They are ray6évres eis npépay xpicews, morjoat exdiknow év Tois mvEevpact THS mays 
kat Tov BeAiap. 

serving the Lord... various singing. ‘This is the function assigned by Test. Levi iii. 8 to the inhabitants 
of the fourth heaven .. . év 6 det duvor 7 Oe mporpépovrar. Note the dittography ‘ with sweet and incessant (voice) ’. 

XVIII. 1. fifth heaven. Our text and Test. Levi iii. 7 differ absolutely as to the inhabitants of the fifth heaven. 
According to the latter the inhabitants are of dyyedor of héepovres Tas dmokpicets Tois dyyédous TOD MpoTarov kupiov. This 
view, however, seems limited to the Test. Levi, whereas we find in Cag. 12” the same view expressed as here: i.e. in 
Nyd the fifth heaven are to be found ‘hosts of angels praising God by night, but keeping silent by day that God may 
hear the praises of Israel.’ The latter clause is a late Rabbinic idea. Again, in Clem. Alex. Strom. V. 11.77, we find 
a fragment of the Apocalypse of Zephaniah which supports, and in all probability is based on, our text: dip ovx Spore 
radra Tois t7d Sopovia AexGcior Tod mpopyrov; Kat dvédaBév pe mvedpa Kal dynveyxev pe eis odpavdy meumTov kat éOempovv 
dyyeAous Kaovpevovs Kuptous . . . buvourras Bedy Gppytor wyuorov. This Apocalypse 1s extant in Thebaic in a fragmentary 
condition, but these fragments do not contain the passage just quoted. 

Grigori. These are the Watchers, the ’Eypryopor, or DYY, of whom we have so full accounts in 1 En. yi-xvi, 
xix, Ixxxvi. ; ; 

3. The Grigori. These are the angels whose brethren rebelled and were confined in the second heaven, See 
vi. 3 (note). These Watchers rebelled against God before the angels were tempted to sin with the daughters of men. 
In other words, we have here the agents of the original revolt in heaven, the Satans ; and their leader is naturally 
named Satanail. These existed as evil agencies before the fall of the angels; for in 1 En. liv. 6 the guilt of the 
latter consisted in becoming subject to Satan. See I En. xl. 7 (note). The myth here, however, varies somewhat 
from that in 1 En. vi-xvi. The leaders in 1 En. yi-xvi are not Satans, but ‘ Watchers’, like their followers. In I En. 
Ixix, however, we have an account which harmonizes with our text. There we see that the superior angels had 


439 


7 


17 £ 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 18. 4—19: 3 
~ 


4 light, and after them are those who are held in great darkness on the second heaven, and three of 
them went down on to earth from the Lord’s throne, to the place Ermon, and broke through their 
vows on the shoulder of the hill Ermon and saw the daughters of men how good they are, and took 

5 to themselves wives, and befouled the earth with their deeds, who in all times of their age made 

6 lawlessness and mixing, and giants are born and marvellous big men and great enmity. And 
therefore God judged them with great judgement, and they weep for their brethren and they will be 

7 punished on the Lord’s great day. And I said to the Grigori: ‘I saw your brethren and their 
works, and their great torments, and I prayed for them, but the Lord has condemned them #0 be 

8 under earth till heaven and earth shall end for ever.’ And I said: ‘Wherefore do you wait, brethren, 
and do not serve before the Lord’s face, and have not put your services before the Lord’s face, lest 
you anger your Lord utterly?’ 

9 And they listened to my admonition, and spoke to the four ranks in heaven, and lo! as I stood 
with those two men four trumpets trumpeted together with great voice, and the Grigori broke into 
song with one voice, and their voice went up before the Lord pitifully and affectingly. 


Tas B 
Of the taking of Enoch on to the sixth heaven. 
19: And thence those men took me and bore me 
up on to the sixth heaven, and there I saw seven | carried me up on to the sixth heaven, and I saw 
bands of angels, very bright and very glorious, there seven ranks of angels very bright and 
and their faces shining more than the sun’s glorious, their faces shining like the sun, and 
shining, glistening, and there is no difference in there is no difference in ¢heir faces, nor in their 
2 their faces, or behaviour, or manner of dress; and extent, nor in the composition of zhezr clothes. 
these make the orders, and learn the goings of These organize and learn the good ordering of 2 
the stars, and the alteration of the moon, or | the world and the goings of the stars, of the sun 
revolution of the sun, and the good government | and of the moon. 
3 of the world. And when they see evil-doing | Angels, angels, these heavenly angels harmo- 3 


And the two men took me from thence, they 19 1 


rebelled before the creation of Adam; that they had tempted Eve and brought about the fall of the angels in the 
days of Jared. Thus, in 1 En, lxix and here, the leaders of the angels who fell in Jared’s days are Satans. This 
is practically the view of portions of the Talmud. See Weber, pp. 211, 243, 244. 

who with their prince Satanail. Quoted in Test, Dan v. 5,6... dv myevpatwr tis Tovnpias. ‘Avéyywv yap év 
BiBA@ “Evex rov Sixaiov ... dru 6 dpxov bpav 6 Saravas early (tpav is corrupt for atrév). Our text can hardly mean that 
all the Watchers rebelled, but only that it was from the class of the Watchers that the rebels proceeded. It is indeed 
possible that the writer’s scheme may differ from the conception we have given above, and be as follows. The 
rebellious Watchers, with their prince Satanail, are confined to the fifth heaven. The subordinate angels (‘after 
them ’) who followed them (? = ‘the order that was under him, xxix. 4) are imprisoned in the second heaven, whereas 
the Watchers who went further and descended to earth and sinned with women are imprisoned under the earth. 
This view is very attractive, but raises more difficulties than the one we have followed. The MSS. reading Jifth in 
vii. 3 does indeed favour it, but for ‘prince who’ in that verse we must read ‘prince and leaders who’. The main 
objections, however, lie in xviii. 8, 9, and in vii. 3 where the prisoners of the second heaven are clearly identified 
with the fallen Watchers. In xxix. 4, 5 Satanail with his angels is cast down from heaven, to the air, above the abyss. 

4. after them (A), i.e. of the same sort as they. 

three. According to 1 En. ix. 6 the leader was Azazel, or vi. 3, ix. 7 Semjaza; Jalkut Schim, Beresch. 44 gives 
Assael and Semjaza. 
Ermon. See 1 En. vi. 2-6. 
broke through their vows. Hermon means a place of cursing or vowing. We should expect ‘bound 
themselves by mutual vows’ as in 1 En. vi. 5. 
Solan, X18, Villy 2 
6. 1 En. x. 4-15. 
they will be punished. Not those who weep, but the lustful Watchers are punished. 

7. There is some confusion in this verse. Enoch has seen in vii the rebellious Watchers in torment in the second 
heaven, but here he proceeds to refer to the lustful Watchers punished under the earth. We have not had an account 
of his journey thither. 

I prayed for them. See vii. 5 (note). 

8, 9. The Watchers are silent out of sympathy for their fallen brethren, and at Enoch’s rebuke they resume their 

worship, but with sadness. 


6 


XIX. 1. This account of the sixth heaven disagrees more or less with that of Test. Levi iii. 5, 6, with that of 
Chag. 12°, and with the colourless account in Asc. Is. 

_ there is no difference in their faces, &c. Asc. viii. 16 ‘Omnium una species et gloria aequalis’ seems to be 
derived from our text, as it emphasizes the differences in glory between the angelic orders in each of the first five 
heavens, and emphasizes no less the equality in glory of all the angels of the sixth heaven. (Cf.-Ase. Is. viii. 5-7.) 

2. The heavenly bodies are under Uriel in 1 En, Ixxii-lxxxii, 


440 


20 


THE COO Or rHE SECRETS OF ENOCH 19, 4-20. 3 


A 


ie 


they make commandments and instruction, and | nize all the heavenly life, organize the commands, 


sweet and loud singing, and all songs of praise. 


teachings and euphony, and singing and every 


These are the archangels who are above angels, | glorious praise. 

4 measure all life in heaven and on earth, and the And those angels that rule over the seasons 4 
angels who are appointed over seasons and years, | and the years, and the angels that are over rivers 
the angels who are over rivers and sea, and who | and seas, and the angels that are over the fruit 
are over the fruits of the earth, and the angels | and grass and everything bubbling (szc), and 5 
who are over every grass, giving food to all, to | angels wo organize all the life of all people and 

5 every living thing, and the angels who write all | write before the Lord’s face. 


the souls of men, and all their deeds, and their 


6 lives before the Lord’s face; in their midst are In their midst seven phoenixes, seven cherubim, 6 
six Phoenixes and six Cherubim and six six- | and seven six-winged ones, voicing and singing to 
winged ones continually with one voice singing | each other as one, and it is impossible to describe 


one voice, and it is not possible 


to describe their | their singing, and the Lord rejoices in his foot- 


singing, and they rejoice tbefore the Lordy} at | stool. 


his footstool. 


-Hence they took Enoch into the 
x 


seventh Heaven. Enoch’s ascent on to the Seventh Heaven. 


And those two men lifted me up thence on to And the two men lifted me up thence and 20 1 


the seventh Heaven, and I saw there a very great | carried me up on to the seventh heaven. And 
light, and fiery troops of great archangels, in- | I saw there a great light and all the fiery troops 
corporeal forces, and dominions, orders and | of incorporeal archangels and the shining station 
governments, cherubim and seraphim, thrones | of the Ostanim, and I became afraid and began 
and many-eyed ones, nine regiments, the Ioanit | to tremble. 


stations of light, and I became afraid, and began And the two men put me in the midst of them, 2 
2 to tremble with great terror, and those men took | saying to me: ‘ Have courage, Enoch, fear not.’ 
me, and led me after them, and said to me: They showed me from afar the Lord sitting on 3 


3 ‘ Have courage, Enoch, do not fear,’ and showed | his throne, and all the heavenly troops in com- 
me the Lord from afar, sitting on His very high | panies stepping on to the steps and they kept 
throne. For what is there on the tenth heaven, | bowing down to the Lord, and would then walk 4 


since the Lord dwells here? 


On the tenth | away and go to their places in joy and happiness 


. heaven is God, in the Hebrew tongue he is called | and in immeasurable light ; 


Aravat./ And all the heavenly troops would 





4. Subordinate spirits are over these natural objects in 1 En. Ix. Cf. 1 En. Ixxxil. 13; Rev. ix. 14, xvi. 5. 


bubbling (B.), lit. ‘boiling’, i.e. 


‘ gushing forth’, ‘abundant’. 


5. Raphael’s function in 1 En, xx. 3. : ' ; 
6. six six-winged ones. i.e. Seraphim, cf. xii. 1 (notes). Note that Cherubim and Seraphim are also in the seventh 
heaven. Chag. 12” places Seraphim, Ophannim, and Chajjoth, and other angels of service in the seventh heaven. Test. 


Levi iii. 5 agrees with this verse, and 
one voice. A dittography. 


places in the sixth heaven apxayyeXor of NecroupyouvTes. 


XX. 1. With this description of the heavenly hosts, cf. Isa. vi; Ezek. i; 1 En. xiv. 9-17, Ixxi. 7-9; Rev. iv. For 


Chag. 12” see xix. 6 (note). But this 


account can well compare for grandeur with any of the above. 


dominions, orders, and governments... thrones. So exactly Col. i. 16 «tre Opdvor cite KUpLoTHTES eLTE 
dpxai cire eEovoia. Cf. Eph. i. 21 apxis Kat é€ovotas kat Suvdpews Kai Kupidrnros : also Rom. viii. 38; Eph. ii. 10, 15 ; 


1 Pet. ii. 22; 1 En. lx. 10. 


many-eyed. Seems to be derived from Ezek. x. 12. These are the Ophannim. Cf. 1 En. lxi. 10, and B here. 
nine regiments. We must read ‘ten’, to agree with ver. 3, where there are ten grades corresponding to the ten 


steps. 


Ioanit stations of light. Apparently some reference to the Apocalypse of John. 
I became afraid, &c. 1 En. xiv. 14. 


2. Have courage, &c. Cf. i. 8. 


3. the Lord . . . on His very high throne. Isa. vi. 1; 1 En. xiv. 20; Rev. X1x. 4. 
tenth heaven. Cf. xxi. 6 (note), xxii. 1. 
Aravat. See xxil. I. 
all the heavenly troops ... on the ten steps according to their rank. These hosts consist of the ten 


: : P : z ing’ i i i Mishne Thora 8.1 ; 
troops mentioned in ver. 1, arranged in the order of their rank. According to Maimonides in the d d ; 
Tae pee GE. 2, they are: Chajjoth, Ophannim, Arellim, Chashmallim, Seraphim, Mal achim, Elohim, Bene 
Elohim, Kerubim, Ishim (Weber, p. 163). In the Berith menucha the list is different: Arellim, Ishim, Bene Elohim, 


Mal’achim, Chashmallim, Tarshishim 


, Shina’nim, Kerubim, Ophannim, Seraphim (Eisenmenger, 11. 9374). But the 


nearest parallel is to be found in the nine orders of Dionysius the Areopagite, i.e. Sepahip, XepovBip, Opdvor, Kupdryres, 


Avuvdyes, E€ovola, “Apxai, Apxdyyeror 
differing arrangement of Gregory the 


,Ayyedo. These are reproduced in Dante, Par. c. xxviii, where the slightly 
Great (om. xxxiv- 7) is censured. 


441 


21 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 20. 3—22. 2 


A 


come and stand on the ten steps according to 
their rank, and would bow down to the Lord, 
4 and would again go to their places in joy and 
felicity, singing songs in the boundless light with 
small and tender voices, gloriously serving him. 


Of how the angels here left Enoch, at the end of 
the seventh Heaven, and went away from 
him unseen. 


And the cherubim and seraphim standing 
about the throne, the six-winged and many-eyed 
ones do not depart, standing before the Lord’s 
face doing his will, and cover his whole throne, 
singing with gentle voice before the Lord’s face: 
“Holy, holy, holy, Lord Ruler of Sabaoth, 
heavens and earth are full of Thy glory... When 
I saw all these things, those men said to me: 
‘Enoch, thus far is it commanded us to journey 
with thee,’ and those men went away from me, 
and thereupon I saw them not. And I remained 
alone at the end of the seventh heaven and 
became afraid, and fell on my face and said to 
myself: ‘Woe is me, what has befallen me?’ 
And the Lord sent one of his glorious ones, the 
archangel Gabriel, and he said to me: ‘ Have 
courage, Enoch, do not fear, arise before the 
Lord’s face into eternity, arise, come with me,’ 
4 and I answered him, and said in myself: ‘My 

Lord, my soul is departed from me, from terror 

and trembling,’ and I called to the men who led 

me up to this place, on them I relied, and 7z¢ zs 
5 with them I go before the Lord’s face. And 
Gabriel caught me up, as a leaf caught up by the 
wind, and placed me before the Lord’s face. 


-~ 


tb 


ioe) 





B 


and the glorious 21 1 
ones serving him do not leave him by night nor 
go away by day, standing before the Lord’s face, 
and working his will, and all the troops of cheru- 
bim and seraphim about his throne never leaving 
iim, and the six-winged ones cover his throne, 
singing before the Lord’s face. 

And when I saw all, the two men went away 2 
from me and thenceforward I saw them not. 
And they left me alone at the end of heaven, 
and I grew afraid and fell on my face. 

And the Lord sent one of his glorious ones 3 
Gabriel to me, and he said to me: ‘ Have cour- 
age, Enoch, fear not the troops, come after me, 
and stand before the Lord’s face into eternity.’ 

And I said to him: ‘ Woe is me, my Lord, my. 4° 
soul is gone out of me for terror, call up to me 
the two men who brought me to the place, be- 
cause I trusted them and with them I go before 
the Lord’s face.’ . 

And Gabriel seized me, just as a leaf seized by 
the wind, and took me, and put me before the 
Lord’s face. 


Or 


6 And I saw the eighth Heaven, which is called in the Hebrew tongue Muzaloth, changer of the 
seasons, of drought, and of wet. and of the twelve signs of the zodiac, which are above the seventh 


22 


Heaven. And I saw the ninth Heaven, 


which is called in Hebrew Kuchavim, where are the 
heavenly homes of the twelve signs of the zodiac. 


In the tenth Heaven the archangel Michael led Enoch to before the Lord's face. 


1 On the tenth Heaven, Aravoth, I saw the appearance of the Lord’s face, like iron made to glow in 


fire, and brought out, emitting sparks, and it burns. 
is ineffable, marvellous and very awful, and very, 
2 And who am I to tell of the Lord’s unspeak 
I cannot tell the quantity of his many instruction 


XXI. 1. do not depart. Cf. 1 En. xiv. De 
six-winged .. . Thy glory. Isa. vi. 2, 3. 

3. Have courage. See i. 8, xx. 2) 3s1.05 00 1 ensixvenne 

pepe tenvieress 


Thus I saw the Lord’s face, but the Lord’s face 


very terrible. 
able being, and of his very wonderful face? and. 
s, and various voices, the Lord’s throne very great 


6. This verse is clearly an interpolation, It is not found either in B or Sok. Furthermore, throughout the rest of the 


‘book only 


seven heavens are mentioned or implied. The term Muzaloth is the Hebrew name for the twelve signs 


of the Zodiac nirq. Kuchavim is merely a transliteration of paid. Some ground for this conception may be found 


in-t En. xiv. 17, 


where the path of the stars is above the throne of God, and as the throne of God according to this 


book is in the seventh heaven, the signs and stars might be regarded as in the eighth or ninth. 


XXII. 1-3. Aravoth a transliteration of MAW, which according to Chagig. 12” was really the seventh heaven. The 


rest of ver. 1, and verses 2,3, May in some form have belonged to the text. 


I have with some hesitation rejected them, 


442 


Tite bOOk OF HIME SECRETS: OF ENOCH 22. 4-2 


we) 
_— 


ro) 


and not made with hands, nor the quantity of those standing round him, troops of cherubim and 
3 seraphim, nor their incessant singing, nor his immutable beauty, and who shall tell of the ineffable 


greatness of his glory ? 
A 


4 And I fell prone and bowed down to the Lord, 

5 and the Lord with his lips said to me: ‘Have 
courage, Enoch, do not fear, arise and stand 
before my face into eternity.’ 

6 And the archistratege Michael lifted me up, 
and led me to before the Lord’s face. 

And the Lord said to his servants tempting 
them: ‘Let Enoch stand before my face into 

7 eternity, and the glorious ones bowed down to 
the Lord, and said: ‘ Let Enoch go according to 
Thy word.’ 

8 And the Lord said to Michael: ‘Go and take 
Enoch from out his earthly garments, and anoint 
him with my sweet ointment, and put him into 
the garments of My glory.’ 

9 And Michael did thus, as the Lord told him. 
He anointed me, and dressed me, and the appear- 
ance of that ointment is more than the great 
light, and his ointment is like sweet dew, and its 

ro smell mild, shining like the sun’s ray, and I looked 
at myself, and was like one of his glorious ones. 
1r And the Lord summoned one of his arch- 
angels by name Pravuil, whose knowledge was 
quicker in wisdom than the other archangels, 
who wrote all the deeds of the Lord; and the 
12 Lord said to Pravuil: ‘ Bring out the books from 
my store-houses, and a reed of quick-writing, 
and give zt to Enoch, and deliver to him the 
choice and tcomforting} books out of thy hand.’ 


Of Enoch’s writing, how he wrote his wonderful 
journeyings and the heavenly apparitions 
and himself wrote three hundred and sixty- 
six books. 

And he was telling me all the works of heaven, 
earth and sea, and all the elements, their passages 
and goings, and the thunderings of the thunders, 
the sun and moon, the goings and changes of 
the stars, the seasons, years, days, and hours, 
the risings of the wind, the numbers of the angels, 


23 1 


4. and could not see the Lord God (B). 
6. Michael. 
1 En. xl. 9 also. 


8. sweet ointment. This is ro €Aaov rod édéou of Apoc. Mosis ix. 3, xill. I. 








B 


and I fell prone, and could not see the Lord God, 22 4 
and I bowed down to the Lord, and the Lord 8 
God spake to Michael: ‘Take Enoch, and take 
him out from his earthly (sc. garments), and anoint 
him with sweet oil, and clothe him in garments 
of glory. And Michael took me out from my 9 
garments, and anointed me with sweet oil; and 
the appearance of that oil is better than great 
light, and its ointment like sweet dew, and its 
smell like myrrh, and shining like the rays of the 
sun. 

And I looked down looking at myself, and ro 
I was as one of the glorious ones, and there was 
no difference. And the terror and trembling 
went away from me, and the Lord with his mouth 4 
summoned me and said: ‘ Have courage, Enoch, 
fear not, stand before my face into eternity.’ 

And the Lord’s archistratege Michael brought 6 
me before the face of God. The Lord tempted 
his servants, and said to them: ‘ Let Enoch step 
up to stand before my face into eternity.’ And 7 
the Lord’s glorious ones bowed down, and said : 
“Let him step up.. 

And the Lord summoned Vretil, one of his 11 
archangels, who is wise and writes down all the 
Lord’s works. 

And the Lord said to Vretil: ‘ Take the books 12 
from the safe places, and give Enoch a reed, and 
tell him the books.’ And Vretil hastened and 
brought me the books all made sharp with myrrh, 
and gave me the reed out of his hand. 


And he began to tell me all things in heaven 23 
and earth and sea, the courses and dwellings of 
all the elements, the seasons of the years, the 
courses and mutations of the days, and the com- 
mandinents and teachings. 


Contrast xxii. 1 (A). : ; 
Cf. 1 En. lxxi. 13, 14, where Michael takes charge of Enoch. He is the chief of the archangels in 
As the angel set over Israel, 1 En. xx. 5 he is naturally the chief captain. 


See also viii. 7; Evang. Nicod. ii. 3. 


In verse 9 here this oil is described and in verse 10 its effects. > & 
garments of My glory. These are the raiment of the blessed. Cf. 1 En. Ixii. 15, cviil. 12; 2 Cor. v. 3, 4; 
Rev. ili. 4, 5, 183; iv. 45 vi. 11; vii. 9, 13, 14; 4 Ezra ii. 39, 45 ; Herm. Sém. viii, 2; Asc. Is. 1x. 9. 


11. Pravuil. I cannot find this name anywhere else. 
12. safe places (B), lit. ‘ store-rooms us 


B has Vretil. 


areed ... give it to Enoch. These words are drawn upon in Liber S. Iohannis Apocryphus (T hilo, Cod. Apocr. 


N.T. vol. i, p. 890): ‘ Elevavit Henoc super firmamentum .. . 


sexaginta septem libros’. 


et praecepit ei dari calamum . . . et sedens scripsit 


+comfortingt. Read as B suggests ‘fragrant with myrrh’. i 
XXIII. 1. This verse might well describe the Book of the Heavenly Luminaries in 1 En, Ixxii-Ixxxii. 


443 


THE BOOK OF THE ‘SECRETS’ OF! ENOCH: 2882-24774 


A | B 
2 and the formation of their songs, and all human 
things, the tongue of every human song and life, 
the commandments,. instructions, and sweet- 
voiced singings, and all things that it is fitting to 
learn. And Pravuil told me: ‘All the things 
4 that I have told thee, we have written. Sit and 
write all the souls of mankind, however many of 
them are born, and the places prepared for them 
5 to eternity ; for all souls are prepared to eternity, ; 
before the formation of the world.’ And all And Vretil was telling me thirty days and 
6 double thirty days and thirty nights, and I wrote thirty nights, his lips talking unintermittently. 
out all things exactly, and wrote three hundred , And I did not rest thirty days and thirty nights 
and sixty-six books. | writing all the signs, and when I finished, I had 
written three hundred and sixty books. 


Of the great secrets of God, which God revealed 
and told to Enoch, and spoke with him face 
to face. 
24 x And the Lord summoned me, and said to me: And the Lord summoned me, and put me on 24 1 
‘Enoch, sit down on my left with Gabriel.’ And | his left near Gabriel. And I bowed down to the 
I bowed down to the Lord, and the Lord spoke | Lord. 

2 to me: Enoch, beloved, all thou seest, all things And he spake to me: All the things thou hast 2 
that are standing finished I tell to thee even | seen, Enoch, standing and walking and completed 
before the very beginning, all that I created from by me, I will tell thee, before they took shape. 





non-being, and visible things from invisible. First all the things I created from non-existence 
3 Hear, Enoch, and take in these my words, for | into existence, and from invisible to visible. 
not to My angels have I told my secret, and I And to my angels I have not made known my 3 


formation of their songs. Possibly we should read ‘ songs of the armed hosts’, see xvii. 

-~ 5. all souls are prepared . . . before the formation of the world. The Platonic doctrine of the pre-existence 
of the soul is here taught. We find that it had already made its way into Jewish thought in Egypt; cf. Wisdom of 
Solomon viii. 19, 20 mais 5€ Hunv etpuns, Woyis te ehaxov dyabijs, paddov bé dyabos dv HdOov cis Gua Guiavroy, This 
doctrine was accepted and further developed by Philo. According to him the whole atmosphere is filled with souls, 
Among these, those who are nearer the earth and are attracted by the body descend into mortal bodies (rotrey rap 
Wuxav ai pev kariaowy €vdeOnodpevar copact Ovnrois, boas mpoo yerdraro. Kal pirocwpara, De Sommn. i. 22). When they have 
entered the body they are swept off by it as by a river and swallowed up in its eddies (éxeivac d€ domep cis morapéy 7d 
g@pa xataBacai rore pev id Guppod divns Biavordrns dpracbeioa KatendOnoav, De Gigant. 3). Only a few escape by 
obedience to a spiritual philosophy and come to share in the incorporeal and imperishable life that is with God 
(De Gigant. 3). But there were other souls, called demons in philosophy and angels in Scripture, who dwelling in the 
higher parts were never entangled by love of the earthly (ynSevos pev Tay mepryciwy mote dpeybeioa Td Taparray, 
De Somn. i. 22), and who reported the commands of the Father to the children, and the needs of the children to the 
Father (ras rod marpos émixedetdoets tos exydvors kal Tas TOv exydvev Xpelas T@ matpi SuayyédAXovor, De Sonn. i. 22 ; cf. De 
Gigant. 4). This doctrine of the pre-existence of the soul was according to Josephus, Bed/. Lud. ii. 8. 11, held by the 
Essenes : kai yap ppwrat rap’ adrois Hde 7 dda, POapra pev civar Ta odpara Kal Ti UAny ov pdvipoy adrois, Tas Sé Wuyxas 
a@avdrous del dSiapevery, cai cupmdéxerbar Hey, €k TOD Nentordrov porrdoas aidépos, Sorep cipxrais rois copuaocw ivyyt te 
proxy Kataorepévas, éemedav d€ dveOdou Tov KaTE adpka Seopar, ofa 51 paxpas Sovdeias ann\d\aypevas, Tore yaipey Kai 
pete@pous hépecOa, It became a prevailing dogma in later Judaism. All souls which were to enter human bodies 
existed before the creation of the world in the Garden of Eden (Zanchuma, Pikkude 3) or in the seventh heaven 
Chagig. 12”) or in a certain chamber (TSN) (Szf/re 143) whence God called them forth to enter human bodies. These 
souls were conceived of as actually living beings. According to Bereshith rabba c. 8, God takes counsel with the souls 
of the righteous before He creates the earth (cf. Weber, pp. 204, 205, 217-20). See xxx. 16 (note). 

6. double thirty days. Cf. Ixviii. 1, ‘ sixty days.’ 
XXIV. 2. took shape (3). lit. ‘became’. 
from non-being. Here creation ex nihilo seems to be taught. In Philo, on the other hand, the world was 
not created, but only formed from pre-existent chaotic elements. In one passage, however, where the absolute 
creation of the world is taught, we have an actual and almost verbal agreement with our text—as fALos dvaret\as Ta 
KEKPUMEVA TOY GOpATaY emOELKYUTAL, OUTW Kal 6 Oeds Td TdvTU yevunoas ov pédvoy eis rd epaves ifyayev, GAAd Kal & TpOTe pov 
OUK TY emoinoey, Ov Onuoupyds pdvov, GAA Kal kriatns avtos av (De Soman. i. 13). Probably, however, from non-being 
1s a rendering of é« ray pu) bvr@v. This will harmonize with xxv. 1. 
visible things from invisible. Cf. the passage just quoted from Philo; also Heb. xi. 3 ‘the world has been 
formed by the word of God, so that what is seen hath not been made out of things which do appear’. These 
words from Hebrews do not necessarily imply creation, but can naturally be interpreted after Philo’s conceptions. 


In Gen. i. 2 we find the idea of invisible elements introduced by the LXX as it gi » SE yn Hv ad i 
AX as it gives 7 be v aopatos as a rendering 
of what we translate by ‘the earth was waste ’. i ¥ Pies liiee' pitta 


3. not to My angels. Cf. xl, 35 \t Reta1 12: 


* Ch Mumhso p 201 (courg ) 


444 


4 


5 


25 1 


2 


3 


4 


OL 


26 x 


_ here. 


THE BOOK OF THE: SECRETS OF ENOCH 24 3 


A 


have not told them their rise, nor my endless 
realm, nor have they understood my creating, 
which I tell thee to-day. For before all things 
were visible, I alone used to go about in the in- 
visible things, like the sun from east to west, and 
from west to east. But even the sun has peace 
in itself, while I found no peace, because I was 
creating all things, and I conceived the thought 
of placing foundations, and of creating visible 
creation. 


God relates to Enoch, how out of the very lowest 
darknesscomes down thevisibleand invisible. 


I commanded in the very lowest parés, that 
visible things should come down from invisible, 
and Adoil came down very great, and I beheld 
him, and lo! he had a belly of great light. And 
I said to him: ‘ Become undone, Adoil, and let 
the visible come out of thee.’ And he came un- 
done, and a great light came out. And I was in 
the midst of the great light, and as there is born 
light from light, there came forth a great age, 
and showed all creation, which I had thought to 
create. And I saw that z¢ was good. And 
I placed for myself a throne, and took my seat 
on it, and said to the light: ‘Go thou up higher 
and fix thyself high above the throne, and be 
a foundation to the highest things.’ And above 
the light there is nothing else, and then I bent 
up and looked up from my throne. 


God summons from the very lowest a second 
time that Archas, heavy and very red, 
should come forth. 


And I summoned the very lowest a second 
time, and said: ‘Let Archas come forth hard,’ 
and he came forth hard from the invisible. And 
Archas came forth, hard, heavy, and very red. 
And I said: ‘Be opened, Archas, and let there 
be born from thee, and he came undone, an age 





3—26. 2 
B 


secrets, nor told them the secrets, nor their 
establishments, nor my endless and incompre- 
hensible thinking out of creation. And I opened 4 
up the light. And I rode through the midst of 
the light, just as one of the invisible, just as the 
sun rides from east to west; and I conceived the 5 
thought to place foundations and to create visible 
creation. 


I commanded in the very lowest that the very 25 1x 


great Idoil should come forth, having in his belly 
avery great stone. 

And I spoke to him: ‘ Burst asunder Idoil, 2 
and let there be the visible born out of thee.’ 

And he burst asunder. There came out of 3 
him a great stone, and thither bearing (or ‘ carry- 
ing,’ szc) all creation, which I had wished to 
create, and I saw that ¢¢ was good. 


And I put a throne also for myself, and sat 4 
down on it. I said to the light : ‘Go up higher 
and make thyself firm and be a foundation for 
the highest.’ 

And there is nothing higher than the light, 5 
only nothing ; and I saw, having bent myself up 
from my throne. 


I summoned a second time in the very lowest, 26 1 


and said that there should come out from the 
invisible into the firm one thing visible. And 
Aruchas came out firm and heavy and very black. 
And I saw that 7¢ was well. 3 


their establishments (B). lit. ‘the manner in which they were established ’. 


XXV. 1. Here the formation of the world from pre-existing elements is taught, as in the Book of Wisdom xi. 17 


€& dudphov vAns. 


Cf. also Philo, De Justitia 7 Mnvvier b€ 7 Tod Kéopov yeverts » ss 


\ ‘ 9 > , ? ‘ ‘cg 
Ta yap p11) ovTa ékaeo ev els TO Elva, 


This is in the main the teaching of the Talmud. See Weber, 193-6. 


Adoil. Is this from bs > = ‘the hand of God’? The word does not occur elsewhere that I am aware of. In 
this and the two subsequent verses we have an adaptation of an Egyptian myth. 


2. We have here a modification of the egg 
u. Myth. d. alten Aegypter, p. 101, we 
fungsact begann mit 
des Lebens in dem Bereiche der irdischen Welt, 

3. a great light came out. 
note. Cf. also Brugsch, Rel. w. Myth. pp. 160, 

there came forth a great age. 
the next chapter. 

4. I placed for myself a throne. 


theory of the universe. 
find a very close parallel. C 1 ¢ 
der Bildung eines Eies aus dem Urgewasser, aus dem das Tageslicht, die unmittelbare Ursache 
herausbrach.’ 
This exactly agrees with the ancient Egyptian myth as described in preceding 
161 on ‘ Die Geburt des Lichtes ’. 


This should refer to the world of the 


In Brugsch, e/. 


See Clem. Kecog. x. 17, 30. 
‘der erste Schop- 


According to the monuments: 


heavens, as the earth is dealt with in 


This throne was created before the world according to Bereshith rabba c. 1 as 
This idea may have found support in the LXX of Prov. viii. 27, where wisdom declares that she was with God 


at the creation when He established His throne upon the winds. 


XXVI. 1. Formation, but not creation, 
very red. So A, but B reads ‘very black’ ; 
the firm (B) = ‘the hard’, ‘fixed’. 


of the earth. Archas may be from 9%), or possibly from apx7. 
cf. next verse ‘ very dark’. 


445 


27 


28 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 26;'3— 2835 


A 
came forth, very great and very dark, bearing 
3 the creation of all lower things, and I saw that zz 
was good and said to him: ‘Go thou down 
below, and make thyself firm, and be for a 
foundation for the lower things,’ and it happened 
and he went down and fixed himself, and became 
the foundation for the lower things, and below 
the darkness there is nothing else. 


Of how God founded the water, and surrounded 
it with light, and established on it seven 
islands. 

1 And I commanded that there should be taken 

2 from light and darkness, and I said: ‘ Be thick,’ 
and it became thus, and I spread it out with the 
light, and it became water, and I spread it out 
over the darkness, 





A 


B 
And I said to him : 


And it 


‘Go below and make thyself firm.’ 
And 


became the foundation for the lowest. 
under the darkness there is nothing. 


Having surrounded some things with light, 271 
I made thick and stretched forth a road of water 2 
over the darkness, 


3 below the light, and then I made firm the waters, that is to say the bottomless, and I made founda- 


tion of light around the water, and created seven circles from inside, and imaged it (sc. the water) 
like crystal wet and dry, that is to say like glass, avd the circumcession of the waters and the other 
elements, and I showed each one of them its road, and the seven stars each one of them in its 
4 heaven, that they go thus, and I saw that it was good. And I separated between light and between 
darkness, that is to say in the midst of the water hither and thither, and I said to the light, that it 
should be the day, and to the darkness, that it should be the night, and there was evening and there 


was morning the first day. 


A 


The week in which God showed Enoch all his 
wisdom and power, throughout all the seven 
days, how he created all the heavenly and 
earthly forces and all moving things even 
down to man. 

1 <And then I made firm the heavenly circle, and 
made that the lower water which is under heaven 
collect itself together, into one whole, and that 
the chaos become dry, and it became so. 

Out of the waves I created rock hard and big, 
and from the rock I piled up the dry, and the dry 
3 I called earth, and the midst of the earth I called 
4 abyss, that is to say the bottomless, I collected 

the sea in one place and bound it together with 

a yoke. And I said to the sea: ‘Behold I give 

thee zy eternal limits, and thou shalt not break 

loose from thy component parts.’ Thus I made 
5 fast the firmament. This day I called me the 
first-created. 


2 


XXVII. The title is very corrupt. 

1. there should be taken from light and darkness. 
follows. 

3. the seven stars. 

4. Gen. 1. 4, 5. 

XXVIII. 1. Gen. i. 9. 


See Xxx. 5. 





Contrast Gen. i. 4. 


B 


And I made firm great rocks, and commanded 28 1, 2 

the bottomless waves to dry up on the dry 

(sc. land), and on the rivers having collected into 4 

one place the falling into (sc. the waters that fall 

into) the bottomless sea and binding them with 

a yoke, I gave an eternal boundary in the midst 

of (sc. between) sea and earth, that shall not be 
broken through by the water. And I made fast 

the firm, and founded the water over it. 


I do not pretend to understand what 


2. the dry I called earth, an exact rendering of Gen. i. ro. 


3. This may be Sheol, or Tartarus (cf. xxix. 5), 
1 En, Ixxxix. 7, 8; Jub. ii. 2. 


or it may be the abysses of the waters. 


4. Cf. Job xxvi. 10 3, Ps. civ. 9; Prov. viii. 29; Jer. v. 22. 


firmament. Gen. i. 7, 8. 


Cf. Gen. vii. 115 viii. 2; 


5. This verse should be read immediately after xxix; and together with that chapter should be restored before XXVili. 


This is clear from the analogy of xxx. D257 10: 


It is impossible in its present position. 


446 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH: 29. 1—30. 1 


A B 
29 ; Then it became evening, and then again morn- 
ing, and it was the second day. 
[Monday is the first day.] The fiery Essence. 
_ And for all the heavenly troops I imaged the | And for all the heavenly troops I formed the 29 1 
image and essence of fire, and my eye looked at | sun out of the great light, azd put it in the 
the very hard, firm rock, and from the gleam of | heavens that it should shine over the earth. 
my eye the lightning received its wonderful | 
2 nature, zich is both fire in water and water in | 
fire, and one does not put out the other, nor does 
the one dry up the other, therefore the lightning | 
is brighter than the sun, softer than water and | 
3 firmer than hard rock. And from the rock I cut From the stone I cut a great fire and from the 3 
off a great fire, and from the fire I created the | stone I created the incorporeal troops, and all 
orders of the incorporeal ten troops of angels, and | the troops of stars, of Cherubim, Seraphim and 
their weapons are fiery and their raiment a | Ophannim I cut from the fire. 
burning flame, and I commanded that each one | 
should stand in his order. 





A 
Here Satanail with his angels was thrown down from the height. 
And one from out the order of angels, having turned away with the order that was under him, 
conceived an impossible thought, to place his throne higher than the clouds above the earth, that 
he might become equal in rank to my power. 


And I threw him out from the height with his angels, and he was flying in the air continuously 
above the bottomless. 


aS 


On 


iN B 


30: And then I created all the heavens, and the 
third day was. 
[Tuesday]. On the third day I commanded And the earth I commanded to bring forth all 30 1 
the earth to make grow great and fruitful trees, | kinds of tree and high hills, all kinds of grass and 


XXIX. 1. [Monday is the first day| bracketed as a Christian interpolation as *‘ Tuesday ’, “Wednesday ’, &c., in xxx. 
1,2, &c. In Jub. ii. 2, and occasionally in patristic tradition, the creation of the angels is assigned to the first day— 
evidently on the ground of Job xxxviii. 7—but according to Shemoth Rabba 15 and the Targ. Jer. on Gen. i. 26 the angels 
were, created on the second day as in our text. : 

3. from the fire I created the . . . angels. So Pesikta 3": see Weber, Z. @. /. 161. . 2. 

4. one... with the order that was under him. This is clearly Satan. The rank below him is probably the 
Watchers. But however we interpret the text we are beset with difficuities. There are conflicting elements in the 
text. See xii and xviii with notes; vii; xix; xxxi. 3-7 (notes). ; 

place his throne higher than the clouds. If this is genuine we must take clouds in the sense of heavens. 
Satan was one of the highest angels before his fall: cf. xviii. 4. Satan and Sammael can not be distinguished in 
Rabbinic writings. On the attempt of Sammael to found a kingdom see Weber, 244. The following passage from 
the Book of Adam and Eve \. vi is evidently derived from our text: The wicked Satan . . . set me at naught and 
sought the Godhead, so that I hurled him down from heaven.’ ; 

5. he was flying in the air continuously. This view seems to have been generally received amongst the Jews. 
Cf. Eph. ii. 2 ‘The prince of the power of the air’; vi. 12; Test. Benj. ill. 4 tov depiov (8-a) mverparos TOU BeXtap : 
Asc. Is. iv. 2 ‘Berial angelus magnus res huius mundi. . . descendet e firmamento suo ; vii. 9 ‘Et ascendimus in 
firmamentum, ego et ille, et ibi vidi Sammaelem eiusque potestates ; X. 29 descendit in firmamentum ubi princeps 
huius mundihabitat’. Tuf. haarez, f. 9. 2 ‘ Under the sphere of the moon, which is the last under all, is a firmament... 
and there the souls of the demons are’. Cf. Eisenmenger, 1. 411. According to the Stoics, on the other hand, the 
abode of the blessed was under the moon. Cf. Tertull. De Az. 543, Lucan, ix.5 sq. For other authorities see Meyer on 
Eph. ii. 2; Eisenmenger, ii. 456. It is hard to get a consistent view of the demonology of this book ; it seems to be 
as follows: Satan, one of the archangels (xviii. 4; xxix. 4), seduced the Watchers of the fifth heaven into revolt, in 
order to establish a counter kingdom to God, xxix. 4. | Therefore Satan, or the Satans (for it is the name of a class ) 
(Weber, 244), were cast down from heaven, xxix. 5; xxxi. 4, and given the air for their habitation, eae ise fee for a 
followers, the Watchers of the fifth heaven, they were cast down to the second and there kept unos ee EEE ; 
vii. 3; xviii. 4. Some, however, of the Satans or Watchers went down to earth and married t = aug ae men, 
xviii. 4.. From these were born giants, xviii, 5. Thereupon these Watchers were imprisoned under ae eart ee 
6, 7, and the souls of the giants, their children, became subjects of Satan. To return i the Seah pacer awnen 
man was created, Satan envied him and wished to make another world, xxxi. 3. Out of envy he tempted Eve to her 


fall, xxxi. 6. 


DOXOXS Li Cis Gent. 0, IT- 
447 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS: OF ENOCH 30.16 
A Bb 


and hills, and seed to sow, and I planted Paradise, | all kinds of seed that are sown, before I created 
and enclosed it, and placed as armed guardians | living souls, and prepared food for them. 
flaming angels, and thus I created renewal. 


A 


2 Then came evening, and came morning the fourth day. 
[Wednesday]. On the fourth day I commanded that there should be great lights on the heavenly 
3 circles. On the first uppermost circle I placed the stars, Kruno, and on the second Aphrodit, on the 
4 third Aris, on the fifth Zeus, on the sixth Ermis, on the seventh lesser the moon, and adorned it with 
the lesser stars. 
5 And on the lower I placed the sun for the illumination of day, and the moon and stars for the 
6 illumination of night. The sun that it should go according to each animal (sc. signs of the zodiac), 
twelve, and I appointed the succession of the months and their names and lives, their thunderings, 
7 and their hour-markings, how they should succeed. Then evening came and morning came the 
fifth day. 


A B 


[Thursday]. On the fifth day I commanded And the sea I commanded to bring forth and 7 
the sea, that it should bring forth fishes, and give birth to its fishes, all kinds of reptiles that 
feathered birds of many varieties, and all animals _ creep over the earth, and wild beasts and cattle. 
creeping over the earth, going forth over the and all kinds of feathered birds. 
earth on four legs, and soaring in the air, male | And when I had finished all, I told my wisdom 8 
sex and female, and every soul breathing the to create me man. 
spirit of life. | 

And there came evening, and there came morn- | 
ing the sixth day. 


iors) 


A 


[Friday]. On the sixth day I commanded my wisdom to create man from seven consistencies : one, 


hills. This is corrupt. We should have a reference here probably to non-fruit-bearing trees, as in Jub. ii. 7 Ta 
EvNa Ta Kdpmipd te Kai dkapra. 

seed to sow (A): ‘all kinds of seed that are sown’ (B). This phrase is found in Jub. ii. 7, as one of the third day 
creations. 

Paradise. Also in Jub. ii. 7, among the creations of the third day. 

2. heavenly circles. In Philo, De Mundi Of. 38, we find seven circles as here, though with a different meaning : 
Tov ovpavoy daow entra SteCGoOar KvKXors. 

3. Gen. i. 14-19. In the Chronography of Joel, circ. A.D. 1200, p. 34 (ed. Bekker, 1836), the discovery of the signs 
of the zodiac, the solstices and the seasons, and the naming of the planets, are assigned to Seth; but as such 
discoveries were anciently assigned to Enoch, and were only in later tradition ascribed to Seth, we may not unreason- 
ably regard the mention in Joel of the five planets, Kronos, Zeus, Ares, Aphrodite, Hermes, as ultimately derived from 
the Enoch literature. The statement in Joel is, 6 8} 20 mpatos e€edpe . . . ta onpeia Tod ovpavod kal Tas Tpomas Tay 
eviautov ... kat tois dotpos eméOnkey dvéuata Kab Tois mévre mAavnrats els 7d yropiCerOat brs toy avOpomov .. . Kal roy 
pev mp@rov mAavntny exddeoe Kpdvoy, tiv d€ Sedrepov Ala, rov Tpirov “Apea, tov téraprov ’"Adpoditny Kal rov méunrov “Epuny 
In the mysteries of Mithras (see Origen, c. Celsum, vi. 22) the five planets and the sun and moon are said to be 
connected by a heavenly ladder. The previous chapter seems to connect these heavenly bodies with the seven 
heavens, as in our text. Their order in Origen is Kronos, Aphrodite, Zeus, Hermes, Ares, Selene, Helios. Archi- 
medes’ order (Macrob. zz Somn. Scip. i. 19. 2) is: Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury the Moon, and 
this is the one generally followed, e.g. Cicero, de Div. ii. 43. Plato refers to the five planets in his Faces but the 
Epinomis, by a disciple of his, is the first to assign each planet toa god. The five planets were known to Israel in 
O.T. times: Kronos as j"3, Amos v. 26; Aphrodite as Obs Isa. xiv. 12; 
Isa. xv. 11; Hermes as 13), Isa. xlvi. 1. 

5. the sun . . . according to each animal. See xiii-xiv and 1 En. Ixxii for the periods corresponding to the 
signs of the zodiac. 

6. the months, &c. See lvi and 1 En. Ixxiii-Ixxiy. 

7. Cf. Gen. i. 20-26. Note that most of the sixth day creations are here assigned to the fifth day. 

8. commanded my wisdom. Wisdom is here hypostatized as in Prov. viii. 30 ‘Then I was by him as a master 
workman’. In the Book of Wisdom, Wisdom is the assessor on God’s throne, ix. 4; was with Him when He made 
the world, ix. 9; was the instrument by which all things were created, viii. 5 ; is the tuler and renewer of all things 
vil. I; vil. 27. Cf. Philo’s Logos, the instrument by which God created the world. Cf. Leg. Adv. iii. 31 oxed Beot Be 
6 yes avTov €or, & ve opyave wa le 2 exooporoic: also de Cherubim B55 

rom seven consistencies. This list of substances seems to have s i i i i 
(G. Sext. Wath. ix. 81) and Philonic views. Cf. Philo, de Mundt Of. ie man's bel eee ee toe a 
bones have something in common with stones, Leg. All. ii. 7 ( pev Ets Kown kal Tov aixav éatt AiGov Kad biker, hs 


448 


Ares as 039), 2 Kings xvii. 30; Zeus as 73, 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 380. 8-15 


ye 


his flesh from the earth; two, his blood from the dew ; three, his eyes from the sun; four, his bones 
from stone ; five, his intelligence from the swiftness of the angels and from cloud ; six his veins and 
his hair from the grass of the earth; seven, his soul from my breath and from the wind. 
9 And I gave him seven natures: to the flesh hearing, the eyes for sight, to the soul smell, the veins 
for touch, the blood for taste, the bones for endurance, to the intelligence sweetness (sc. enjoyment). 
to I conceived a cunning saying to say, I created man from invisible and from visible nature, of 
both are his death and life and image, the knows speech like some created thing, small in great- 
Ii ness and again great in smallness}, and I placed him on earth, a second angel, honourable, great 


12 and glorious, and I appointed him as ruler to rule on earth and to have my wisdom, and there was 
none like him of earth of all my existing creatures. 


13 And I appointed him a name, from the four component parts, from east, from west, from south, 
14, 15 from north, and I appointed for him four special stars, and I called his name Adam, and showed him 
the two ways, the light and the darkness, and I told him: ‘ This is good, and that bad,’ that 


peréxet Kal TA ev Nuty eoxdra ALOots boréa) and on a higher level again man is allied to plant nature (7 d¢ pvows Siareiver 
kat emt ra urd. kal ev npiv é ciow éeoikdra gurois, dvuxés Te Kal Tpixes), €. g. in respect to his nails and hair. Perhaps 
ie OF ee should read ‘nails’ accordingly in our text. Finally, for the seventh element we may compare De 
unat Op. 46. 
Philo’s view of man’s nature is well summed up in De Mundi Op. 51 was dvOpwros kara pev thy didvoray @kel@rac 
Ocio Ady, THs pakapias Picews . . . Aravyacpa yeyoves, Kata S€ THY TOU OHpmaTos KaTacKEUHY GravTL TO Kdo PO" TVYKEKpLTAL 
yap éK Tay avray, yas, kal datos Kal dépos kal mupds, Exdorou THy aroixei@y cioeveyKdvTos TO emUBaddoy pEpos mpos exadAnpwow 
a’tapkeararns Ans, Hy Eder aBeiv rov Snusovpydy, iva Texvrevontar THY Sparny TavTnv eixdva. For the later Talmudic 
views cf. Weber, 202-4; Malan’s Book of Adam and Eve, pp. 209-15. In the Anglo-Saxon Ritual (circ. 950), to 
which Dr. Murray has called my attention, man is said to be made out of eight substances: ‘ Octo pondera de quibus 
factus est Adam. Pondus limi, inde factus est caro; pondus ignis, inde rubeus est sanguis et calidus ; pondus salis, 
inde sunt salsae lacrimae ; pondus roris, inde factus est sudor; pondus floris, inde est varietas oculorum ; pondus 
nubis, inde est instabilitas mentium ; pondus venti, inde est anhela frigida ; pondus gratiae, inde est sensus hominis.’ 
9. seven natures. Cf. Philo, De Mundi Op. 40 tijs nnerépas uxis 76 dixa Tod jyeportKod pepos éewtaxy oXiCerat, mpos 
mévre aiaOncets Kal Td Povnrnptov bpyavov Kal émi mac TO yoviyov. Thus Philo has the vocal organ and the generative 
power in place of the bones and the intelligence. Plutarch, P/ac. iv. 4 agrees with Philo, but adds an eighth, ro 
ryepovikoy, or directive power. See especially Test. Naph. 2 (notes). 
Io. saying. We should expect a reference to a creative word. This verse is very corrupt, but obviously man’s 
spiritual and material nature is meant. 
11. a second angel. According to the Beresh. Rad. fol. 17, Adam, when first created, reached from the earth to 
the firmament. In the Book of Adam and Eve, |. x, Adam is called a ‘ bright angel’. 
12. Gen. i. 26, 28. 
13. This verse may either be the source of or else derived from the Sibyll. Or. iii. 24-6: 
airs 5} beds éc 6’ 6 mAdoas terpaypdpparoy “Addu 
Tov mpotov mAacbévra Kal ovvowa TANpocarTa 
dvroNiny te Siow re peonuBpinv te Kai dpKtoy. 
The third line frequently occurs, e.g. in ii. 195, viii. 321, xl. 3, and the order of letters is wrong. In the anonymous 
treatise De Montibus Sina et Ston, 4, formerly ascribed to Cyprian, we have a long account : ‘Nomen accepit a Deo. 
Hebreicum Adam in Latino interpretat “terra caro facta”, eo quod ex quattuor cardinibus orbis terrarum pugno 
comprehendit, sicut scriptum est: “ palmo mensus sum caelum et pugno comprehendi terram et confinxi hominem ex 
omni limo terrae; ad imaginem Dei feci illum.” Oportuit illum ex his quattuor cardinibus orbis terrae nomen in se 
portare Adam.’ At each of the four quarters four stars were set by the Creator, called anatole, dysis, arctus, mesembrion. 
Take from these stars the first letter of each, and you have the name adéy. Bede, 7 Genesin Expositio iv. approves, 
and adds that ‘ haec proprietas significat dominaturam Adam in quattuor partibus mundi’. Cf. too the Chronicon of 
Glycas (circ. 1150) p. 143, and see Jub. iil. 28 (note). : : ; 
14. four special stars. Cf. De Montibus Sina et Sion quoted under verse 13. ‘Stars’ may here mean angels ’. 
Certain ministering angels were appointed to wait on Adam, Jalkut Rub. fol. 13; Jalkut Schim. fol. 4 (see Book of 
Adam and Eve, p. 215). ; 
rife Nave Re caeeet aes of free-will is that in Tanchuma Pikkude 3 (quoted by Weber, p. 208) ‘God does not 
determine beforehand whether a man shall be righteous or wicked, but puts this into the hands of the man only’. In 
the text free-will is presupposed in man, but this is prejudicially affected by his ignorance (verse 16): cf. Sirach 
XV. 14, 15 adros e& apxis émoinoey dvOporoy Kai agjxey adrov ev xetpt SuaBovdtov avtod, eay Gedys, TvvTHpHoErs evroNds, Kat 
niotw roinoa evdokias. On pes question ae see Josephus, Bel? [ud. ii. 8, 143; Anz. xiii. 5,93; Xvill. I, 3; Psalms 
olomon, ed. by Ryle and James, pp. 96. 
Ce two ithe light qades dest: This popular figure of the Two Ways was suggested by jers 
xxi. 8 ‘Thus saith the Lord: Behold, I set before you the way of life and the way of death’ ; by Deut. Xxx. 15 I have 
set before thee this day life and good and death and evil ns Sirach XV. 17 €vavte avOparor n (an kal 6 Oavaros, Kat 0 éav 
evdoxhan SoOjcerat ait@: xvii. 6 Kal dyaBa Kat kaxa tnédecEey avrois. For parallel N.T. expressions cf. Matt. vil. 13, 14; 
2 Pet. ii.2. Of the two great post-apostolic descriptions of the Two Ways, in the Didaché and in the Ep. of Barnabas, 
that of the latter presents the nearest parallel to our text : chap. xvil odol dvo cio didaxns kat e¢€ovclas, Te TOU pords 
kal 4 TOU okdrovs. In the Didache i. 1 we have 6601 dvo0 cot, pla TIS Cons kai pla Tov Oavarov : cf. Test. Asher i. 35 4 duc 
Sdovs Zdwxev 6 Oeds Tois viois Tv avOpaTav... 6dol yap elo dvo, kahod kat kaxod: Szbyll. Or, villi. 399, 400 autos pp 
mpoeOnka dSvo, (wis Oavarov te Kal yvouny mpoeOnk™ ayabny Cony mpoedea Oat : cf. also Herm. Mand. vi. 1, 2; Clem. Alex. 
Strom. v. 5; Apost. Church Order, iv; Apost. Constitutzons, Vi. 1; Clem. Homilies Vv. 7 ¥ 
I told him: ‘This is good and that bad,’ &c. This does not harmonize with the account in Gen., where the 
knowledge of good and evil follows on eating the forbidden fruit. 


1105.2 449 B S 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 80. 15—1. 5 


A 
I should learn whether he has jove towards me, or hatred, that it be clear which in his race 


love me. 
16 For I have seen his nature, but he has not seen his own nature, therefore ¢irough not seeing 


he will sin worse, and I said: ‘ After sin what zs there but death?’ 
17 And I put sleep into him and he fell asleep. And I took from him a rib, and created him 
18 a wife, that death should come to him by his wife, and I took his last word and called her name 
mother, that is to say, Eva. 


God gives over paradise to Adam, and gives him a command to see the heavens opened, and 
that he should see the angels singing the song of victory. 


Sl: Adam has life on earth, and I created a garden in Eden in the east, that he should observe the 


testament and keep the command. 
2 I made the heavens open to him, that he should see the angels singing the song of victory, and 


the gloomless light. 
3 <And he was continuously in paradise, and the devil understood that I want to create another 


9) 
world, because Adam was lord on earth, to rule and control it. 
4 The devil is the evil spirit of the lower places, tas a fugitive he made, he made Sotona from 
5 the heavens} as his name was Satomail, thus he became different from the angels, du¢ zs nature 
did not change “zs intelligence as far as Azs understanding of righteous and sinful ¢hings. 


that I should learn whether he has love towards me or hatred. Deut. xiii. 3 ‘ Your God proveth you to 
know whether ye love the Lord your God ’. 

16. through not seeing he will sin worse. This ignorance, as we see from the preceding verse, is not first 
and directly an ignorance of moral distinctions, but of his nature with its good and evil impulses (JON “AN and 
yn 4s). Ignorance is thus regarded here as an evil in itself. This is probably the result of Platonic thought, which 
had gained great influence over Hellenistic Judaism, and the idea of the text seems related, however distantly, to that 
ethical system which may be summed up in the words was 8’ ddcxos od Exdv ddixos (Plato, Legg. 731C): odvdéva avOporav 
éxdvra efapapraver (Prot. 345D): Kaxds pev yap éxav oddeis (7777. 86D). See also Lege. 734B; Rep. ix. 589C; Hipp. Mar. 
296C. Herein it is taught that no man wilfully chooses evil in preference to good ; but in every act of moral judgement 
the determining motive is to be found in the real or seeming preponderance of good in the course adopted; and that, 
should this course be the worse one, the error of judgement is due either to physical incapacities or faulty education, 
or to a combination of both. This view of sin as an involuntary affection of the soul follows logically from another 
Platonic principle already enunciated by our author (see xxiii. 5, note). This principle is the pre-existence of the 
soul. The soul, as such, according to Platonic teaching, is wholly good. Evil, therefore, cannot arise' from its 
voluntary preferences, but from its limitations, i.e. from its physical and moral environment, from its relation to the 
body and from wrong education. In the Book of Wisdom this view is widely diverged from. There the body is not 
held to be irredeemably evil, but souls are already good and bad on their entrance into this life (viii. 19,20). In Philo 
on the other hand, there is in the main a return to the Platonic and Stoic doctrine. The body is irredeemably evil : ~ 
it is in fact the tomb of the soul (céua = ojya); and only the sensuously-inclined souls are incorporated with bodies 
(see above, xxiii. 5, note). The views adopted by our author on these and kindred points stand in some degree in 
a closer relation to the Platonic principles than do those of Philo or the author of the Book of Wisdom. Thus he 
held : (1) That the soul was created originally good. (2) That it was not predetermined either to good or ill by God 
but left to mould its own destiny (see xxx. 15). (3) That its incorporation in a body, however, with its necessary 
limitations served to bias its preferences in the direction of evil. (4) That faithful souls will hereafter live as blessed 
incorporeal spirits, or at all events clothed only in God’s glory (xxii. 7); for there is no resurrection of the body. 

after sin... death. So Sirach xxv. 24 dd yuvatkds dpx} dpaprias, kad de atrny amobyyckopev mdvres, for ‘men 
were created exactly like the angels’, 1 En. Ixix. 11, righteous and immortal, but death came through sin Book of 
Wisdom, ii. 23, 24; 1 En. xcviii. 4. The same teaching is found in the Talmud: see Weber, 208, 214 230. This 
doctrine of man’s conditional immortality and of death entering the world through sin does not belong to O.T. 
literature ; for Gen. li. 17, when studied in its context, implies nothing more than a premature death ; for the law of 
man’s being is enunciated in Gen. iii. 19 ‘Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return ’, and his expulsion from Eden 
was due first and principally to the need of guarding against his eating of the tree of life and living for ever. Further- 
more, even in Sirach, where the idea of death as brought about by sin is first tnunciated, the doctrine appears in 
complete isolation and in open contradiction to the main statements and tendencies of the book : for it elsewhere 
teaches that man’s mortality is the law from everlasting (7 yap d.aOyKn dm’ aidvos, Sirach xiv. 17): and that bein 
formed from earth unto earth must he return, xvii. 1, 2, xl. 11. Nor again is this doctrine a controlling principle ie 
the system of the writers of Wisdom. In N.T. times, however, we find it the current view in the Pauline Epistles 
e.g. Rom. v, 12; 1 Cor. xv. 21; 2 Cor. xi. 3. On various views on sin and death and their causes see 1 En. vi-viii : 
x. 83 xxxii. 6; Ixix. 6, 11; xcviii. 4, with notes. 
18. death ... by his wife. Cf. Sirach xxv. 23; 1 Tim. ii.14. See note on verse 16 
I took his last word. Corrupt. 


XXXI. 2. Cf. Book of Adam and Eve, I. viii. According to Ephrem i. 139, Adam and Eve 1 ic visi 
. . ey, te : x 5 t 
on their fall. For this power of vision cf. Philo, Quaest. xxxii in Gen. a poate S88 
gloomless light. The light in Paradise was continual, Book of Adam and Eve, |. xii, xiii, xiv. 
3. On Satan’s envy see Wisdom, ii. 24; Josephus, Azz. i. 1. 4. 
4. Sec xvill. 3; xxix. 4 (notes). 


450 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 31. 6—33. 4 
A 


6 And he understood his condemnation and the sin which he had si 
; } ‘ ad sinned before, theref : 
ceived thought against Adam, in such form he entered and seduced Eva, but did notsteech oe 


7 But I cursed ignorance, but what I had blessed previously, those I did not curse, I cursed not man 
8 nor the earth, nor other creatures, but man’s evil fruit, and his works. 


After Adam’s sin God sends him away into the earth ‘ whence I took thee’, but does not wish to 
ruin him for all years to come. 


Sari said to him: ‘ Earth thou art, and into the earth whence I took thee thou shalt go, and I will 
not ruin thee, but send thee whence I took thee. < 
Then I can again take thee at My second coming.’ 
And I blessed all my creatures visible and invisible. And Adam was five and half hours in 


2 coher And I blessed the seventh day, which is the Sabbath, on which he rested from all his 
works. 


God shows Enoch the age of this world, z¢s existence of seven thousand years, and the eighth thousand 
is the end, neither years, nor months, nor weeks, nor days. 


331 AndI appointed the eighth day also, that the eighth day should be the first-created after my 
2 work, and that ¢he first seven revolve in the form of the seventh thousand, and that at the beginning 
of the eighth thousand there should be a time of not-counting, endless, with neither years nor months 

nor weeks nor days nor hours. 


A B 


3 And now, Enoch, all that I have told thee, all And now, Enoch, all the things I have told 33 3 
that thou hast understood, all that thou hast seen | thee and all the things thou hast seen on earth 
of heavenly things, all that thou hast seen on | and all the things thou hast written in these 
earth, and all that I have written in books by | books, I invented the creation of all chds, having 
my great wisdom, all these things I have devised | created from the highest to the lowest. 
and created from the uppermost foundation to There is no counsellor here. I am eternal and 4 

4 the lower and to the end, and there is no coun- | not made with hands, and my thought is coun- 
sellor nor inheritor to my creations. I am self- | sellor, and my word is deed, and my eyes behold 


6. See xxx. 18 (note). Weber, 211, 244. 
7. The curse is not on man himself, but on his ignorance and sin. 


XXXII. 1. My second coming. God’s coming to judge the earth is called the xaipos émurxomys and jpépa Siayvdoews 
in Wisdom iii. 7, 18. Cf. 2 En. xlii. 5. The first coming was for Adam’s sake and to bless all that God had made, 
Iviii. 1. 

XXXIII. 1, 2. From the fact that Adam did not live to be 1,000 years old, the author of the Book of Jubilees, iv. 30, 
concludes that the words of Gen. iil. 17 ‘In the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die’ were actually 
fulfilled. It is hence obvious that already before the Christian era 1,000 years had come to be regarded as one world- 
day. To arrive at the conception of a world-week of 7,000 years—6,o00 years from the creation to the judgement, 
followed by 1,000 years, or a millennium of blessedness and rest—it was necessary to proceed but one step further, 
and this step we find was taken by the author of our text. In Irenaeus, moreover, Contra Haer. v. 28. 3 this 
reasoning is given explicitly: dca . . . nucpats eyevero 6 Kdopos, Tooavrats XLMLovTdot Guvredeitat, Kai dua rodrd now 7 
ypagpn. Kai cvveréhecey 6 beds tHinuepa D ta epya adrod a eroinge, kai Katémavoey ev TH nuépa tH C awd mayTwov TOY épyeav 
avtod. roito & éott ray mpoyeyovdrar Sinynors Kai Tov ecopevav mpopnteia® 7 yap jyépa Kupiov ws ja ety. ev EF odv Nuepats 
ovvrerédeotat Ta yeyovdta. havepoy ovy bre 7) GuvTéheta adTav 7d F eros eori. Clemens Alex. Stvom. iv. 25 refers to this 
conception—possibly to our text. It isnot improbable that the statements of Cedrenus on this head are drawn from 
our text. Thus on p. 9 he writes: rovrou xdpuy nddoynOn Kai avrn (7 Hpépa) bro Tod Deod Kai HyrdoOn Kal odBBarov ws KaTa- 
ravowpos mpoonyopevOn, kal &s Tinos THs EBdduns XeALoernpidos Kai TY dpapr@dy ouvTedeias, ws “loonmmos papTupel Kal 1 
hemr} Téveois jv Kal Mooéas civai pact twes droxdduyw. It is, we repeat, not improbable that our text is the original 
source of Cedrenus’s statements, inasmuch as nothing of the kind is found either in Josephus or the Book of Jubilees, 
from which he professes to derive them. Syncellus, on whom Cedrenus is largely dependent, is frequently wrong in 
his references in the case of Apocalyptic literature. A most interesting expansion and an adaptation of the text to 
Christian conceptions are to be found in Augustine, De C7v. xxii. 30. 5 ‘Ipse etiam numerus aetatum, veluti dierum, 
si secundum eos articulos temporis computetur qui in Scripturis videntur expressi, iste Sabbatismus evidentius 
apparebit, quoniam septimus invenitur: ut prima aetas tanquam dies primus sit ab Adam usque ad diluvium, secunda 
inde usque ad Abraham . . . ab Abraham usque ad David una, altera inde usque ad transmigrationem in Babyloniam, 
tertia inde usque ad Christi carnalem nativitatem. Fiunt itaque omnes quinque. Sexta nunc agitur . . . post hanc 
tanquam in die septimo requiescet Deus, cum eundem septimum diem, quod nos erimus, in se ipso Deo faciet requie- 
scere. . . . Haec tamen septima erit Sabbatum nostrum, cuius finis non erit vespera, sed dominicus dies velut octavus 
aeternus. . . . Ecce quod erit in fine sine fine.’ For other speculations in reference to the world-week see Evang. 
Nicodemi, ii. 12; Book of Adam and Eve, |. iii. a 

2. a time of not-counting ... neither years nor months, &c. Sibyll. Or. viii. 424-7 may have been influenced 
by our text where it speaks of the eternity of blessedness. 

3. the creation (B), lit. ‘to create’. 

451 Gg2 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 83, 4—84. 2 


A 


eternal, not made with hands, and without 
change. My thought is my counsellor, my 
wisdom and my word are tmade}, and my eyes 
observe all things how they stand here and 
tremble with terror. If I turn away my face, 
then all things will be destroyed. 

5 And apply thy mind, Enoch, and know him 
who is speaking to thee, and take thou the books 
which thou thyself hast written. 

6 And I give thee Samuil and Raguil, who led 
thee up, and the books, and go down to earth, 
and tell thy sons all that I have told thee, and 
all that thou hast seen, from the lower heaven 
up to my throne, and all the troops. 


B 


all. If I look on all, then it stands (sc. exists), 
but if I shall turn away, then will all be destroyed. 


Apply thy mind, Enoch, and know him who 5 
speaketh to thee, and take the books that thou 
hast written. 

And I give thee the angel Semil and Rasuil 6 
and him who brought ¢A/ee up to me. And go 
down on to earth and tell thy sons all the things 
I have spoken to thee and all the things thou 
hast seen from the lowest heaven even up to my 


throne. 

All the troops I have created; there is none 7 
that opposes me or that submits not to me. All 
submit to my monarchy and serve my power. 

And give them the books of thy handwriting, 8 
children to children, kinsmen to kinsmen, race to 10 
race, as mediator, Enoch, of my general Michael, 
because thy handwriting and the handwriting of 
thy fathers Adam and Seth shall not be destroyed 11 
till the end of time, as I have commanded my 
angels Orioch and Marioch, how that I have put 
a chart on earth, and ordered the ages that it be 
preserved, and that the handwriting of thy fathers 12 
be preserved, that it perish not in the deluge 
which I shall make in thy race. 


7 For I created all forces, and there is none that 
resisteth me or that does not subject himself to 
me. For all subject themselves to my monarchy, 
and labour for my sole rule. 

8 Give them the books of the handwriting, and 
they will read ¢hem and will know me for the 
creator of all things, and will understand how 
there is no other God but me. 

9 And let them distribute the books of thy 
handwriting—children to children, generation to 
generation, nations to nations. 

to And I will give thee, Enoch, my intercessor, 
the archistratege Michael, for the handwritings of 
thy fathers Adam, Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahaleleel, 
and Jared thy father. 





God convicts the idolaters and sodomitic forni- 
cators, and therefore brings down a deluge 
upon them. 


They have rejected my commandments and 
my yoke, worthless seed has come up, not fear- 
ing God, and they would not bow down to me, 
but have begun to bow down to vain gods, and 
2 denied my unity, and have laden the whole earth 
with untruths, offences, abominable lecheries, 


34 1 


For I know the wickedness of men, that they 34 1 
will not carry the yoke which I have laid upon 
them, nor sow the seeds which I have given them, 
but having cast off my yoke, they will take an- 
other yoke, and will sow empty seeds and will bow 
down to vain gods and will reject my oneness, 


4. without change. Num. xxiii. 19; 1 Sam. xv. 20); Wzek-exxiv. U4: 
my thought is my counsellor. Cf. xxx. 8 (note). Cf. Sir. xlii. 22. 
my wisdom and my word are +madet, i.e. are reality. Cf. B and 1 En. xiv. 22 (Greek) was Adyos adbrod epyoy. 
Cf. Ps. xxxiii. 9 ; Sir. xlii. 15. 
my eyes observe all things. 
If I turn, &c. Ps. civ. 29. 
6. Cf. 1 En, Ixxxi. 5,6. Raguil, i.e. Raguel. See 1 En. xx. 4. 
_ 9. Cf. xvii. 2, 3; xlviii. 7-9; liv; Iv. 5; 1 En. Ixxxii. 1, 2, where, as here, the books are to be transmitted 
immediately to the generations of the world, whereas in i. 2; XCili. 10; civ. 12 of 1 En. the method and times of the 
disclosure of the books are different. Though the writings are committed to the keeping of men, they are under the 


guardianship of special angels until the time for their complete disclosure and understanding has come. Compare 
verses 11 and 12 (B only), 


10. Michael. Cf. xxii. 6 (note). 
It. till the end of time (B), lit. ‘till the last age’. At last the time for the due understandine of these books will 
arrive. See verse 9 (note) ; xxxv. 2, 3; (liv) ; 1 En. xciii. 10; civ. 12. 
Orioch (B), a name found in Gen. xiy. 1s O)3 DEI NG ly 1, 
ages (B), lit. ‘times’, 
XXXIV. 1. rejected... my yoke. Cf. xlviii. 9 ; Sir. xxviii. 19, 20 ; Matt. xi. 29. 


_. Sow empty seeds (B), or worthless seeds. Apparentl metaphorical, as A shows 
xxii. 9, empty (B), i.e. ‘worthless’. PP y Pp , shows, and not a reference to Deut. 


denied my unity. Cf. Deut. vi. 4 together with Joshua xxiv. 27. 
2. It is this verse that is referred to in Test. Naph. tv. 1, though there differently applied. 


452 


Cf.:Sir. Xxxix. 19. 


35 x 


36 1 


37: 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 34, 2—87. 1 


A 


namely one with another, and all manner of other 
unclean wickednesses, which are disgusting to 
relate. 

3 And therefore I will bring down a deluge upon 
the earth and will destroy all men, and the whole 
earth will crumble together into great darkness. 


God leaves one righteous man of Enoch’s tribe 
with his whole house, who did God’s plea- 
sure according to his will. 

Behold from their seed shall arise another 
generation, much afterwards, but of them many 
2 will be very insatiate. He who raises that 

generation, shall reveal to them the books of 
thy handwriting, of thy fathers, to them to whom 
he must point out the guardianship of the 
world, to the faithful men and workers of my 
pleasure, who do not acknowledge my name in 
vain. 

3 And they shall tell another generation, and 

those others having read shall be glorified there- 

after, more than the first. 


God commanded Enoch to live on earth thirty 
days, to give instruction to his sons and to 
his children’s children. After thirty days 
he was again taken on to heaven. 

Now, Enoch, I give thee the term of thirty 
days to spend in thy house, and tell thy sons and 
all thy household, that all may hear from my 
face what is told them by thee, that they may 
read and understand, how there is no other God 
but me. And that they may always keep my 
commandments, and begin to read and take in 
the books of thy handwriting. 

And after thirty days I shall send my angel 
for thee, and he will take thee from earth and 
from thy sons to me. 


iS) 


Here God summons an angel. 


And the Lord called up one of the older 
angels, terrible and menacing, and placed him by 
me, in appearance white as snow, and his hands 
like ice, having the appearance of great frost, and 
he froze my face, because I could not endure the 
terror of the Lord, just as it is not possible to 
endure a stove’s fire and the sun’s heat, and the 
frost of the air. 


quake (B), lit. ‘be shaken’ (as though in fever). 





B 


and the whole earth will quake with injustice, 2 
wrongs, and fornication and idolatry. 


Then also I shall bring a deluge on to the 3 
earth, and the earth will crumble together in 
great chaos. 


And I shall leave over ove just man with all 35 1 
his house, who shall work according to my will 
(sc. who shall be found to have been working, &c.), 
and from their seed shall rise another race after- 
wards, very numerous and insatiable. 

Then he who has brought up (sc. founded and 2 
formed) that race shall reveal the books of thy 
handwriting and of thy fathers, through whom 
the guardians of the earth shall show ¢hem to the 3 
faithful men and shall tell ¢zem to that race, and 
it shall be glorified thereafter more than before. 


And now, Enoch, I give theea term of waiting 36 1 

of thirty days to do (sc. all) in thy house; tell 

thy sons all that thy heart contains, that they 
may read and understand, how that there is no 
God but me, and after thirty days I shall send 2 
my angels for thee, and they will take thee from 

the earth and from thy sons, whatever may be 
according to my will. 


But the Lord summoned one of the angels, 371 
the eldest (sc. commander) of Tartarus, and put 
him by me, and the appearance of that angel 
was as snow, and his hands were as of ice, and 
he chilled my face, because I could not suffer the 
great heat (szc) and that terror. 


3. This verse too is adapted in Test. Naph. iv. 2, which e. g. alters ‘deluge’ into ‘captivity’. 


XXXV. 1. just man (B), i.e. Noah. 


>. Revelation of these disclosures to the faithful in due time. 
3. These disclosures will then usher in a more glorified generation. 


XXXVI. 1. The period is one year in I En. Ixxxi. 6. 
of waiting (B), or ‘of sojourn’. 
contains (B), lit. ‘ preserves’. 
read and understand. Cf. 1 En. Ixxxu. 1-3. 
2. Cf. 1 En, lxxxi. 6. 
| XXXVI. This chapter is read after XXXIX in b, 
1. Tartarus (B), horror (groza). : 


453 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 387. 2—3073 


A 
2 And the Lord said to me: ‘Enoch, if thy face 
be not frozen here, no man will be able to behold 
thy face.’ 


B 
And thus spake the Lord to me. 


Mathusal continued to have hope and to await his father Enoch at his couch day and night. 


38 1 


2 and await him till the determined day.’ 


o 


I tell them everything.’ 


A 


Enoch’s pitiful admonition to his sons with weep- 
ing and great lamentation, as he spoke to 
them. 

Oh my children, my beloved ones, hear the 
admonition of your father, as much as is accord- 
ing to the Lord’s will. 

2 Ihave been let come to you to-day, and an- 
nounce to you, not from my lips, but from the 
Lord’s lips, all that is and was and all that is 
now, and all that will be till judgement-day. 

3 For the Lord has let me come to you, you hear 
therefore the words of my lips, of a man made 
big for you, but I am one who has seen the 
Lord’s face, like iron made to glow from fire it 
sends forth sparks and burns. 

4 You look now upon my eyes, the eyes of a 
man big with meaning for you, but I have seen 
the Lord’s eyes, shining like the sun’s rays and 
filling the eyes of man with awe. 

5 You see now, my children, the right hand of 
a man that helps you, but I have seen the Lord’s 
right hand filling heaven as he helped me. 

6 You see the compass of my work like your 
own, but I have seen the Lord’s limitless and 
perfect compass, which has no end. 

7 You hear the words of my lips, as I heard the 
words of the Lord, like great thunder incessantly 
with hurling of clouds. 


39 « 


8 And now, my children, hear the discourses of 
the father of the earth, how fearful and awful it 
is to come before the face of the ruler of the 
earth, how much more terrible and awful it is to 
come before the face of the ruler of heaven, the 
controller of quick and dead, and of the heavenly 
troops. Who can endure that endless pain ? 


XXXVIII. 1. Cf. xxxvi. 

2 Chil s2=45 

SpChelgin: xci. 1 

XXXIX. 2. the Lord’s lips. 

3. the Lord’s face. Cf. xxii. 1. 
the Lord’s eyes. Cf. xxix, 1. 


Cf. xxii. 5; xxxiii. 6-12, 


8. the father of the earth. B gives a better sense—‘an earthly ‘ruler.’ 





And the Lord said to those men who first led me up: ‘ Let Enoch go down on to earth with you, 
And they placed me by night on my couch. 

3 And Mathusal expecting my coming, keeping watch by day and by night at my couch, was filled 
with awe when he heard my coming, and I told him, ‘ Let all my household come together, that 


B 
Enoch’s instruction of his sons. 


For I am sent forth to you to-day from the 39 2 
Lord’s mouth to speak to you all things that are 
and all that will be till judgement-day, and now, 
my children, not from my own mouth am I 
to-day informing you, but from the Lord’s 
mouth, 


for you have heard my words from my 7 
mouth, but I have heard the Lord’s words like 
great thunder with incessant hurling of clouds, 
I have seen the Lord’s raiment infinite and 6 
incomparable, which has no end. 

Now hear my words, telling of an earthly g 
ruler “ow it is fearful and miserable to stand 
before the face of an earthly ruler; it is terrible 
and miserable, because the ruler’s will is death, 
and the ruler’s will is life or great heat (sic), 


Perhaps we should put a stop after 


‘discourses’ and read as B from ‘ telling’ up to ‘the ruler’s will is life ’, and then return to A ‘how much more *66C. 


454. 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 40; 1-12 


A 
Enoch admonishes his children truly of all 
things from the Lord’s lips, how he saw and 
heard and wrote down. 
And now, my children, I know all things, for 
this zs from the Lord’s lips, and this my eyes 
have seen, from beginning to end. 


40: 





A 


B 


For, my children, I know all things from the 40 
Lord’s mouth. 


2 I know all things, and have written all things into books, the heavens and their end, and their 


plenitude, and all the armies and their marchings. 


great countless multitude of them. 


3 What man has seen their revolutions, and their entrances? 


number, while I have written all their names. 
4,6,7 


I have measured and described the stars, the 


For not even the angels see their 


And I measured the sun’s circle, and measured its rays, counted the hours, I wrote down too all 


things that go over the earth, I have written the things that are nourished, and all seed sown 
and unsown, which the earth produces and all plants, and every grass and every flower, and their 


sweet smells, and their names, 


A 


g and the dwelling-places of the clouds, and their 
composition, and their wings, and how they 
bear rain and rain-drops. 

9 And I investigated all things, and wrote the 
road of the thunder and of the lightning, and 
they showed me the keys and their guardians, 
their rise, the way they go; it is let out in 


measure (sc. gently) by a chain, lest by a heavy | 


chain and violence it hurl down the angry clouds / 


and destroy all things on earth. 
to I wrote the treasure-houses of the snow, and 
the store-houses of the cold and the frosty airs, 
and I observed their season’s key-holder, he fills 
the clouds with them, and does not exhaust 
their treasure-houses. 

And I wrote the resting-places of the winds 
and observed and saw how their key-holders 
bear weighing-scales and measures ; first, they 
put them in ove weighing-scale, then in the other 
the weights and let them out according to 
measure cunningly over the whole earth, lest by 
heavy breathing they make the earth to rock. 

And I measured out the whole earth, its 
mountains, and all hills, fields, trees, stones, 
rivers, all existing things I wrote down, the 
height from earth to the seventh heaven, and 


It 


12 


XL. 1. I know all things . 
héyer Gpodofoy To "Evox TO €ipynKore € 
materias perspexi’. Cf. too Sibyll. Or. vill. 375. 

2. the stars, &c. Cf. 1 En. xlili, 1, 25 xclll. 14. 

3. not even the angels. Cf. xxiv. 3. 

4. See xiii, xiv (notes). 

4-6. There is an addition in 
(see 1 En. Ixxxii. 11-20, notes). 

8. Cf. 1 En. Ix. 19-22. ; 

g. road of the thunder. Cf. 1 En. lix; Ix. 13-15. 

to. Cf. vi. 1,23 1 En. Ix. 17, 18. 

11. See I En. xli. 4. 





. my eyes have seen, c. 
a D , 
‘cal efSov tas UAas Tdoas , 


Sokolov’s text between ‘rays’ and ‘counted’. 


B 


This have my eyes seen from the beginning 
even to the end, and the dwelling-places of the 8 
clouds, both rain-bearing and thunderous. And 9 
they showed me the angels that guard them and 
their keys. 


I saw the treasure-houses of snow and of ice, ro 
and the going-up, whence they go up in measure. 9 
they are carried up by a chain and let down by 
a chain, lest by heavy violence they tear asunder 
the clouds and destroy what is on earth, both air to 
and frost. I beheld for a time how those who 
hold fast the keys do fill the clouds full, and the 
treasure-houses are never exhausted. 

I saw the lairs of the winds, how those who 11 
keep their keys do carry weighing-scales and 
measures, and first put them (sc. the winds) in 
the weighing-scales and then in the measure, and 
let them out in measure over the whole earth, 
lest by ¢heir heavy breath they make the earth 
to rock. 

Thence I was led to the judgement-place, and 12 


Cf. Clem. Alex. Eclog. Proph. (Dind. iii. 456) 6 Aavunr 
and Origen, de Princ. iv. 35 ‘dicente Enoch universas 


It deals with the moon and the seasons 


455 


13 


4] 


I 


i) 


42 1 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS"“OF ENOCH 40) i2= 4252 


A 


downwards to the very lowest hell, and the 
judgement-place, and the very great, open and 
weeping hell. And I saw how the prisoners are 
in pain, expecting the limitless judgement. And 
I wrote down all those being judged by the 
judge, and all their judgements (sc. sentences) 
and all their works. 


Of how Enoch lamented Adam’s sin. 


And I saw all forefathers from a// time with 
Adam and Eva, and I sighed and broke into 
tears and said of the ruin of their dishonour: 
‘Woe is me for my infirmity and for that of my 
forefathers,’ and thought in my heart and said: 
‘Blessed zs the man who has not been born or 
who has been born and shall not sin before the 
Lord’s face, that he come not into this place, nor 
bring the yoke of this place. 





Of how Enoch saw the key-holders and guards 
of the gates of hell standing. 


I saw the key-holders and guards of the gates 
of hell standing, like great serpents, and their 
faces like extinguished lamps, and their eyes of 
fire, their sharp teeth, 





12, the very lowest hell. The old Jewish beliefs of an 


and intrude even into our author’s scheme which in x locate. 
possible further that the author may have had some idea o 


s hell in the third heaven, 
f a series of seven hells, hence the phrase ‘lowest hell’ 


B 
I saw hell all open and the prisoners and infinite 
judgement, 


And having seen I sighed and wept for the 41 1 
destruction of the impious, and I said in my 
heart : 


‘Blessed is he who has not been born, or 2 
who having been born has not sinned before 
God, that he may not be come to this place, nor 
have borne this yoke.’ 


and I saw the guardians of the keys 42 1 
of hell standing over against the gates like great 
serpents, their faces like lamps that are gone out, 
their eyes like darkened flames, and their teeth 
naked down to their breasts. 

And I spake to their faces: ‘I had better not 2 
have seen you, and may none of my tribe come 
to you.’ 


Enoch’s ascent into the paradise of the righteous. 

And I saw there a blessed place, and all blessed 3 
creatures and all there living in joy and in infinite 
happiness in eternal life. 


underworld of punishment are too strong to be excluded, 
But see xviii. 7 (note). It ts 


here. See Eisenmenger, ii. 302, 328~33 for later Rabbinic tradition. 


13. expecting the limitless judgement. 
Sheol or Hades. 
An ancient Jewish belief: cf. liii, 2; Ixiv; 


emer These words seem to imply an intermediate place of punishment, i. e. 
They are used too in vii. 1, of the fallen Watchers. 
BOS sti, DRA SS 1H, 


From the idea of Enoch as scribe of God’s 


works, as in I and 2 Enoch, the transition was easy to the idea of Enoch as scribe of the deeds of men. For later 


tradition cf. Test. Abraham (ed. James, p. 11 5) 6 


diddoKados rod odipavod Kai tips Vis kal ypappareds rhs Sucaoodyys *Evox* 


> , Xr ‘ 4 > A > v0 a > 2 \ c , \ 4 o / , 
ATEOTELAEY yap Kuplos avTous evtau a, wa aroypapeoiw Tas apapttas Kat Tas Otkatoovvas €KaO TOU, 


XLI. In B this chapter occurs after xlii. 1. 
XLI. 1. Enoch’s forefathers, including Adam and Eve, 
Ix. 8, 23; Ixi. 12; xx. 3, 4 where Paradise is 
and Elijah seem to be its only inhabitants, 


appear to be in the place of punishment. Contrast 1 En. 
already peopled with the righteous, 
In 1 En, xxii. 7, however, Abel 


though in Ixxxix. 52; xciii. 8 Enoch 
seems to remain in Hades till the 


judgement on Cain and his seed is consummated, Cf. the early Christian belief e.g. in Descensus ad Lnferos viii-ix. 


2. Cf. 4 Ezra iv. 12; 1 En. xxxviii, 2; 2 Bar. x. 6. 


XLII. 1. the key-holders. We havea strange 
khedoudagé. For ‘keys’ cf. Rev. ix. 13 xx. I. 
guards of the gates of hell. 
control of a certain angel (Eisenmenger, ii. 332). 
extinguished lamps. 
teeth naked down to their 
the teeth is incomplete, 
2-13. These verses are omitted by A. 
2aetexil, 2: 


breasts (B), 


Emek hammelech, fol. 144, 


application of this idea in Sibyll. Or. viii. 121-2 where the aig» is 


col. 2, says that each division of hell is under the 


Cf. the word rnedotdxos in Apoc, Pauli. 
Contrast the heavenly angels’ face and EYES Nal h. 

i. €. either the teeth reached down to the breasts, 
and the creatures themselves are referred to as naked down to their breasts. . 


or the description of 


456 


14 


431 


Ww 


44 ; 


Ti =eOOKM OF tie SECRETS, OF ENOCH 42. 14-—44) 2 


A 


and I saw all the Lord’s 
works, how they are right, while the works of 
man are some good, and others bad, and in their 
works are known those who lie evilly. 


Enoch shows his children how he measured and 
wrote out God’s judgements. 


I, my children, measured and wrote out every 
work and every measure and every righteous 
judgement. 


As one year is more honourable 
than another, so is ove man more honourable 
than another, some for great possessions, some 
for wisdom of heart, some for particular intellect, 
some for cunning, one for silence of lip, another 
for cleanliness, one for strength, another for 
comeliness, one for youth, another for sharp wit, 
one for shape of body, another for sensibility, 
let it be heard everywhere, but there is none 
better than he who fears God, he shall be more 
glorious in time to come. 


Enoch instructs his sons, that they revile not the 
face of man, small or great. 

The Lord with his hands having created man, 

in the likeness of his own face, the Lord made 


6-14. Nine rather colourless beatitudes. 
7. judges a judgement justly. 








Cf. ix; Ezek. xviii. 8. 


B 


Then I spake: ‘ My children, and now I speak 6 
to you: Blessed is he who fears God and serves 
him. And you, my children, learn to bring gifts 
to the Lord, that you may enjoy life. Blessed is 7 
he who judges a judgement justly to the widow 9 
and orphan, and helps every one that is wronged, 
clothing the naked with garments, and to the 8 
hungry giving bread. 

Blessed is he who turns back from the change- 10 
able path and walks along the straight path. 

Blessed is he who sows the seeds of righteous- 11 
ness, for he shall reap sevenfold. 

Blessed is he in whom is truth, that he may 12 
speak truth to his neighbour. 

Blessed is he in whose mouth is mercy and 13 
gentleness. 

Blessed is he who understands the Lord’s 14 
works and glorifies the Lord God. 


Behold, my children (sc. all) the things that 43 1 
can be used on earth and the things that have 
been planned I have written down from the Lord 
God. 

Winter and summer, all have I put together, 
and of the years I have counted out the hours, 
and the hours have I all measured out and 
written down, and found out all the difference 
(sc. understood all their variety). 

One year is more honourable than another, 2 
and one day than another, and one hour is more 
honourable than another. 

Likewise one man is more honourable than 
another, this one for much property, that for 
mercy of heart, that again for understanding and 
cunning and for silence of tongue and mouth. 

For there is none greater than he who fears 3 
God; they shall be glorious into eternity. 


The Lord with his hands created man, and 441 
likened Aim to his own face. 


8,9. Cf. ix: also for 9 cf. Ps. x. 18; Isa. i. 17; Jer. xxii. 3, 163 Zech. vii. 9, 10. 


10. straight path. 


Cf. Prov. iv. 11; Sibyll. Or. ili. 9-10; Sib. Or. Fragm. 1. 23 Sq. 


1. Cf. Sirach vii. 3; Job. iv. 8; Prov. xxii. 8; Hos. x. 13. 


12. Cf. Lev. xix. 11; Eph. iv. 253; Sibyll. Or. ii. 58, 64. 
13. Cf. Prov. xxx. 26. 
14. in their works . 


XLIII. 2, 3. As one year, &c. 


, . known, &c. (A). 


Matt, vii. 16, 20. 


We might expect ‘as one day’, cf. Sir. xxill. 7. 


The main thought of this 


passage is derived from Sir. x. 20, 22, 24, 30: cf. Sibyll. Or. il. 125. 


457 


La 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 44. 1—46, 3 


A 


him small and great. Whoever reviles the ruler’s 
face, and abhors the Lord’s face, has despised 

2 the Lord’s face, and he who vents anger on any 
man without injury, the Lord’s great anger will 

3 cut him down, he who spits on the face of man 
reproachfully, will be cut down at the Lord’s 
great judgement. 

4 Blessed is the man who does not direct his 
heart with malice against any man, and helps 
the injured and condemned, and raises the broken 

5 down, and shall do charity to the needy, because 
on the day of the great judgement every weight, 
every measure and every makeweight we// be as 
in the market, that is to say ¢hey are hung on 
scales and stand in the market, and every onc 
shall learn his own measure, and according to 
his measure shall take his reward. 


God shows how he does not want from men 
sacrifices, nor burnt-offerings, but pure and 
contrite hearts. 

Whoever hastens to make offering before the 
Lord’s face, the Lord for his part will hasten 
that offering by granting of his work. 

2 But whoever increases his lamp before the 
Lord’s face and make not true judgement, the 
Lord will zo¢ increase his treasure in the realm 
of the highest. 

3 When the Lord demands bread, or candles, or 
flesh (sc. cattle), or any other sacrifice, then that 
is nothing ; but God demands pure hearts, and 
with all that only tests the heart of man. 


45: 





B 

The Lord God created a// things great and 
small. 

He that brings into contempt the face of man, 
brings the Lord’s face into contempt. 

The Lord’s anger and great judgement are on 2 
him who spits in the face of man. 

Blessed is he who turns his heart towards such 4 
a man, so as to help the condemned and raise 
the broken. 


He who multiplies lights before the Lord’s 45 2 
face, the Lord will multiply their storehouses. 


The Lord God wants not bread nor candles, 3 
meal nor cattle, but by this means tempts the 
heart of man. 


aN: 


Of how an earthly ruler does not accept from man abominable and unclean gifts, then how much 
more does God abominate unclean gifts, but sends ¢hem away with wrath and does not accept 


his gifts. 


46 1 


Hear, my people, and take in the words of my lips. 


If any one bring any gifts to an earthly ruler, and have disloyal thoughts in his heart, and the 
ruler know this, will he not be angry with him, and not refuse his gifts, and not give him over to 


2 judgement ? 


Or 7f one man make himself appear good to another by deceit of tongue, but ave 


evil in his heart, then will not ¢he other understand the treachery of his heart, and himself be 


3 condemned, since his untruth was plain to all ? 


And when the Lord shall send a great light, then 


there will be judgement for the just and the unjust, and there no one shall escape notice. 


XLIV. 1. Whoever reviles, &c. 
2. Cf. Matt. v. 22. 


Cf. James iii. 9. 


4. This beatitude, out of place here, would come in fittingly at the end of xii. 


XLV. 3. Cf. Ps. xl. 6, li. 16; Isa. i. 11; Mic. vi. 6-8; Sir. xxxv. 1-3; Sibyll. Or. viii. 390, 391, also ii. 82: g 
Supplic. pro Christo, 13. This is not Essenism. See lix. 1-3. We find the same spiel ei of ian 


in Sir. xxxv. 1-3, side by side with injunctions to offer them. 


candles. Cf. ‘lamp’ in verse 2. 
pure hearts. Ps. li. ro. 


tests the heart of man. Deut. viii. 2; 2 Chron. xxxii. Bly ES exXKxvin 2. 


XLVI. 3. a great light. 
John iii. 19-21. 


tempts (B), or ‘ proves’. 


The reference is not clear, but cf. Isa. ix. 2 or John i. 9, v. 35, viii. 12, and esp. 


458 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 47. 1—48. 9 


A 
Enoch instructs his sons from God’s lips, and hands them the handwriting of this book. 


47: And now, my children, lay thought on your hearts, mark well the words of your father, which are 
all come to you from the Lord’s lips. 


2 Take these books of your father’s handwriting and read them. 

For the books are many, and in them you will learn all the Lord’s works, all that has been from 
the beginning of creation, and will be till the end of time. 

3. And if you will observe my handwriting, you will not sin against the Lord; because there is no 
other except the Lord, neither in heaven, nor in earth, nor in the very lowest places, nor in the one 
foundation. 

4 The Lord has placed the foundations in the unknown, and has spread forth heavens visible and 

5 invisible ; he fixed the earth on the waters, and created countless creatures, and who has counted 
the water and the foundation of the unfixed, or the dust of the earth, or the sand of the sea, or the 
drops of the rain, or the morning dew, or the wind’s breathings? Who has filled earth and sea, 
and the indissoluble winter ? 


I cut the stars out of fire, and decorated heaven, and put it in their midst. 


Of the sun’s passage along the seven circles. 


48: That the sun go along the seven heavenly circles, which are the appointment of one hundred and 

2 eighty-two thrones, that it go down on a short day, and again one hundred and eighty-two, that it 

go down on a big day, and he has two thrones on which he rests, revolving hither and thither above 

the thrones of the months, from the seventeenth day of the month Tsivan it goes down to the 
month Thevan, from the seventeenth of Thevad it goes up. 


3 And thus it goes close to the earth, then the earth is glad and makes grow its fruit, and when it 
goes away, then the earth is sad, and trees and all fruits have no florescence. 


4 All this he measured, with good measurement of hours, and fixed a measure by his wisdom, of 
the visible and the invisible. ; 


5 From the invisible he made all things visible, himself being invisible. 
6 Thus I make known to you, my children, and distribute the books to your children, into all your 
7 generations, and amongst the nations who shall have the sense to fear God, let them receive them, 


and may they come to love them more than any food or earthly sweets, and read them and apply 
themselves to them. 


8 And those who understand not the Lord, who fear not God, who accept not, but reject, who do 
not receive them (sc. the books), a terrible judgement awaits these. 

9 Blessed is the man who shall bear their yoke and shall drag them along, for he shall be released 
on the day of the great judgement. 


GON Me (Qe coree ead 
2. Cf. 1 En. xciii. 10 for this high estimate of the Enochic works. . a : 
3. you will not sin. Cf. xxxiii. 9; xlviii. 7-9. For a like claim cf. 1 En. XXXKVIl. 45 XCll. Ly; /XClil. TO; Cc. 65 ‘Civ. 
12, 13, and contrast Sir. xviii. 3. 4 if 
no other except the Lord. Cf. Isa. xlv.5, &c.; Sibyll. Or. iii. 69, 760; vill. 377; Sib. Or, Fragm. i. 7,15 5 ill. 35 
Souk 
4. spread forth heavens. Ps. civ. 2; Isa. xl. 22; xiii. 5. 
fixed the earth on the waters. 2 Pet. ili. 5. ae 
5. who has counted... the sand of the sea, or the drops of the rain. Drawn from Sir. i. 2. Cf. Isa. xl. 12; 
Job xxxvi. 27 (LXX). ; 
decorated heaven. Cf. Sir. xvi. 27. 


XLVIII. 1. The text is faulty and unintelligible. The sun is in the fourth circle of the heavens in xi. I ; xxx. 3, 
and does not revolve through the seven circles. The twice-mentioned 182 thrones, too, are really, when added, the 
364 world-stations of 1 En. Ixxv. 2, i.e. the 364 different positions occupied by the sun on the 364 days of the year. As 
in 1 En. Ixxii-Ixxxii and Jub. iv the number is not exact (contrast 2 En. xiv. 1). This older Enochic reckoning may 
be partly due to opposition to heathen systems, and partly to the fact that 364 = 52 weeks of 7 days exactly. 

2. Corrupt. Read either ‘Sivan... Kislev’ or ‘Tamuz.. . Tebet’. Thevan and Thevad seem to be the same. 

5. Cf. xxiv. 2 (note) ; xvii. 2 (note). 

6. See xxxiii. g (note). . te 

7. love them more than any food. Cf. 1 En, Ixxxii. 3. Cf. 2 En. xlvil. 2 (note). | - 

8. No such terrible judgement is threatened on the rejecters of Enoch’s disclosures in 1 En., but cf. Rev. xxii. 18, 19. 

g. No such blessing is offered to the obedient in 1 En. There the righteous elect, or the righteous and the wise, 
receive Enoch’s revelations. Cf. Ixxxii. 3 ; xcili. 10; civ. 12. 


459 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 49. 1—50, 5 


A 


Enoch instructs his sons not to swear either by 
heaven or earth, and shows God’s promise, 
even in the mother’s womb. 


I swear to you, my children, but I swear not 
by any oath, neither by heaven nor by earth, nor 
by any other creature which God created. 

The Lord said: ‘ There is no oath in me, nor 
injustice, but truth.’ If there is no truth in men, 
let them swear by the words ‘yea, yea’, or 
else, ‘ nay, nay.’ 

And I swear to you, yea, yea, that there has 
been no man in his mother’s womb, but that 
already before, even to each one there is a place 
prepared for the repose of that soul, and a mea- 
sure fixed how much it is intended that a man 
be tried in this world. 

Yea, children, deceive not yourselves, for there 
has been previously prepared a place for every 
soul of man. 


491 


iS) 


Of how none born on earth can remain hidden 
nor his work remain concealed, but he (sc. 
God) bids ws be meek, to endure attack and 
insult, and not to offend widows and 
orphans. 

I have put every man’s work in writing and 
none born on earth can remain hidden nor his 
works remain concealed. I seeall things. Now 
therefore, my children, in patience and meekness 
spend the number of your days, that you inherit 
endless life. 

3 Endure for the sake of the Lord every wound 
every injury, every evil word and attack. 

4 If ill-requitals befall you, return ##em not either 
to neighbour or enemy, because the Lord will 
return ¢hem for you and be your avenger on the 
day of great judgement, that there be no avenging 
here among men. 

5 Whoever of you spends gold or silver for his 
brother’s sake, he will receive ample treasure in 
the world to come. 

Injure not widows nor orphans nor strangers, 
lest God’s wrath come upon you. 


50: 


to 


? 


XLIX. 1. I swear not, &c. Cf. Matt. v. 34, B53 


be a Jewish commonplace (Conybeare). 
2. toeach... 








See also Philo, De Special. Leg. ii. 1; 
Decem Orac. 17; De Sac. Abels et Caini, 28; De Plant. Noe, 19; Quod Omnis Probus Liber, 12. 
For Jewish forms of swearing see Eisenmenger, ii. 490 sqq. 
a place prepared for the repose, &c. 


B 


For I swear to you, my children, that before 49 2 
man was, a judgement-place was prepared for 
him, and a measure and a weighing-scale, in 
which man will be proved, and ¢hey are there 
already prepared. 


And I shall put the work of every man in 50 1 
writing. 

And now, my children, spend the number of 2 
your days in patience and gentleness, that you 
inherit the endless age that is to come. 


Every wound, every hurt and heat (szc) and 3 
wicked word (sc. which) shall befall you, suffer 
them for the Lord God’s sake; 

and if you are able to requite (sc. ill), do not 4 
requite your neighbour (sc. with ill) because the 
Lord is your requiter, and he (4¢. who) will be 
the avenger on the day of the great judgement. 

Lose gold or silver for a brother’s sake, that 5 
you receive inexhaustible treasure on the judge- 
ment-day. 


Leg. All. iii. 723 De 
This appears to 


So Chagiga, fol. 15, col.1 ; Zorath Adam, fol. 101, col. 3; 


Avodath hakkodesh, fol. 19, col. 1, where it is said a place is prepared for every man either in paradise or hell. Cf. 
_ the number of souls, lviii. 5 ; 2 Bar. xxi. 23, xxiil. 4, 5; 4 Ezra iv. 36, vii. 85, 95. 


L, I. nor his works remain concealed. 1 En. ix. 5. 
2. in patience. 
oat Sir. ii, 4; 2 Tim. iv. 5; Heb. x. Bos 
4. Cf. Sir. xxviii. 1, 2, 

avenger ... day of great judgement. 


5. Whoever, &c. 


Cf. Prov. xix. 17; Sir. xxix. 10. 
Injure not. 


; ? Cf. Luke xxi, 19 ‘in your patience ye shall win your souls’. 
immortality but not, it seems, the resurrection of the dead. 


T Pet.ai- 09; ames 112: 


- Cf. Deut. xxxii. 35 (LXX). 
xu. 19; Heb. x. 30 agree partly with Mass. and partly with LXX. 

See 2 En. li. 2 (note), 
We expect ‘stretch out your hands to’ as in ix. Cf. Sibyll, Or, ii, 75. 


This book teaches a blessed 


See 2. Enili3: 


Cf. too Prov. xx. 22; xxiv. 29. Rom. 


460 


ak 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 51. 1—52. 11 


A 


Enoch instructs his sons, that they hide not trea- 
sures in the earth, but bids ¢hem give alms 
to the poor. 

51: Stretch out your hands to the poor according 
2to your strength. Hide not your silver in the 
earth. Help the faithful man in affliction, and 
affliction will not find you in the time of your 
trouble. 

3 And every grievous and cruel yoke that come 
upon you bear all for the sake of the Lord, and 
thus you will find your reward in the day of 
judgement. 

4 It is good to go morning, midday, and evening 
into the Lord’s dwelling, for the glory of your 
creator. 

5 Because every breathing ¢hzng glorifies him, 
and every creature visible and invisible returns 
him praise. 


God instrucis his faithful, how they are to praise 
his name. 


Blessed is the man who opens his lips in praise 
of God of Sabaoth and praises the Lord with his 
heart. 

2 Cursed every man who opens his lips for the 
bringing into contempt and calumny of his neigh- 
bour, because he brings God into contempt. 

3 Blessed is he who opens his lips blessing and 
praising God. 

4 Cursed is he before the Lord all the days of his 
life, who opens his lips to curse and abuse. 

5 Blessed is he who blesses all the Lord’s works. 

6 Cursed is he who brings the Lord’s creation 
into contempt. 

+ Blessed is he who looks down and raises the 
fallen. 

8 Cursed is he who looks to and is eager for the 
destruction of what is not his. 

9 Blessed is he who keeps the foundations of his 
fathers made firm from the beginning. 

tro. Cursed is he who perverts the decrees of his 
forefathers. 

Blessed is he who implants peace and love. 


52 x 


rf EE 


LI. 1. Sir. vii. 32 ; Prov. xxxi. 20. Cf. Job vil. 9; Sibyll. 





B 


Stretch forth your hands to the orphan and to 51 
the widow, and according to your power help the 
poor, and thus you shall find your reward on the 3 
judgement-day. 


' 


In the morning, at midday and in the evening 4 
and by day (sic) it is good to go into God’s 
house and to glorify the creator of all. 


Blessed is he who opens his heart and mouth 52 1 
for the Lord’s praise. 


Cursed is he who opens his mouth for the 2 
humbling of his neighbour. 


Blessed is he who glorifies all the Lord's works. 5 

Cursed is he who brings a creature of the Lord 6 
into contempt. 

Blessed is he who beholds the labour of his 7 
hands. 

Cursed is he who looks to undo the labours of 8 
others. 

Blessed is he who keeps the foundations of his 9 
fathers. 

Cursed is he who distorts the decrees and ro 
limits of his fathers. 

Blessed is he who goes (sc. with others) and rr 
brings (sc. others) together in peace. 


Or. ii. 88. 


according to your strength. Cf. Sir. xiv. 133 Xxix. 20. 


2. Hide not, &c. Cf. Sir. xxix. Io. 
Help ... in affliction. Cf. Sir. iv. 4. 
3. Sir. ii. 4. Cf. 1 Pet. ii. 19 ; Mis, oC ia2) en. 1.3 


4. Ps. lv.17. Cf. Dan. vi. 10. For these three Jewish hours of prayer—the third, sixth, and ninth—cf. Acts il. 15 ; 


Ailes 0X5 


sacrifice, and sacrifices could only be offered in Jerusalem. 
55 Cf. Ps, cl..6. 


the fone dwelling, i.e. the temple. Although the writer is a Jew living in Egypt, he writes for Judaism as 
a whole, and gives here the ideal conduct of a dweller at Jerusalem. 


In lix. 2, 3 he prescribes the right method of 


LII. For these beatitudes cf. xlii. 6-14. They are derived mainly from Sirach. 


2. Cf. Wisdom i. 11 amd karadahuas peicacbe yrooons. 
4. curse and abuse. Cf sinecais 9-12. : 


Z 2 


calle Ane mee 
Ge Ch Sit, xxix. 14 ebAoynoare Kuptovemt magt-Tols épyous avTov. 


io. Cf. 1 En. xcix. 2, 143 Sir. xvii. 11. 
11. Cf. Matt. v. 9. 


461 


53 1 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 52, 12—54. 


A 


12 Cursed is he who disturbs those that love their 
neighbours. 

™3 Blessed is he who speaks with humble tongue 
and heart to all. 

™4 Cursed is he who speaks peace with his tongue, 
while in his heart there is no peace but a sword. 

15 For all these things will be laid bare in the 
weighing-scales and in the books, on the day of 
the great judgement. 


[Let us not say: ‘Our father is before God, 
he will stand forward for us on the day of 
judgement,’ for there father cannot help son, 
nor yet son father, ] 

And now, my children, do not say: ‘Our 
father is standing before God, and is praying for 
our sins,’ for there is there no helper of any man 
who has sinned. 

2 You see how I wrote all works of every man, 

before his creation, a// that is done amongst all 

3 men for all time, and none can tell or relate my 

handwriting, because the Lord sees all the imagin- 

ings of man, how they are vain, where they lie 
in the treasure-houses of the heart. 

4 And now, my children, mark well all the words 

of your father, that I tell you, lest you regret, 

saying: ‘Why did our father not tell us ?? 


Enoch instructs his sons, that they should hand 
the books to others also. 


[At that time, not understanding this] let these 
books which I have given you be for an inherj- 


54 


12. Cf. Sir, xxviii. 9, 13. 


B 
Cursed is he who disturbs what is in peace. 12 


Blessed is he who speaks peace, and he has 73 
peace. 


All this will be laid bare in the weighing- 15 
scales and on the books on the day of the great 
judgement. 

And now, children, keep your hearts from all 16 
unrighteousness, that you may inherit the weigh- 
ing-scale of the light into eternity. 


Say not, my children, that our father is with 53 
God, and will pray for us (sc. and obtain absolu- 
tion) from our sins. 


You see, how that I write down all the works 
of every man. 

And none can distort my handwriting, because 3 
the Lord seeth. all. 


iS) 


And now, my children, mark well all the 4 
words of your father’s mouth, 


that they may be 54 
for you for an inheritance of peace, and the books 


14. Cf. Ps. xxviii. 3; lv. 21 ; lxii. 4; Sibyl]. Or. ii. 120, 122. 


16. unrighteousness (B). See lxi. (note). 


LIII. 1. This verse has a duplicate reading in A, The idea that departed saints interceded on behalf of the 
living has been attributed by some scholars to Isa. Ixiii. 16 (see Ewald, Hést. of Israel, i. 296 ; Cheyne, Prophecies 


of Isaiah, 107-8 ; 299-300). If, however, the doctrine of a 


blessed immortality or of the resurrection was a late 


development among the Jews, this idea must necessarily have been later still, and accordingly unless we are prepared 
to bring down considerably the date of Isa. Ixiii, we shall have some difficulty in justifying such an interpretation. It 


seems indeed that this idea among the Jews was comparatively late in origin. 


The first indubitable evidence in its 


favour is to be found in 1 En. xxii. 12 } XCvii. 3, 5; xcix. 16; and thus we find that it was an accepted Pharisaic belief 


early in the second century B.c. 


The next mention of this belief is to be met with in 2 Macc. xv. 14 where Jeremiah, 
who appears in a vision to Judas Maccabaeus, is described as follows: 6 Piradderos obrd 
Tept Tov Aaod Kal Tis dyias Téews "lepeuias 6 tod beod mpopytns. 
Tplot xpnodspevor mapakAyrows Tov mpos Tov matépa Karaddayar . 
aepevas copudtov \oyxais ddacroy Kab yopuny emdeckvupévais mpods tov dpxovra Oeparreia 
ikerelas ovK atedeis eboOacr mover Oat, yépas avrois mapéxovros Tod mat pos 70 emnKooy ev edxais. 


s €oTtv 6 Toha Tpocevydpevos 
This was also the teaching of Philo, de Exsecrat OVE 
. . Oevrép@ d€ rh rdv dpynyeray rod Lbvous Oovdrntt, Ort Tais 
vy tas imép vidv Kal Ovyarépov 
The same view was obviously 


held by Josephus, Azzé. i. 13. 3, where he describes Abraham as saying to Isaac when on the point of sacrificing him: 


BEL SaaS ; x : 

Het evxav O€ Kal tepoupylas exetvou THY Wuxny ryv oy mpoodeEonevov Kai rap’ aiT@ Kabééo 
i 5 ee a 

yrpoxopov. And also in Sibyll. Or. 330-3 ois Kai 6 mavroxpdtap beds &bOiros dAXO Tap 

2 ane nie e 3 s 

apOiroy aitjowvrar’ x pahepoto mupds te Kal dxapdroy drs Bpvypav avOpamovs cdca Shoe’ Kai todTo Tromoet. 


doctrine is recognized and apparently accepted in certain 
John viii. 56 (?); Heb. xii. 1 PSURGV.. vi 6-18, 
357-9; 361. 


vros €on pot eis Kndeudva Kai 
’ > ’ > RS SFE SD rep) A 
€fer evoeBeoo’, émdr av Oedy 


Finally this 


parts of the N. T.: Matt. xxvii. 47, 49; Luke xvi. 24-31 ; 
| I . For the prevalence of this belief in later Judaism, see Eisenmenger ii. 
The idea of intercession may be derived from ancestor-worship, and not from the doctrine of a future 


life as I have implied above ; Cf. Cheyne’s /ntrod. to the Book of Isaiah, 352, 353. 


2. Enoch is the universal scribe. 
3. tell or relate. B has ‘distort’. 


Perhaps read ‘tell or gainsay’. Cf, Ps, Civ. 11; Sir. xvii. 15, 20, 
f.Be 


relate = raskazati—possibly a mistake for raskaziti = ‘to distort’. C 


LIV. See xxxiii. 9 (note). 


462 


55 1 


56 1 


571 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 55, 1—57. 2 


i 


tance of your peace. Hand them to all who want 
them, and instruct them, that they may see the 
Lord's very great and marvellous works. 


Here Enoch shows his sons, telling them with 
tears: ‘My children, the hour has approached 
for me to go up on to heaven ; behold, the 
angels are standing before me.’ 

‘My children, behold, the day of my term and 
the time have approached. 

For the angels who shall go with me are stand- 
ing before me and urge me to my departure 
from you; they are standing here on earth, 
awaiting what has been told them. 


2 For to-morrow I shall go up on to heaven, to 
the uppermost Jerusalem to my eternal inherit- 
ance. 

3. Therefore I bid you do before the Lord’s face 
ail 4zs good pleasure. 


Methosalam asks of his father blessing, that he 
(sc. Methosalam) may make him (sc. Enoch) 
food to eat. 

Methosalam having answered his father Enoch, 
said: ‘What is agreeable to thy eyes, father, 
that I may make before thy face, that thou 
mayst bless our dwellings, and thy sons, and 
that thy people may be made glorious through 
thee, and then ¢/at thou mayst depart thus, as 
the Lord said ?’ 

2 Enoch answered to his son Methosalam and 
said: ‘ Hear, child, from the time when the Lord 
anointed me with the ointment of his glory, 
there has been no food in me, and my soul remem- 
bers not earthly enjoyment, neither do I want 
anything earthly.’ 


Enoch bade his son Methosalam to summon all 

his brethren. 

‘My child Methosalam, summon all thy 
brethren and all your household and the elders 
of the people, that I may talk to them and 
depart, as is planned for me.’ 

2 And Methosalam made haste, and summoned 
his brethren, Regim, Riman, Uchan, Chermion, 
Gaidad, and all the elders of the people before 
the face of his father Enoch; and he blessed 
them, avd said to them: 


the Lord’s... 


LV. See xxxvi. 
2. the highest heaven (B). 


Vitec Ch xxil. 7; 3- 
CVG ete cremavie 1s 23 2 xh 6. 








B 


which I have given you from God, hide them not, 
tell them to all that want, that by word they 
learn of God’s works. 


For behold, my children, the day of my term 55 1 
has approached, the angels coming from the Lord 
God urge the appointed time, and stand with me 
before my face. 


And I shall go up to-morrow on to the highest 2 
heaven into my eternal inheritance. 


Therefore I command you, my children, that 3 
you do Ais good pleasure before the Lord’s face. 


Mefusailom answered his father Enoch: ‘ What 56 1 
food (sc. meal) is agreeable to thy eyes, father, 
that we may make before thy face, that thou 
mayst bless our dwellings and thy sons, and all 
thy household, and glorify thy people, and thus 
after that depart ?’ 


Enoch said to his son: ‘ Hear, my child, from 2 
that day when the Lord anointed me with the 
oil of his glory, from that time there has been no 
food in me. I do not desire earthly food, 


but 571 
summon thy brethren and all our household, and 
the elders of the people, that I may speak with 
them and depart.’ 

And Mefusailom made haste and summoned 2 
his brethren Regim and Rim and Azuchan and 
Chermion, and the elders of the people, and 
brought all before the face of his father Enoch. 
And he blessed them, and said to them: 


marvellous works. Job xxxvii. 14, 16; Ps. Ixxi. 17, &c. 


Cf. Ixvii. 2. A’s reading, ‘to the uppermost Jerusalem,’ seems inferior. 


2. Riman, Uchan, and Chermion are not mentioned in i. Io. 


463 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 58, 1-6 


A B 
Enoch’s instruction to his sons. 
58 1 ‘Listen to me, my children, to-day. ‘Listen, children, in the days of our father 58 1 


In those days when the Lord came downonto | Adam, the Lord God came down (sc. to earth) 
earth for Adam’s sake, and visited all his | and visited it and all his creatures, which he 2 
creatures, which he created himself, after all | created himself, and the Lord God called all the 

2 these he created Adam, and the Lord called all | beasts of the earth and all the wild animals and 
the beasts of the earth, all the reptiles, and all the | all the quadrupeds, and all the reptiles of the 
birds that soar in the air, and brought them all | earth, and all the birds that soar, and brought 
before the face of our father Adam. them before the face of our father Adam, and 

And Adam gave the names to all things living | called the names to all things that move over the 

3on earth. And the Lord appointed him ruler | earth. And God subjected to Adam all things 3 
over all, and subjected to him all things under | existing into subservience (lit. lessness) and 
his hands, and made them dumb and made them | secondly made them all dull (lit. deaf) that they 
dull (lit. deaf) that they be commanded of man, | might be in subjection and obedience to man. 
and be in subjection and obedience to him. : 

Thus also the Lord created every man lord | For the Lord created man ruler over all his 


over all his possessions. possessions. 
4 The Lord will not judge a single soul of beast In this there will be no judgement of every 4 
for man’s sake, but adjudges the souls of men to | living soul, but only of man’s. 
5 their beasts in this world ; for men have a special But for the souls of beasts there is in the great 5 
place. age one place and one fold. 
And as every soul of man is according to For no soul of any animal which the Lord 6 





6 number, similarly beasts will not perish, nor all | created will be shut up till the great judgement, 


LVIII. 1. the Lord came down, &c. See xxxii. 1 (note). 
5- men have a special place. See xlix. 2 (note). ; ae 
similarly beasts will not perish. As the Jews believed about the opening of the Christian era that all animals 
had spoken one language before the fall, and so were rational to some extent (Jub. iii. 28; Josephus, Avz. i. 1. 4) it 
was natural they should infer a future existence of the animal world. Yet nowhere else except here do we find it, 
either in O.T. or pre-Christian Jewish works. Their future life is limited and has an ethical motive, not for the brute’s 
own sake, but to accuse man at the final judgement. The Greek view of metempsychosis, and the deification of animals 
in Egypt show that the idea of animals’ future life was conceivable in the ancient world. Plutarch, P/ac. v. 20. 4 holds 
that brutes’ souls are rational, but incapable of acting rationally on account of their bodies ; according to Xenocrates 
they possessed a consciousness of God, caOédov yoo tiv rept Tod Ociov évvoray Hevoxpdtns . . . ovdK dmeAmi¢er Kat ey tots 
Méyors (Pos (Clem. Strom. v. 590). Chrysippus ascribed reason to brutes (Chalkid in Zi. p. 148b); while Sextus 
Medicus (ix. 127) maintained that the souls of brutes and of men were alike. Hence it was generally believed that the 
souls of men could pass into brutes, mparov pév dOdvatov civai pnow tiv Wuyny, etra peraBdddAoveav eis Ba yérn Cov 
(Porph. Y. P. 19): while Plato indeed went further and derived the souls of all brutes ultimately from those of men, 
through a process of deterioration, as ydp more €& avdpav yuvaikes kai Tada Onpia yernoovro, nricrayto of cumordvres nas 
(Zim. 76D). With regard to individual animals, some thinkers believed that bees contained a divine element (Virg. 
Georg. iv. 219-21), while Democritus and Pliny placed religion among the moral virtues of elephants (H. JX. viii. we 
But the closest parallels are to be found in Zoroastrianism, to which indeed we should probably trace in some measure 
the ideas of the text. Thus in the Zend-Avesta Vendidad Fargard 13 (Darmesteter) we find an entire chapter dealing 
with the sacredness of the life of the domesticated dog and the crime of attempting its life—its murderer was to lose 
his soul to the ninth generation (1-4): with the food that was to be given to it and the penalties entailed by feeding 
it badly (20-28), which were to range from fifty to two hundred blows with the horse-goad. Nay more, the land, its 
pastures and crops were to suffer for the unatoned death of the dog, and these plagues were not to be removed till the 
man who had slain it was slain in turn or had offered sacrifices three days and three nights to the pious soul of the 
departed dog (54, 55). Finally, the soul of the dog went after death to the source of the waters (51). In the Midrash 
Koheleth, fol. 329, col. 1, we find the following quaint and slightly analogous thought: ‘Rabbi Chama, the son of 
Gorion, said that wolves and unfruitful trees must give account: just as man must give account, so also must unfruitful 
trees.’ Eisenmenger i. 468. It is noteworthy that the ideas. of the text have passed over into the creed of the 
Mohammedans. Thus, according to Sale’s note on the sixth chapter of the Koran, irrational animals will be restored 
to life at the resurrection that they may be brought to judgement and have vengeance taken on them for the injuries 
they had inflicted on each other in this life. Then after they have duly retaliated their several wrongs, God will turn 
them again to dust (Sale’s Koran, Prelim. Discourse, Sect. iv), with the exception of Ezra’s ass and the dog of the 
Seven Sleepers which will enjoy eternal life in Paradise (Koran ili; xviii). Are we to interpret in this manner Orac. 
Sibyll. viii. 415-18 ?— 
kal Uorepoy és Kpiow néo 

kKpivov evoeBewr Kal dvaceBéwy Biov avdpav" 

kal Kptoy KpL@ Kal Trowméve mroiméva Onow 

kal poaxov pdax@ mrédas GAjAwy €s Edeyxov. 
Even in Christian times animals were credited with intelligence, conscience, responsibility, as well as with the passions, 
vices, and virtues of mankind (see Bestie delinguentt, D’Addosio, 1892, from which the following facts are taken). 
They were accordingly solemnly tried, and advocates were assigned at the public expense to them to plead their 
cause. Thus moles (A.D. 824), a sow (1324), a cock (1474), snails (1487) were duly tried and condemned. They were 


464 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 58. 6—61. 7 


A 
souls of beasts which the Lord created, till the 


great judgement, and they will accuse man, if he 
feed them ill. 


Enoch instructs his sons wherefore they may not 
touch beef because of what comes from it. 
Whoever defiles the soul of beast, defiles his 
own soul. 
2 For man brings clean animals to make sacrifice 
for sin, that he may have cure of his soul. 


59 : 





B 
and all souls will accuse the man, 


whoever feeds 59 1 
ill the soul of beast, defiles his own soul. 
But he who brings sacrifice of clean beasts, 2 
cures his own soul, and he who brings an offering 
of clean birds, cures his own soul. 


va 


And if they bring for sacrifice clean animals, and birds, man has cure, he cures his soul. 


3 
4 
5 
own soul. 
A 
GO x He who does injury to soul of man, does injury 


to his own soul, and there is no cure for his flesh, 
nor pardon for all time. 


How it is not fitting to kill man neither by 
weapon nor by tongue. 

2 He who works the killing of a man’s soul, kills 
his-own soul, and kills his own body, and there 
is no cure for him for all time. 

3 He who puts a man in any snare, shall stick 
in it himself, and there is no cure for him for all 
time. 

4 He who puts a man in any vessel, his retri- 
bution will not be wanting at the great judgement 
for all time. 

5 He who works crookedly or speaks evil against 
any soul, will not make justice for himself for 
all time. 


Enoch instructs his sons to keep themselves 
from injustice and often to stretch forth 
hands to the poor, to give a share of their 
labours. 

And now, my children, keep your hearts 
from every injustice, which the Lord hates. 

Just as a man asks (sc. something) for his own 


61 x 


also occasionally subjected to torture, and 
as 1531 a book was written by Chassauée to 


methods of procedure (Z. ¢. p. 75)- 





and their cries were regarded as a confession of guilt (7. ¢. p. 46). as 
discuss the lawfulness of trying animals judicially, and the legitimate 


All is given you for food, bind it by the four feet, that is to make good the cure, he cures his soul. 
But whoever kills beast without wound, kills his own soul and defiles his own flesh. 
And he who does any beast any injury whatsoever, in secret, it is evil practice, and he defiles his 


B 


He who does injury to the soul of man, in- 60 1 
jures his own soul, and there is no cure for him 
into eternity. 


He who puts a man into tparadise}—his 3 
judgement shall not be exhausted into eternity. 


Now, my children, keep yourselves from every 61 1 
thing unrighteous, which the Lord hateth, still 
more from every living soul. 

Even as late 


LIX. 1. Whoever defiles the soul of beast. This refers not to the sin of bestiality, but, as B and 2-4 show, to 


some unlawful way of sacrificing or slaughtering animals. 


2, 3. These verses suggest a date earlier than the destruction of the Temple, A.D. 70. 


4. Against strangling beasts. 

5. Here bestiality may be meant. 

LX. 1. The sin referred to in 1 Thess. iv. 6. 

3. Cf. Ps. ix. 15; xxxv. 8; lvil. 6. 
+paradiset (B). 


There is an utter want of proportion between sin and penalty here. 
The text is corrupt but easily emended to give the sense ‘ (crooked) dealing’. 


4. vessel = sosud, perhaps a mistake for swd = ‘judgement ’, ‘ lawsuit ’. 


Ra Cb, Psnck.s, 

LXI. 1. injustice which the Lord hates. 
injustice. 

1105.2 


Cf, Jud. v. 17; Sir. xv. Il, 1352 En. Ixvi. 1. 
The same word, mefravda, means injustice, untruth, and unrighteousness. 


465 


Cf levis 1; 
Hh 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 61. 2—638. 4 


A 


2 soul from God, so let him do to every living 
soul, because I know all things, how in the great 
time (sc. to come) are many mansions prepared 
for men, good for the good, and bad for the bad, 
without number many. 

3 Blessed are those who enter the good houses, 
for in the bad (sc. houses) there is no peace nor 
return (sc. from them). 





A 


R 
Just as man asks (sc. something) for his own 
soul from the Lord, so let him dg to every living 2 
soul, lest in the great age... He has prepared 
many mansions, very good dwellings, and bad 

dwellings without number. 
Blessed is he who departs into the sweet 3 
houses. 


4 Hear, my children, small and great! When man puts a good thought in his heart, brings gifts 
from his labours before the Lord’s face and his hands made them not, then the Lord will turn away 
his face from the labour of his hand, and he (sc. man) cannot find the labour of his hands. 

5 And if his hands made it, but his heart murmur, and his heart cease not making murmur 


incessantly, he has not any advantage. 


A 
Of how it is fitting to bring one’s gift with faith, 
because there is no repentance after death. 
Blessed is the man who in his patience brings 
his gifts with faith before the Lord’s face, because 
he will find forgiveness of sins. 

2 But if he take back his words before the time, 
there is no repentance for him; and if the time 
pass and he do not of his own will what is 
promised, there is no repentance after death. 

3 Because every work which man does before 
the time, is all deceit before men, and sin before 


God. 


62 1 


Of how not to despise the poor, but to share 
with them equally, lest thou be murmured 
against before God. 


63 : When man clothes the naked and fills the 

hungry, he will find reward from God. 

2 But if his heart murmur, he commits a double 
evil: ruin of himself and of that which he gives ; 
and for him there will be no finding of reward on 
account of that. 

3 And if his own heart is filled with his food 
and his own flesh (sc. clothed) with his clothing, 
he commits contempt, and will forfeit all his 
endurance of poverty, and will not find reward 
of his good deeds. 

4 Every proud and magniloquent man is hateful 
to the Lord, and every false speech, clothed in 
untruth ; it will be cut with the blade of the 
sword of death, and thrown into the fire, and 
shall burn for all time.’ 


2, Many mansions. 
good for the good, &c. 





Cf. 1 En, xxxix. 4, 7, 8; xli. 2; John xiv. 2. 
Sir, xxxix. 25; Sibyll. Or. Fragm. iii. 18-19. 


B 


Blessed is he who in his patience brings a gift 62 1 
before the Lord’s face, for he shall find forgive- 
ness of 4zs sins. 

When a man gives from his mouth terms of 2 
time to bring gifts before the Lord’s face, doing 
thus (sc. fulfilling his promise) he will find 
repentance of forgiveness (szc). But if the 
appointed time pass by and he go back on his 
word he shall receive repentance. 


When he covers the naked and gives bread to 63 1 
the hungry, he shall find forgiveness. 

But if his heart murmurs, then he makes ruin 2 
of his giving of alms. 


And if, when he has had his fill, he is con- 3 
temptuous, then he shall lose all his good deeds, 
and shall not find (sc. forgiveness), for every con- 4 
temptuous man is hateful to the Lord.’ 


*  Yoldon Rule .y Aroha $207 


4. The text seems corrupt, and the idea is: it is good to offer gifts to God; but if a man sacrifices to God what is 
another man’s or ill-gotten, God turns away His face from him. Cf. lxvi. 2, and esp. Sir. xxxi. 21-4, 28. 


his hands made them not. 


Cf. Sibyll. Or. viii. 403, 406. 


5. Only willing offerers are blessed. Cf. Exod. xxv. 2 3 xxxv. 5; Prov. xi. 25. 


his heart murmur. 


3. before the time. 
LXIII. 1. See ix (notes). 

2. See Ixi. § (note). 

4. proud .. . hateful to the Lord. Ps, xviii. Ceri. 


Cf. Ixiii. 2; Deut. xv. 10; Sir. xxxii. Io. 
LXII. 1, 2. There is forgiveness if men keep strictly to their vows. 
We might expect also ‘ or after the time’. 


B has quite missed the point in ver. 2. 


3. Prov. vi; 16,17. 


466 


64 : 


65 1 


* 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 64; 1—65: 8 


A 


Of how the Lord calls up Enoch, and people 
took counsel to go and kiss him at the place 
called Achuzan. 


When Enoch had spoken these words to his 
sons, all people far and near heard how the Lord 
was calling Enoch. They took counsel together : 
2*Let us go and kiss Enoch, and two thousand 

men came together and came to the place 

Achuzan where Enoch was, and his sons. 

3 And the elders of the people, the whole assem- 
bly, came and bowed down and began to kiss 
Enoch and said to him: ‘Our father Enoch, be 

4 thou blessed of the Lord, the eternal ruler, and 

now bless thy sons and all the people, that we 

may be glorified to-day before thy face. 

For thou shalt be glorified before the Lord’s 
face for all time, since the Lord chose thee, rather 
than all men on earth, and designated thee writer 
of all his creation, visible and invisible, and re- 
deemer of the sins of man, and helper of thy 
household.’ 

And Enoch answered all his people, saying : 


oO 


Of Enoch’s instruction of his sons. 
‘Hear, my children, before that all creatures 
were created, the Lord created the visible and 
invisible things. 

2 And as much time as there was and went past, 
understand that after all that he created manin the 
likeness of his own form, and put into him eyes 
to see, and ears to hear, and heart to reflect, and 
intellect wherewith to deliberate. 

3 And the Lord saw all man’s works, and created 
all his creatures, and divided time, from time he 
fixed the years, and from the years he appointed 
the months, and from the months he appointed 
the days, and of days he appointed seven. 

And in those he appointed the hours, measured 
them out exactly, that man might reflect on time 
and count years, months, and hours, ¢hezr alter- 
nation, beginning, and end, and that he might 
count his own life, from the beginning until death, 
and reflect on his sin and write his work bad and 

5 good; because no work is hidden before the 
Lord, that every man might know his works and 
never transgress all his commandments, and keep 
my handwriting from generation to generation. 

6 When all creation visible and invisible, as the 
Lord created it, shail end, then every man goes 


LXIV. 5. writer of all his creation. 
redeemer. 


LXV. 1. For creation cf. xxiv. 2 (note). 
2. created man. . 
4. count years, &c. 
5. Cf. xxxili. 9 (note). Bie) . 
6. The judgement is to close man’s existence on earth. 
here to show that there is a resurrection of the body. 


Cf. Wisdom vii. 17-18. 


467 











B 


And it happened, when Enoch had spoken to 64 1 
his sons and to the princes of the people, all the 
people and all those near him heard how the 
Lord God was calling Enoch. All took counsel 
together, saying: ‘Come, let us kiss Enoch.’ 

And these came together up to four thousand 2 
men, and they came to the place Achuzan, where 
Enoch was and his sons. 

And the elders of the people began to kiss 3 


| Enoch, saying: ‘ Blessed art thou of the Lord, 


the eternal ruler, and now bless thy people, and 4 
glorify us before the Lord’s face, for the Lord 5 
hath chosen thee, and appointed thee the taker 
away of our sins.’ And Enoch said to all the 
people: 


‘Hear, my children, before all creation took 65 1 
shape, the Lord appointed the age of things 
created. 

Then he created all his creatures visible and 
invisible. 

And then he put together man in his own 2 
image, and put into him eyes to see and ears to 
hear, the heart to reflect and the mind to 
deliberate. 

Then the Lord resolved the age for the sake 3 
of man, and divided up the various seasons and 
years and months and hours, that man might 4 
reflect on the changes and end of the seasons, 
and the beginning and end of the years and the 
days and the hours, that he might reckon the 
death of his life. 

And when the creation, which the Lord created, 
shall end, and every man shall go to the Lord’s 
great judgement, then the seasons shall perish, 
and thenceforward there will be no more years, 
nor months, nor days, and there will be no more 
hours thenceforward, nor will they be reckoned, 
but there shall begin one endless age. 8 

And all the righteous shall be collected to- 
gether in the great age, and age and age of the 


TG 


See xl. 13 (note) ; lili. 2. 5 
For Enoch as intercessor cf. 1 En. xili. 4. Contrast 2 En. liii. 1. 


. heart to reflect. Cf. Sir. xvii. 3, 5. 


At this judgement all men must appear, but there is nothing 


Hh 2 


THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 65. 7—66. 8 


A 


7 to the great judgement, and then all time shall 
perish, and the years, and thenceforward there 
will be neither months nor days nor hours, they 
will be stuck together and will not be counted. 

8 There will be one aeon, and all the righteous 
who shall escape the Lord’s great judgement, 
shall be collected in the great aeon, for the 
righteous the great aeon will begin, and they will 

9 live eternally, and then too there will be amongst 

them neither labour, nor sickness, nor humiliation, 

nor anxiety, nor need, nor violence, nor night, 
nor darkness, but great light. 

And they shall have a great indestructible 
wall, and a paradise bright and incorruptible, 
for all corruptible things shall pass away, and 
there will be eternal life. 


Io 


Enoch instructs his sons and all the elders of the 
people, how they are to walk with terror 
and trembling before the Lord, and serve 
him alone and not bow down to idols, but 
to God, who created heaven and earth and 
every creature, and jtof his image. 

And now, my children, keep your souls from all 
injustice, such as the Lord hates. 


66; 





B 


righteous shall be collected together, and they 
shall be eternal and incorruptible. 

And thenceforward there shall be no labour 9 
amongst them, nor sickness nor humiliation, nor 
anxiety zor need, nor night nor darkness, but 
great, endless, and indestructible light. 

And the great paradise will be their shelter ro 
and eternal dwelling-place, and they shall no 
more bear the injuries (lit. lawlessnesses) of those 
on earth. 

The Lord will send down great destruction on 
to earth and the earth’s whole composition shall 
perish. 

For I know, that this will end in tumult and 11 
will perish, only my brother will be preserved on 
that day, placed in... and those of his tribe and 
the sun. 


And now, my children, keep your souls from 66 1 


all unrighteousness, such as the Lord hates. 


A 

2 Walk before his face with terror and trembling and serve him alone. Bow down to the true 
God, not to dumb idols, [but bow down to his picture], and bring all just offerings before the Lord’s 
face. The Lord hates what is unjust. 

3 For the Lord sees all things ; when man takes thought in his heart, then he counsels the intellects, 
and every thought is always before the Lord, who made firm the earth and put all creatures on it. 

4 If you look to heaven, the Lord is there; if you take thought of the sea’s deep and all the under-earth 
the Lord is there. : 

5 For the Lord created all things. Bow not down to things made by man, leaving the Lord of all 
creation, because no work can remain hidden before the Lord’s face. 

6 Walk, my children, in long-suffering, in meekness, honesty, in provocation, in grief, in faith and 
in truth, in velzance on promises, in illness, in abuse, in wounds, in temptation, in nakedness. in 
privation, loving one another, till you go out from this age of ills, that you become inheritors of 
endless time. 

7 Blessed are the just who shall escape the great judgement, for they shall shine forth more than 

8 the sun sevenfold, for in this world the seventh part is taken off from all, light, darkness, food, 


enjoyment, sorrow, paradise, torture, fire, frost, and other things ; he put all down in writing, that 
you might read and understand.’ 


TmOCe KKM Ze 
8-9. A blessed immortality. 


10. wall. Perhaps the wall that divides Paradise (see ix) from the place of punishment (see x) 
Il. Sir. xiv. 19. 


LXVI. 1. injustice . . . the Lord hates. 
injustice. Cf. lxvi. 1 (note). 
Walk ... terror and trembling. Cf. Phil. ji. 12; also 2 Cor. vii. 13; Eph. vi. oe 
2. all just offerings. See Ixi. 4 (note). 
3. Sees all things .. . thought in his heart, &c. 
Dan. ii. 30. 
4. Partly drawn from Ps. cxxxix, 8-12. 
of the heavens. 


Cf. Ixi. 1; Deut. xii. 31 ; Wisdom xiv. 9. 


Cf. 1 Chron. xxviii. 9; 2 Chron. vi. 30; Ps.xciv.11; Prov. xv.11- 
2 ] 


Mention of Sheol is omitted here, as it is included in the author’s conception 


5. no work ... hidden. Cf. Jer. xvi. 17; Sir. xvii. 15. 
6. Cf. Rom. viii. 35 ; 2 Cor. xi. 27 SO GS Ne ahs 
Aa. Ei dbaiautey, 


8. enjoyment, &c. 1 En. Ixix, 8. 


46 8 


PRET eOOR OPP THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 67. 1—68. 7 


A 


The Lord let out darkness on to earth and 
covered the people and Enoch, and he was 
taken up on high, and light came again zz 
the heaven. 

When Enoch had talked to the people, the 
Lord sent out darkness on to the earth, and 
there was darkness, and it covered those men 
2 standing and talking with Enoch, and they took 

Enoch up on to the highest heaven, where the 
Lord zs; and he received him and placed him 
before his face, and the darkness went off from 
the earth, and light came again. 

And the people saw and understood not how 
Enoch had been taken, and glorified God, and 
found a roll in which was traced: ‘the invisible 
God, and all went to their homes. 


67 1 


3 


68 1 





B 


When Enoch had talked to the people, the 67 1 
Lord sent down murk on to the earth, and there 
was darkness, it covered all the men standing 
with Enoch. 

And the angels hastened and having taken 2 
Enoch, they carried him up on to the highest 
heaven. And he received him, and put him 
before his face into eternity. And the darkness 
went off from the earth, and light came again, 
and all the people saw, and understood not how 3 
Enoch had been taken, and glorified God. 

And they came to their homes, those who had 
seen such things. Glory be to our God into 
eternity. Amen. 


Enoch was born on the sixth day of the month Tsivan, and lived three hundred and sixty-five years. 


He was taken up to heaven on the first day of the month Tsivan and remained in heaven sixty 


2 days. 


He wrote all these signs of all creation, which the Lord created, and wrote three hundred 


3 and sixty-six books, and handed them over to his sons and remained on earth thirty days, and was 
again taken up to heaven on the sixth day of the month Tsivan, on the very day and hour when 
4he was born. As every man’s nature in this life is dark, so are also his conception, birth, and 


departure from this life. 
hour too he died. 


At what hour he was conceived, at that hour he was born, and at that 


5  Methosalam and his brethren, all the sons of Enoch, made haste, and erected an altar at the 
place called Achuzan, whence and where Enoch had been taken up to heaven. 
6 And they took sacrificial oxen and summoned al] people and sacrificed the sacrifice before the 


Lord’s face. 


4 All people, the elders of the people and the whole assembly came to the feast and brought gifts 


to the sons of Enoch. 
And they made a great feast, rejoicing and 


making merry three days, praising God, who had 


given them such a sign through Enoch, who had found favour with him, and that they should hand 


it on to their sons from generation to generation, from age to age. 


LXVII. 2. highest heaven. Cf. lxv. 2 (B). 
the eternal abode of the righteous, lv. 2. 


LXVIII. A short ~ésumé of Enoch’s life. Cf. xxiii. 
I. sixty days. Cf. xxiii. 6 and xxxvi. I. 


Amen. 


This is an exceptional privilege, as Paradise in the third heaven is 
In Asc. Is. ix. 7 the future habitation of the righteous 1s the seventi heaven. 


5~7. Cf. the fragment of Melchizedekian literature (appended to my Commentary on 2 Enoch) for Methusalem’s 


sacrifice. 


7. hand it on, &c. Cf. xxxili. Io. 


The place of sacrifice, and here of Enoch’s assumption, is called Achuzan in i, 3, but Aruzan in il. 17. 


469 


( hankea. \ 
II BARUCH 


I. THE SYRIAC APOCALYPSEROP BAR Ue 
INTRODUCTION 


§ 1. SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE Book. 


THE Apocalypse of Baruch, which for the sake of convenience will be designated 2 Baruch in 
this edition, is a composite work written in the latter half of the first century of the Christian era. 
Its authors were orthodox Jews and it is a good representative of the Judaism against which the 
Pauline dialectic was directed. 

In this Apocalypse we have almost the last noble utterance of Judaism before it plunged into 
the dark and oppressive years that followed the destruction of Jerusalem. For ages after that epoch 
its people seem to have been bereft of their immemorial gifts of song and eloquence, or to have had 
thought and energy only for the study and expansion of the traditions of the Fathers. But when 
our book was written, that evil and barren era had not yet set in; breathing thought and burning 
word had still their home in Palestine, and the hand of the Jewish artist was still master of its ancient 
cunning. 

This beautiful Apocalypse, with the exception of nine chapters towards its close, which under 
the title ‘the Epistle of Baruch’ or a similar one, were incorporated in the later Syriac Bible, was 
lost sight of for quite 1,200 years. 

Written originally in Hebrew, it was translated into Greek, and from Greek into Syriac. Of the 
Hebrew original every line has perished save a few still surviving in rabbinic writings. Of the Greek 
version, a small fragment has been recovered from the papyri, while many phrases and sentences have 
been preserved in the Greek Apocalypse of Baruch (i.e. 3 Baruch in this edition) and in the Rest of 
the Words of Baruch (i.e. 4 Baruch). Happily the Syriac has come down to us in its entirety in a 
sixth-century MS., the discovery of which is due to Ceriani. Of this MS. Ceriani published a Latin 
translation in 1866, the Syriac text in 1871, and the photo-lithographic facsimile in 1883. Though 
there are no adequate grounds for assuming a Latin version, it is demonstrable that our Apocalypse 
was the foundation of a Latin Apocalypse of Baruch, a fragment of which is preserved in Cyprian. 

This Apocalypse is, as has already been stated, composite. The editor has made use of a 
number of independent writings, belonging to various dates between 50 and go A.D. They are thus 
contemporaneous with the chief New Testament writings, and furnish records of the Jewish doctrines 
and beliefs of that period, and of the arguments which prevailed in Judaism in the latter half of the first 
century, and with which its leaders sought to uphold its declining faith and confront the attacks of a 
growing and aggressive Christianity. Written by Pharisaic Jews as an apology for Judaism, and in 
part an implicit polemic against Christianity, it gained nevertheless a larger circulation amongst 
Christians than amongst Jews, and owed its very preservation to the scholarly cares of the Church it 
assailed. But in the struggle for life its secret animus against Christianity begat an instinctive 
Opposition in Christian circles, and so proved a bar to its popularity. Thus the place it would 
naturally have filled was taken by the sister work 4 Ezra. This latter work, which forms in fact an 
unconscious confession of the failure of Judaism to redeem the world, was naturally more acceptable 
to Christian readers, and thus, in due course, our Apocalypse was elbowed out of recognition by its 
fitter and sturdier rival. 


§ 2. THE Various Books oF BARUCH. 


a The Book of Baruch in the LXX (i.e. r Baruch). On the probability that i. 1-3; iti. g— 
lv. 29 of this book are a recast of a lost portion of our Apocalypse, i. e. ‘the Letter to the Two and a 
Half Tribes’, see § 8. There is no verbal borrowing between our Apocalypse and 1 Baruch, but in the 
following passages there is a similarity of diction or of thought or of both: 


470 


INTRODUCTION 





2 BARUCH. 1 BarucH. 
ie aie 133 

x. 16, Iv. IO, 14. 

lix. 7. Liles b 2 

Ixxvil. Io. il. 26. 

Ixxvili. 7. iv. 36, 37 (v. 6, 7). 
Isxtx.. 2. 1, Oy. .ios 

Ixxx. 5. ie 13; 

Ixxxlv. 2-5. 1s TO)p1 le 2 
Ixosxvie 1, 2: Teenie 


2° 2 Baruch or the present Apocalypse. . 

3° 3 Baruch or the Greek Apocalypse—a work of the second century, which is dealt with fully 
in its proper place in this volume. On some points of connexion between this and the preceding 
work see my Commentary on The Apocalypse of Baruch, pp. XX. sq. 

4° 4 Baruch or the Rest of the Words of Baruch. The book was written in Greek in the second 
century of our era. It is in part a Jewish work recast. The Greek text was first printed at Venice 
in 1609, next by Ceriani in 1868 under the title ‘ Paralipomena Jeremiae’ in his Mon. Sacr.v. 11-18, 
and has been critically edited by Rendel Harris in 1889. This book exists also in the Ethiopic Bible, 
and was edited from three MSS. by Dillmann in his Chrestomathia aethiopica in 1886. But as these 
MSS. are inferior, a new edition is needed, which will take account of the Greek MSS. as well as of 
the Ethiopic—there are eight still uncollated of the latter in the British Museum—and also of the 
Jewish matter underlying the book. 

5° A Gnostic Book of Baruch is drawn upon in Hippolytus’ Philosophumena, Vv. 24-7. 

6° A Latin Book of Baruch is quoted in an MS. of Cyprian’s Testimonia, iii. 29, which is clearly 
based on our Apocalypse. 

7° Another Book of Baruch is mentioned in the Altercatio Sitmonis Tudaeit et Theophile 
Christiani, published by Harnack (Texte und Untersuchungen, Bad. I, Heft 3, 1883), but so far 
as the quotation goes, this book has no connexion with our Apocalypse. 


§ 3. Tue Syriac MSS. 


For chapters i-lxxvii we have only one MS. This MS.—designated ¢ in my edition—was 
found in the library in Milan. It belongs to the sixth century. In 1871 Ceriani edited the Syriac 
text from the MS. in his Mon. Sacr. et Prof. V.ii. 113-80. Of chapters Ixxviii-lxxxvi, which form 
the Epistle of Baruch, many MSS. were known to exist, and three of them, a, 4, d, were collated by 
Ceriani. In 1871 Fritzsche attempted to form a text on the basis of these four MSS. through the 
medium of an emended edition of Ceriani’s Latin translation in his Libri Apocryphi V. T. Graece, 
1871, pp. 690-9. 

The present writer edited the Syriac text of these chapters in his edition of the Apocalypse of 
Baruch, 1896, in which he made use of the following MSS. 


Called A in Ceriani. See p. 167 note. 

Add. 17105 Brit. Mus., ff. 116-121®. Sixth century. 

Milan MS., ff. 265-267. Sixth century. 

Cod. Ambrosianus A 145. 

No. 1 Syr. MSS., Bodley, ff. 430-432. A.D. 1627. 

Egerton 705, Brit. Mus., ff. 373-374". Seventeenth century. 
Add. 12172 Brit. Mus., ff. 192'-195». ‘Tenth or Twelfth century. 
Add. 18715 Brit. Mus., ff. 2426-244. Twelfth century. 

No. 2 Syr. MSS., Bodley, ff. 492-493. A.D. 1614. 

No. 20 Syr. MSS., Bodley, ff. 37-38. 


Of these ten befg ik were collated directly by the present writer. In addition to these he 
found excerpts from the Epistle in J = Add.12178, Brit. Mus., f. 111° (ninth or tenth century), in m 
= 14482 Brit. Mus., ff. 47°-48* (eleventh or twelfth century), and in 2, 14684 Brit. Mus., f. 24 
(twefth century). Finally the readings of the Walton and Paris Polyglots were taken account of. As 
a result of a critical study of these authorities I arrived at certain definite results. Thus while ¢ 
represents one type of text, @ bdefghikimn represent another—say a. The latter again fall into 
two classes ab g Ak (=f) being more trustworthy than de fz (=y). The originals of these three 
classes, a, 8, , have been lost, but they are helpful in showing the interrelations of our authorities. 
The results i: 1ally arrived at (see my edition, pp. xxii-xxx) can best be represented in the following 


table : 


We WI WTA DR 


471 


Il BARUCH 


Original Syriac Translation 

















| 
| | 
B Y 
| | 
errs | | | | 
a h k | a < wh Z 
b iy 
ne 
Wp 


Here W and P stand for the Walton and Paris Polyglots. It is of no little interest to have traced 
the sources of the text in the two great polyglots ; for, as their editors have given no information 
on the subject, scholars had hitherto been in the dark in this respect. 


§4. DATE OF THE SYRIAC VERSION. 


Since the MSS. ¢ and @ referred to in the preceding section both belong to the sixth century, 
we find that at that date there existed two distinctly developed types of text, both of which must 
have been for no brief period in existence owing to the variety of readings already evolved. Further, 
though @ belongs to the sixth century, many of its readings are decidedly later than c, or even than 
ah. In fact ah represent the text at an earlier stage than 6. The common parent a dk therefore, 
i.e. 8, could not be later than the fifth century. Since, therefore, 8 belongs at latest to the fifth century, 
the common progenitor of c and-a (= the parent of 8 and y) can hardly be sought later than the fourth 
century. It may be as early as the third. 


§ 5. THE SyrRI4c—A TRANSLATION FROM THE GREEK.— The Oxyrhynchus Greek 
lragment, xii-xiv. 3. 

The Syriac Version is a translation from the Greek. The conclusion was already arrived at 
before the discovery of the Greek fragment of Grenfell and Hunt. 1° For it is so stated in « 
2° There are certain corruptions in the text which are only explicable on the hypothesis that the 
translator misinterpreted the Greek, or found the corruption already existing there. The corrupt 
readings in iii. 7, xxi. 9, 11, 12; xxiv. 2; Ixii. 7 are to be explained on this principle. 3° There 
are frequent transliterations of Greek words aS in vii.49. x. 19 Poxvils a, See 4° The Rest of the 
Words of Baruch preserves important fragments of the Greek Version. 

All the above facts and more (see my edition, p. xlii sq.) were known when Grenfell and Hunt 
discovered an actual fragment of the Greek Version, which they published in the Oxyrhynchus 
Papyri, iii. 3-7. The papyrus is part of a leaf from a book, and is written in a large slightly sloping 
uncial hand—possibly as early as the fourth century, and probably not later than the fifth, 

This fragment embraces xii. I-5, Xlil. I-2, 11-12, xiv. 1-3. I have printed this fragment and 
an English translation of it in parallel columns with the Syriac. The text is poor and defective. In 
xiv. 2 it read papruphcavres, but this was by a later hand rightly corrected into apapticavtes as we 
find in the Syriac. Again in xiv. 1 ‘shall be endured by the Gentiles’ is corrupt for ‘ shall come 
upon the Gentiles’. Here the Papyrus reads trevexOijoera: which seems corrupt for émevexOjoerar. 
At all events the phrase in the Syriac is exactly the same in xiii, 5, ‘retribution which is coming 
upon’ and in xiv. 1 ‘the retribution .. . shall come upon’. In xii, 3 the parallelism which is 
preserved in the Syriac is wholly lost. ‘Condemn’ cannot be right, if originally there was any 
parallelism. The fact that the parallelism is preserved in both Greek and Syriac in xii. 2 is in favour 
that the Syriac has rightly preserved it in xii, oe 


§6. THE GREEK—a TRANSLATION FROM THE HEBREw. 


Previous to my edition of Baruch in 1896 an unbroken unanimity prevailed among scholars on 
the question of a Greek original. Since the discovery of the book by Ceriani not a single serious 
attempt had been made to grapple with this problem, and yet in nearly every instance scholars 
spoke with am assurance on the subject that only a personal and thorough study of the subject could 
have justified. To this strong and unanimous tradition of the learned world I bo:ved without 
hesitation at the outset of my studies, but with an awakening distrust and an ever-growing reluctance 


472 


INTRODUCTION 


during the years in which I was engaged in the preparation of the work which was published in 
1896. The necessity for postulating a Hebrew original which was first shown in this work was 
subsequently maintained by Wellhausen. (Shizzen und Vorarbeiten, vi. 234), Ryssel (Apok. und 
Pseudepig. A. T., 1900, ii. 411), and Ginzberg (Fewish Encyc. ii. 555). As regards the grounds for 
this conclusion, I will here be as brief as possible, and adduce only the following. 1°. What is true 
of 4 Ezra the sister work, which was written in Hebrew, is true also of our Apocalypse. 2°. The 
quotations from the Old Testament agree with the Massoretic text except in one case. 3°. There 
are many paronomasiae which discover themselves on retranslation into Hebrew. 4°. Many passages 
in the book have been preserved in Talmudic and Rabbinic writings. 5°. Unintelligible expressions 
in the Syriac can be explained and the text restored by retranslation into Hebrew. 


3 1°. It is now an accepted view that 4 Ezra was written in Hebrew. Since the two books show 
in nearly every respect the closest affinities it may provisionally be accepted that as the former is 
derived from a Hebrew original so also is the latter. In my edition of 2 Baruch in 1896 I pointed 
out (p. lxxii) the necessity of assuming a Hebrew original for 4 Ezra. Inthe same year Wellhausen 
(Gott. Gel, Anz., pp. 12-13) insisted on the same necessity, and demonstrated this necessity in his 
Skiszen u. Vorarbeiten, vi. 234-40, 1899. 


2°. See my edition, pp. xlv sq., 169. 


3°. In xv. 8 there are two paronomasiae. Thus ‘ Labour with much trouble’ = pri Spy and 
‘crown with great glory’ MNDn2 Mwy (see notes 27 Joc.). 

But these need not necessarily postulate a Hebrew original; the following cases undoubtedly 
do. Thus in xxi. 14 (see note for the Hebrew) we have a stanza of three lines, each line of which 
contains a rhyme within it. The writer is so fond of the last of these that he repeats it exactly in 
xlviil. 35 and partially in Ixxxiii. 12, In xlviii. 35 we have another and still more remarkable 
instance of paronomasia. In this stanza there are three lines, the first, second, and fourth of which 
respectively contain this rhyming or alliterative character, but not the third. But even a cursory 
examination makes it clear that the third line is corrupt. It is against the parallelism and structure 
of the adjoining three lines. In the notes on the passage the reader will find an attempt to restore 
the original text, in which a paronomasia is recovered and also a parallelism in sense and structure 
with the adjoining lines. Again, in Ixiii. 3, 4 there were undoubtedly plays in the Hebrew on the 
names of Hezekiah and Sennacherib. There is probably another instance of this play on words in 
Ixxxiii. 10, certainly in lxxxiii. 14, and possibly in Ixxxiv. 2. 

The above evidence is of a very convincing character. 


4°. Many sections of our book have exact parallels in the Taimudic and Rabbinic writings. Thus 
in ii. 1-2 Jeremiah is bidden to leave Jerusalem (implicitly) on the ground that it could not be 
destroyed so long as Jeremiah was in it. This is explicitly stated in Pesikta r.c. 26 (131a ed. 
Friedmann). On the interpolated passage on the heavenly Temple cf. Sakka 41a, Taanith 5a. 
The account of the destruction of Jerusalem, vi-viii, is substantiated at times verbally by Pesikta r. 
(loc. cit.). The poetical incident in x. 18 is recounted as a literal fact in Taanith 29a, Lev. r. xix. 6 ; 
Pesikta v.26. See note zz Joc. With the marvel of the burning of the bodies of the host of 
Sennacherib, lxiii. 8, cf. Sanh. 94a, while the legend of the brazen horse, lxiv. 8, is found in 
Pesikta Rab Kahana, xxv. 162. See Ginzberg in Few. Encye. li. 553. 


5°. Unintelligible expressions in the Syriac can be explained and the textrestored by retranslation 
into Hebrew. We have here the clinching evidence of a Hebrew original. First of all in the 
following five passages xxi. 9, TI, 12; xxiv. 23 Ixil. 7 I have been able to explain and restore an 
unintelligible text by retranslation first into Greek and thence into Hebrew. The Syriac in these 
verses is the stock rendering of d.cavodo dat, and this in turn of pty. Now pay can mean either dccavododa 
or dikavos elvat. In the five passages above cited the context can admit only of the latter meaning ; 
but the translator, who was probably a Christian and therefore influenced by the Christian doctrine 
of justification, wrongly adopted the former rendering. Ryssel has accepted without acknowledge- 
ment my restoration of these five passages. 

Next in vi. 7 ‘ephod’ is undoubtedly corrupt for ‘ark’ (see note). The corruption can have 
arisen either in the Hebrew or even in the Syriac, i.e. Jyao? corrupt for Jso%/, but the former is 
more likely. 

In xxi. 22 the text can be restored by retranslation into Hebrew. See note. In xliv. 12 we 
arrive at a very interesting restoration, which Ryssel adopts without acknowledgement. In the 
Syriac the phrase ‘on its beginning’ is set over against ‘to torment’ as its antithesis. Here the 
context requires ‘to its blessedness’. Now the Syriac = wxna, which is obviously a corruption of 
sawed = ‘to its blessedness’. In Ivi. 6 ‘ boasting’ is out of place, enumerated as it is along with 


473 


II BARUCH 


‘untimely death’, ‘ grief and anguish’, ‘ pain’, ‘ trouble’, and ‘ Sheol’. The word = Kadxnya = non, 
which seems corrupt for mmm, ‘ disease’. In lxx. 6 the'text reads: ‘some ... shall be hindered. 
But the parallelism requires a strong expression. Now ‘shall be hindered’ = kwAvdjnoovtTa = wd", 
corrupt for 152» — ‘shall be consumed’. These two verbs are often confused in Hebrew. 


Finally, in 1xxx. 2, it is said that the sacred vessels of the Temple were hidden ‘lest they should 
be polluted by the enemy’. But this clause can hardly be right; for Ixxx is simply a concise 
reproduction of vi-viii. Now in vi. 8 the real reason for the concealment of these vessels is given, 
i.e. “that strangers may not get possession of them’. Furthermore, the vessels were put away with 
a view to their use in the restored Temple, vi. 7-10. Now if we retranslate the words, ‘lest any 


should be polluted by the enemy’, we have D’NND 15M 7B, which is an easy corruption of Dx2"N odn> 35 
‘lest the enemy get possession of them’. 


§ 7. THE DIFFERENT ELEMENTS IN 2 BARUCH. 


The composite nature of this book was first recognized by Kabisch in 1891 and the following 
year by De Faye, and subsequently by the present writer in 1896 and by Beer in Herzog’s Real- 
Encyc.’ art. ‘ Pseudepigraphen des A. Testaments’, p. 250. A short summary of the grounds on 
which it seems necessary to postulate a diversity of authorship may here be given. If we disregard 
the letter to the tribes in captivity (Ixxviii-lxxxvi), the book falls naturally into seven sections 
separated by fasts, save in one case (after xxxv) where the text is probably defective. These 
sections, which are of unequal length, are (1) i-v. 6; (2) v. 7-viii; (3) IX-Xll. 4; (4) xii. SUX 5 
(5) xxi-xxxv; (6) xxxvi-xlvi; (7) xlvii-Ixxvii. These treat of the Messiah and of the Messianic 
kingdom, the woes of Israel in the past and the destruction of Jerusalem in the present, as well as of 
theological questions which were debated in the schools, relating to original sin, free-will, works, the 
number of the saved, the nature of the resurrection body, &c. The views expressed on these subjects 
are often conflicting. In one class of passages there is everywhere a vigorous optimism as to 
Israel’s ultimate well-being on earth ; there is sketched in glowing and sensuous colours the blessed- 
ness which awaits the chosen people in the kingdom of the Messiah which is at hand (EXAX 5 
XxXxXix—xl ; Ixxili-Ixxiv), when healing will descend in dew, and disease and anguish flee away: 
when strife and hatred shall vanish and gladness march throughout the earth, when childbirth shall 
entail no pangs, and none shall die untimely, when Israel’s enemies shall be destroyed (xxxix-—x] ; 
Ixx. 7-lxxii) and God’s own people enjoy a world-wide empire with its centre at Jerusalem (xl. 2; 
Ixxiii-lxxiv). Over against these passages stand others of a hopelessly pessimistic character, 
wherein, alike as to Israel’s present and future destiny on earth, there is written nothing save 
‘lamentation and mourning and woe’. The world isa scene of corruption, its evils are irremediable ; 
it is a never-ceasing toil and strife, but its end is at hand; its strength exhausted ; the ship is already 
come to the port and life to its consummation (Ixxxv). The advent of the new and spiritual world 
is at hand (xxi. 19; xliv. 9-15; lxxxv). The first to draw attention to the conflicting elements in 
our book was, as I have already remarked, Kabisch in the “akrbiicher Jur protest. Theol., 1891, 
pp. 66-107. Kabisch shows that we have in Baruch a measureless pessimism and world despair on 
the one hand, and on the other a vigorous optimism and world-joy. He further points out that the 
same subjects are treated several times and often without any fresh contribution to the subject at 
issue. Thus the Messianic kingdom is twice delineated, the advent of the Messiah twice foretold 
and the Messianic woes as often depicted. On these and other grounds he derives the book from 
three or four authors. He distinguishes as the groundwork i—xxiv. I; XXX. 2-xxxiv; xli-li; 
Ixxv—Ixxxvii written subsequently to A.D. 70 and saturated throughout by the pessimistic temper 
already referred to. But in this groundwork the order of the text was according to Kabisch 
originally different ; i.e. i-xx, xxxi. I-xxxii. 1, xxxii. 5-XXXIV, Xxi. I-xxiv. 2, xxx. 2-5, xli-lii. a 
Ixxv, Ixxvii-lxxxvii. In the remaining sections of the book there is a faith in Israel’s ultimate 
triumph here, and an optimism that looks for a Messianic kingdom of sensuous delights. These sections 
which are prior to A. D. 70 are the work of three writers, i. e. the Vine and Cedar Vision XXXvi-xl, the 
Cloud Vision liiitxxiv, which are preserved unmutilated, and the third a fragmentary Apocalypse 
XXIV. 3-xxix. Finally these different writings were incorporated into one book by a Christian con- 
temporary of Papias, and to this editor are probably due xxviii. 5, xxx. I, XXXIi. 2-4, xx xv, Ixxvi. 1. 

This analysis of Kabisch is good in regard to the separate visions, but his so-called groundwork 


is as composite as the whole work is composite. The problem is far more complex than Kabisch 
conceived it. 


* See my edition of the 4 docalypse of Baruch, pp. liii-Ixv. 
474 


INTRODUCTION 


It is interesting to find that some of Kabisch’s conclusions were reached independently at about 
the same date bya French scholar, De Faye, Les Apocalypses juives, 1892, pp. 25-8, 76-103, 192-204. 
De Faye like Kabisch distinguishes xxxvi-xl and liii-lxxv as distinct works written before A. D. 70. 
The rest of his conclusions are less satisfactory. i-xxxii. 6 constitute an Apocalypse of Baruch 
written after A.D. 70; i-v and vi-xxxii. 6, however, being originally derived from two different 
authors. Another distinct work was the Assumption of Baruch, i. e. xlviii—lii, xliii. 1-2, Ixxvi. 1-4 
written after A.D. 70, XXXil, 7-XXXV, xli-xlvii. 2, Ixxvi. 5-Ixxxvii are for the most part the work of 
the final editor, but xliv. 9-15, xlvi. 7 was due to a Christian reviser. On the whole this analysis is 
less convincing than that of Kabisch. 

Since the above solutions of the complex problems before us are inadequate, the present writer 
addressed himself afresh to the task in 1895-6. From the conclusions then arrived at he has 
seen no good ground for departing save in a few minor points. 

With Kabisch and De Faye I recognize the fact that two distinct types of documents are 
present in our book, the one of an optimistic character as to Israel’s future on Earth and the other 
of a pessimistic character in this respect. To the former type I assign the three Messianic 
Apocalypses xxvii-xxx. 1; xxxvi-xl ; liii-Ixxiv, which for convenience’ sake I designate A eee 
and a short original Apocalypse of Baruch B!. In the remaining sections are B?, B°, the contents 
of which we shall determine presently, the doctrine of a Messianic kingdom is absolutely 
relinquished. 

Different documents behind the Text. Thus A', A*, A®, B' agree in presenting an optimistic view 
of Israels future and inculcating the hope of a Messianic kingdom : whereas in B*, B® the hopes of the 
righteous are directed to the immediate advent of the final judgement and the spiritual world. (For 
details see my edition pp. 49, 61, 87, 65-69, 119, 140.) 

But at this point a difference between At, A?, A® and B* emerges. The former look for a 
Messiah at the head of the kingdom, but B! for a kingdom without the Messiah. ; 

Their relative dates. As we pursue our study we discover further that: 1° In At Ate Ae 
Jerusalem is still standing—hence they were written before A.D. 70; whereas in B!, B*, B® it is 
already destroyed (though in B? it is to be restored): 2° In A}, A, A’, it is only to the actual 
inhabitants of Palestine that the promise of protection is given in the time of the Messianic woes (see 
xxix. 2; xl. 2; Ixxi. 1)—thus the Jews are still in Palestine; but in B', B?, B°, they are already in 
exile. In B! they are ultimately to be restored. 

Facts confirming the above conclusions. A cursory examination of the books reveals the scheme 
of the final editor. According to this scheme the book was divided into seven sections separated by 
six fasts. Each of the last six of these sections thus opens with or is preceded by a fast: cp. V- 7, 
ix. 2, xii. 5, XXi. 1,(mention of fifth fast which should occur after xxxv is,lost), xlvii. 2. In each section 
4 definite movement or order of events is observed. This order briefly is: firs? a fast, then a divine 
command or revelation and finally the publication of the command or matter revealed unless accom- 
panied by a prohibition to do so as Mt XX. 3. In some cases a prayer follows the fast xxi. 3, xlviil. 1, 
and a lamentation the publication of the divine disclosure x. 6 (see the notes in my edition pp. T, 9, 
13, 36, 61). This being so, it is significant that in the addresses on xxxi. 2-xxxiv, xlvi. 4-6, Ixxvil. 
1-17 there is not a single reference to the Messianic Apocalypses Al, A*, AS. From this it follows 
that Al, A2, A® have no real organic connexion with the rest of the book B!, B*, B®. Their removal 
serves to restore some cohesion to the text (see my edition xxx. 2 note, xli note, Ixxv—lxxvi note). 

The relations of A}, A*, A® to cach other. A» is of distinct authorship from A® and A®; for 
whereas in A the Messiah pursues a passive role and does not appear till the enemies of Israel are 
destroyed and the kingdom established, in A?, A® it is the Messiah that destroys the enemies of 
Israel and establishes the kingdom. A” and A* though differing in some respects may come from 
the same author. All three Apocalypses were written before A.D. 70. 

The relations of B}, B*, B® to each other. Since B° consists of a single chapter we shall deal 
with it first. 

B® = lexxv. This chapter agrees with B’, B’ in being written after A.D. 70; but differs from 
B! and agrees with B? in despairing of a national restoration, and in looking only for spiritual 
blessedness in the world of incorruption. But again it differs from B? also, in that B? was written 
in Jerusalem or Judaea, whereas B* was written in Babylon or some other land of the dispersion, 
Ixxxv. 3—in the former most probably ; for it was written in Hebrew. Again whereas, according 
to B?, Jeremiah was with the captivity in Babylon, it 1s here definitely stated that the righteous and 
the prophets are dead, and that the exiles have none to intercede for them, ixxx. 1, 2: Thus B* ts 
a fragment written in Hebrew after A.D. 70 by an exile probably in Babylon. 

B) B—their extent and characteristics. Even the elimination of the preceding sections does 
not leave a coherent whole as we have already seen. Thus i-ix. 1, xxxii. 2—4, xliii-xliv. 7, xlv—xlvi, 


475 


IT BARUCH 


Ixxvii-Ixxxii, Ixxxiv, Ixxxvi sq. (= B!) are optimistic and hopeful as to this world, whereas x-xxv, 
XXX, 2—XXxXil. I, xxxii. 5—xxxv, xli sq., xliv. 8-15, xlvii-lii, Ixxv sq., Ixxxiii (= B®) are 
decidedly of an opposite character. But the differences are not only of a general but of a detailed 
character. Thus in B! the dispersion is to return, Ixxvii. 6, Ixxviii. 7, but in B* no such restoration 
is expected. In B! the earthly Jerusalem is to be rebuilt, i. 4, vi. 9, Xxxii. 2-4, xxviii. 7 (see notes 
in my edition), but not in B*: cf. x. 10, xx. 2. In B! Baruch is to die an ordinary death, xliv. 2, 
xlvili. 30, xxviii. 5, Ixxxiv. 1, but to be translated in B? xiii. 3, xxv. 1, Ixxvi. 2. In Bt Jeremiah is 
not sent to Babylon, Ixxvii. 12, but in B® he is sent, x. 2, xxxiii. 2. In B} Jerusalem is destroyed by 
angels lest the enemy should boast, vii. 1, Ixxx. 3, but this idea is foreign to A®*: cf. lxvii. 6-7, and 
appears to be so to B*.as it was to 4 Ezra iv. 30 and the Ass. Mosis iii. 2. Finally though the Law 
is valued in B', it is extravagantly glorified in B*. See note on xv. 5 in my edition. ; 

Lhe final editor's use of B' and B*, From B! the editor borrowed materials and used them in 
a straightforward fashion, as will be seen by referring to the preceding paragraph. But this is not 
the case with B?. This source the editor mutilated and transposed in a fashion that appears quite 
incredible to the ordinary reader. But the serious student cannot ignore the present hopeless 
order of xiii-xxv. In these chapters the original text has been frequently transposed, the original 
development of thought arrested and inverted, questions are frequently recorded after their specific 
answers have already been given in full, and passages torn from their original setting in Baruch’s 
address to the people and inserted in Baruch’s prayers to God, where they have no conceivable 
meaning. On the note on xiii-xxv the question is treated with sufficient fullness for our present 
contention, and as a result of the facts and deductions there given we might restore provisionally the 
order of x—xxv as follows: x -xiii. I—-3*, XX, XXIv. 2—4, xiii, 3°-12, xxv, xiv-xix, xxi-xxiv. 1. 

As regards the remaining sections of B’, they appear to have received the same drastic treatment 
from the editor as the earlier chapters. Thus the gist of xxxi-xxxii. 6, which contains an address 
of Baruch to the people, consists of three themes. These should of course have been dealt with in 
a preceding revelation, since the subject on which Baruch addresses the people is to be found in each 
instance in the previous divine revelation : cf. v. 5,X. 4. But the themes on which Baruch discourses 
in XxXxi-xxxii. 6 are not made the subject of revelation till later. See note on XXXi-xXxxv, where 
it is shown that xlii. 6-8, xlviii. 22-24, 38-41, 49, lii. 3, 8-9, 16 are presupposed by xxxi-xxxii. 6. 
Again, liv. 16-18 is clearly in its wrong context and likewise xlviii. 48-50, lii. 5-7. These passages 
seem to belong to an address of Baruch to the people: they form a direct address to the wicked and 
could not therefore occur in a prayer of Baruch to God. In every case, too, they break the sense of 
the context. We cannot enter here into the many other dislocations which the original document B2 
underwent at the hands of the final editor. The reader will find some of these treated in the notes 
that follow. For a full treatment of the question he can consult my edition pp. Ixi sqq. and the 
notes referred to there. 

As a result of the above criticism we may provisionally restore the original order of the source 
B? as follows: x-xiii. 3°, XX, XXIv. 2-4, xiii. 36-12, xxv, xiv-xix, xxi-xxiv. 1, XEX3/9 55, oe eae 
xlviii. 1-47, xlix—lii. 3, Ixxv, xxxi-xxxii. 1, 5-6, liv. 17,.18, xlviii. 4850, lil. 5-7, liv. 16, xliv. 8-15, 
Ixxxiii, xxxii. 7-xxxv, Ixxvi. . 

The solution here offered seems extremely complex, but since the problem is almost incredibly 
complex, the solution cannot be a simple or obvious one. Further investigation will no doubt modify 
some of the above conclusions, but I know of no study since my edition in 1896 that gives adequate 
grounds for any serious departure from the above analysis. 


§ 8. THE Lost EPISTLE TO THE Two AND A HALF TRIBES. 


In my edition of 2 Baruch in 1896, pp. Ixv-lxvii, I advanced ‘the hypothesis, which is now 
steadily gaining acceptance, that a portion of the lost Epistle to the Two and a Half Tribes, which is 
referred to in Ixxvii. 12, 17, 19, has been preserved in 1 Baruch i. 1~3, iii. g-iv. 29. The lost Epistle 
was addressed to Judah and Benjamin in exile (Ixxvii. 12,17). So was 1 Bar. iii. 9=iv. 29.: The 
lost Epistle was ‘an epistle of doctrine and a scroll of good tidings’ (Ixxvi. 12). So, too, is 1 Bar. iii, 
g-lv. 29. The lost Epistle was to hold out the promise of return and was written by Baruch to 
Babylon. So, too, was 1 Bar. iii. g—iv. 29. For the enforcement of these and other grounds for the 
identification of the lost Epistle, see my edition as referred to above. 


§9. THE RELATIONS OF 2 BARUCH AND 4 EZRa. 


The affinities of our Apocrypha and 4 Ezra are so numerous (see my edition of the former, 
Pp. 170-1, for some sixty-six passages with such affinities) that Ewald and Ryle assumed identity 
of authorship. But their points of divergence are so weighty (of. cit. pp. Ixix-lxxi) that this view 


476 


INTRODUCTION 


cannot be sustained. Three conclusions remain open according as we assume the integrity or com- 
positeness of these books. If on the one hand we assume unity of authorship, either 2 Baruch is 
earlier or later than 4 Ezra. According to Schiirer, Bissell, Thomson, Déane, Kabisch, De Faye 
Clemen, Wellhausen, 2 Baruch is the earlier, while Langen, Hilgenfeld, Renan, Dillmann "Rosenthal, 
Gunkel are just as strongly convinced that it is the later. Moreover, the arguments of the one side 
are just as weighty as the counter arguments of the other, and beyond this zpasse it is impossible, 
in my opinion, for criticism to advance, until it recognizes the composite nature of both books. The 
subject cannot be discussed here. The reader can consult an attempt to deal with the chronological 
relations of the various constituents of the two books in my edition of 2 Baruch, pp. Ixxii-lxxvi. 


See also Box’s edition of 4 Ezra, which is about to be published, as well as his Introduction to 4 Ezra 
in the present volume. 


§10. THEOLOGY. 


This book presents a vivid picture of the hopes and beliefs of Judaism during the years A.D. 50-100. 
As it was written at different dates and by different authors, its composition was thus contemporaneous 
with that of the New Testament. It is, therefore, of great value to the New Testament student, as 
it furnishes him with the historical setting and background of many of the New Testament problems. 

Original Sin and Free-will. Sin in 2 Baruch is the conscious and deliberate breach of the law, 
xv. 5-9, xix. 1-2. Man does not fall inevitably into it ; for he does not possess a cor malignum as 
in 4 Ezra. Jeremiah is ‘ pure from sin’, ix. 1. 

Sin, then, being a conscious breach of law, it began with Adam’s transgression. Adam is the 
starting-point as in 2 Enoch, whereas in 1 Enoch and Jubilees human depravity is traced mainly to 
the angels that sinned. When Adam fell, his name became symbolical for the power of darkness 
opposing the power of light, which is the law, xviii. 1-2. 

On the fall of Adam certain consequences followed. (a) First of all, physical death. 1n B?, i.e. 
xvii. 3, xix. 8, xxiii. 4, Adam’s sin brought in physical death, otherwise man would have been im- 
mortal. This conditional immortality of man appears also in 1 Enoch Ixix. 11, Wisdom i. 13, 14, 
2 Enoch xxx. 16,17, 4 Ezra iii. 7. But in A%, i.e. liv. 15, lvi. 6, Adam is said to have brought in 
only premature death. (6) Psychical and physical declension. This consequence appears in many 
passages but most clearly in lvi. 6, where trouble and anguish, disease and death, sensual passion and 
the begetting of children are traced to it. 


‘For when he transgressed 
Untimely deaths came into being : 
Grief was named, 
And anguish prepared : 
And pain was created, 
And trouble consummated : 
And disease began to be established, 
And Sheol kept demanding that it should be renewed in blood : 
And the begetting of children was brought about, 
And the passion of parents produced : 
And the greatness of humanity was humiliated, 
And goodness languished.’ 


(c) Spiritual evil in that man became a danger to himself, lvi. 10, and to the angels, lvi. 10. In 
the former passage the text states shortly that man ‘ became a danger to his own soul’. This fact, 
therefore, that man henceforth became his own worst enemy, implies that by the Fall a hereditary 
tendency to evil was established in man. In one passage only does spiritual death appear to be 
traced to Adam, i.e. in xlviii. 42 sq., but even there it does not follow as an inevitable consequence. 

Notwithstanding the above penalties that followed on the Fall, man according to 2 Baruch 
preserves his free-will, his moral nature remains unimpaired, and the spiritual consequences of Adam’s 
Fall are in the main limited to Adam himself, liv. 15, 19. 


‘For though Adam first sinned 

And brought untimely death upon all, 

Yet of those who were born from him 

Each one of them has prepared for his own soul torment to come, 
And again each one of them has chosen for himself glories to come. 


Adam is, therefore, not the cause, save only of his own soul, 
But each of us has been the Adam of his own soul.’ 


477 


Il BARUCH 


Thus man remained the captain of his own soul and therefore of his destiny. The issues of right 
and wrong are placed before him and the power of choice remains in his keeping, xix. 1, 3. 


‘“ Behold I have placed before you life and death,” 
And he called heaven and earth to witness against them... . 
But after his death they sinned and transgressed, 
Though they knew they had the Law reproving (them), 
And the light in which nothing could err, 
Also the spheres which testify, and Me.’ 


‘The lamp of the eternal law shone on all those who sat in darkness’, lix. 2: even from the 
Gentiles the needful knowledge was not withheld and their conscience testified to their guilt : only 
their pride withheld from them a knowledge of the law. Hence the choice of evil on man’s part is 
deliberate, li. 16. 


‘For then they chose (not) for themselves this time, 
Which, beyond the reach of anguish, could not pass away: 
But they chose for themselves that time, 
Whose issues are full of lamentations and evils . ... 
So that they shall not come to the honour of which I told thee before.’ 


Thus in 2 Baruch there is no doctrine of inherited guilt or of total depravity. This differs wholly 
from the Pauline doctrine. In the latter owing to the Fall man is henceforth dominated by original 
sin, which makes his fulfilment of the law and therefore his realization of righteousness impossible. 
He is not, indeed, thereby robbed wholly of free-will, but retains it in a degree just sufficient to 
justify his condemnation. 

The Law. This book is of a strongly Pharisaic character. The writers are assured of their 
power to fulfil the law, and the self-complacency of Baruch xiii. 3, xxv. 1, xliii. 1 stands out in strong 
contrast with the self-depreciation that marks 4 Ezra. The importance of the law is emphasized 
lil. 6, xv. 5. It was the centre round which Jewish thought and life revolved. To a limited extent 
the Messianic expectation was likewise a centre, and, in proportion the more one is emphasized, the 
more the other falls into the background. Thus in B! where the restoration of Yerusalem is looked 
Sor but no Messiah, the law is spoken of as follows: God gave the law to Israel, lxxvii. 3; for trans- 
gressing it they were sent into exile, Ixxvii. 4, Ixxxiv. 2; but let not Israel withdraw from the law, 
xliv. 23, but obey it, xlvi. 5; let them remember it, Ixxxiv. 8; for if they do so, they will see the 
consolation of Zion, xliv. 7, and a son of the law shall never be wanting, xlvi. 4, nor a lamp nor 
a shepherd, Ixxvii. 16. In B? where there is no Messiah and no expectation of the restoration of 
Ferusalem, the law is still further glorified. It will protect those who receive it in their hearts, 
XXXli. I, xlviii. 24 ; by it they will be justified, li. 3; in it will be the hope of the righteous, li. 7 ; 
the law is with Israel, and so long as they obey it they will not fall, xlviii. 22, 24. They have 
received one law from One, xlviii. 24. For further treatment of this question see my edition of the 
Apocalypse of Baruch, pp. xix, 26-31, 6 3-4. 

Here we have decidedly orthodox Judaism. In 4 Ezra on the other hand man trembles before 
the law: he needs mercy, not the award of the law ; for all have sinned, viii. 35: it has served rather 
unto condemnation ; for only a very few are saved through good works, vii. 77, or the divine com- 
passion, vii. 139. 

Works and justification. In our apocalypse the righteous are saved by their works, li. 7, and 
their righteousness is of the law, Ixvii. 6. In the consciousness of their justification by the law, li. 3, 
they can with confidence approach God, and look to Him for the fulfilment of their prayers because 
of their works wherein they trust, lxiii. 3,5; \xxxv. 2, and owing to the same ground of confidence 
they depart from this world full of hope, xiv. 12. But their works are not limited to themselves in 
their saving effects. So long as the righteous live, their righteousness is a tower of strength to their 
people, ii. 2, and after death it remains to their country a lasting ground of merit, xiv. 7, lxxxiv. Io. 

The Messiah and the Messianic Kingdom. The hope of a Messiah is entertained only in A! 
a, A®, the hope of the Kingdom without a Messiah in B!, which sections were written before A. D. 70. 
Since the chief characteristics of these sections have been dealt with in this respect in § 7, we shall 
touch only briefly upon them. The kingdom of the Messiah is not like that of the centuries preced- 
ing I00 B.C., which was to last for ever. According to this Apocalypse the whole present world 
belongs to the sphere of corruption. Even so does the Messianic kingdom, It forms the end of the 
world of corruption, xl. 3, and the beginning of the world of incorruption, Ixxiv. 2. Although. of 
temporary duration it is the Golden Age, lxxiti, 145-7; 


478 


INTRODUCTION 


1. ‘And it shall come to pass when he has brought low everything that is in the world, 
And has sat down in peace for the age on the throne of his kingdom, 
That joy shall then be revealed 
And rest shall appear. 
2. And then healing shall descend in dew, 
And disease shall withdraw, 
And anxiety and anguish and lamentation pass from amongst men, 
And gladness proceed through the whole earth . . . 
7. And women shall no longer then have pain when they bear, 
Nor shall they suffer torment when they yield the fruit of the womb. 
And it shall come to pass in those days that the reapers shall not grow weary, 
Nor those that build toilworn, 
For the works shall of themselves speedily advance 
Together with those who do them in much tranquillity.’ 


At the close of this temporary kingdom the Messiah will return to heaven and the righteous 
shall rise to a blessed life, xxx. 1. Then shall the righteous receive their promised reward, lix. 2, and 
enjoy the glories to come, liv. 15, but the unrighteous shall be cast into the torment of fire, liv. 14, 
Iv. 741%. 2, LO. 

In the other sections, B?, B® written after A.D. 70, no period of earthly blessedness is looked for ; 
the hope of a kingdom of righteousness on earth is abandoned wholly. An extreme note of despair 
as to this world marks both these sections but especially B? (i.e. Ixxxv), which was written in exile: 
cp. Ixxxv. 2. According to this latter writer (Ixxxv. 10) : 


‘The youth of the world is past, 

And the strength of the creation already exhausted . . . 
And the pitcher is near to the cistern, 

And the ship to the port: 

And the course of the journey to the city, 

And life to (its) consummation.’ 


LXXLVer 


Resurrection. In xix. 2—-li a view of the resurrection is expounded, which sets forth first the 
raising of the dead with their bodies in exactly the same form in which they had been committed to 
the earth with a view to their recognition by those who knew them, and next their subsequent trans- 
formation with a view to a spiritual existence of unending duration. In my edition of this book, 
pp. 83-4, I have shown that the Pauline teaching in 1 Cor. xv. 35-50 is in many respects not an 
innovation, but a developed and more spiritual exposition of ideas already current in Judaism. In 
Judaism the same physical body was resuscitated and transformed : in the Pauline teaching, the two 
bodies were wholly unconnected except in so far as they were the successive organs of the spirit in 
the material and spiritual worlds. They were so far from being identical in any respect that it was 
not till the physical body was destroyed that the spiritual body could be assumed. There is no 
transformation of dead or resuscitated bodies in the Pauline teaching: only of bodies of the faithful 
who should be alive at the Parousia. 


§ 11. RELATION OF THE. APOCALYPSE WITH THE NEW TESTAMENT. 


The points of contact between this Apocalypse and the New Testament are many in number. 
The most of these, however, are insufficient to establish a relation of dependence on either side; for 
the thoughts and expressions in question could be explained from pre-existing literature, or were 
commonplaces of the time. 


New TESTAMENT. 


Matt. iii. 16: Lo, the heavens 
were opened. 

Matt. ili. 17 (xvil. 5; John xu. 
28): A voice from heaven. 

Matt. iv. 3. 

Matt. xxiv. 7 (Mark xul. 8; 
Luke xxi. 11): Famines and... 
earthquakes. 

_ Matt. xxiv. r1, 24: Many false 
prophets. Ky 

Matt. xxiv. 19 (Luke xxiii. 29). 

Matt. xxvi. 24: It had been 
good for that man, &c. 





PARALLELS IN OUR APOCALYPSE. 


xxll. 1: Lo, the heavens were- 
opened. 

xiil. I; xxii. 1: A voice from the 
~height. 

Ixxvl. 3. 

Xxvil. 6, 7. 


xlviii. 34 (see note). 


x. 13, 14 (resemblance slight). 
x. 6: Blessed is he who was not 
born, &c. 


479 





PROBABLE SOURCE OF BOTH. 
Ezek. 1.1. 


Dan. iv. 31. 


Deut. xxxiv. I-4. 
Commonplaces of Jewish Apo- 
calyptic. 


Commonplaces of Jewish Apo- 
calyptic. 

Isa. liv. 1. 

A Jewish commonplace. 


NEw TESTAMENT. 
Matt. xxiv. 27: For as the light- 
ning . . . so shall be the coming 
of the Son of man. 


Luke xx. 36: Equal unto the 
angels. 

Luke xxi. 28 (1 Pet. iv. 7): Your 
redemption draweth nigh. 

Acts xv. ro (where the law is 
spoken of as a ‘yoke’; cp. Gal. v. 1). 

Rom. ii. 14, 15. 

Rom. viii. 18 (2 Cor. iv. 17): 
The sufferings of this present time 
are not worthy to be compared with 
the glory, &c. 

x Cor. iv:'5 (Heb. iv. 13). 

2 Cor. ili, 18: Reflecting as in a 
mirror the glory of the Lord are 
transformed into the same image 
from glory to glory. 


II BARUCH 


PARALLELS IN OUR APOCALYPSE. 
lii. g: Now that lightning 
shone exceedingly so as to illu- 
minate the whole earth. (The 


lightning here symbolizes — the 
Messiah. ) 

liero. 

xxiil. 7: My redemption has 


drawn nigh. 
xli. 3: The yoke of Thy law. 


xlviii. 40 (see note). 

xv. 8: This world is tothem... 
a labour with much trouble. .. and 
that . .. which is to come, a crown 
with great glory. 

box: 3: 

li. ro: And they shall be made 
like unto the angels, . .. and they 


| shall be changed . . . from beauty 


into loveliness, and from light into 


PROBABLE SOURCE OF. BOTH. 
A coincidence (?). 


1 Enoch civ. 4, 6. 
1 Enoch li. 2. 
A current expression. 


A Jewish commonplace. 
A Jewish commonplace. 


1 Enoch ix. 5. 


2 Cor. iv. 17 (Rom. viii. 18). xv. 8, 
1 Tim. i. 2: Mercy and peace. 
2 Pet, 1af,-0: 
2 Pet. ui. 13 (Matt. xix. 28; Rev. 
xxi. 1): New heavens and a new 


XX1. 20. 





earth. 
Rey. xx. 12: The books were XXIV. I: 
opened. opened. 


the splendour of glory. 
Ixxviil 2: Mercy and peace. 


Xxxli. 6: Renew His creation. 


The books shall be 


A Jewish commonplace 
A coincidence. 

A coincidence. 

Isa. ixy. 27. 





Dan. vii. ro. 


In the following passages our text is dependent on the New Testament, or on some lost common 


source :— 
New TESTAMENT. 


Matt. xvi. 26: For what shall a man be profited, if 
he shall gain the whole world, and forfeit his soul? or 
what shall a man give in exchange for his soul ? 

Luke i. 43: Blessed art thou among women, &c. 


1 Cor. xv. 19: If in this life only we have hoped 
in Christ, we are of all men most miserable. 

t Cor. xv. 35: How are the dead raised? and with 
what manner of body do they come ? 

James i. 2: Count it all joy when ye fall into 
manifold temptations. 

Rev. iv. 6: In the midst of the throne, and round 
about the throne, four living creatures. 


§ 12. 





PARALLELS IN OUR APOCALYPSE. 


h. 15: For what then have men lost their life and for 
what have those who were on the earth exchanged 
their soul ? 

liv. 10: Blessed be my mother among those that. 
bear, &c. (probably interpolated). 

xxl. 13: For if there were this life only . . . nothing 
could be more bitter than this. 

xlix. 2: In what shape will those live who live in 
Thy day? 

li. 6: Rejoice ye in the suffering which ye now 
suffer. 

li. 11: The living creatures that are beneath the 
throne. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


For a full bibliography see Charles’ Apocalypse of Baruch with short criticisms of the various works, and 


Schiirer, 27 Zoc. 


(2) THE GREEK VERSION. Fragments published in Grenfell and Hunt’s Oxyrhynchus Papyri, iil. 3-7, 1903 ; 


reprinted in this volume, p. 487 sqq. 


THE SyYRIAC VERSION. The entire version in Ceriani’s Monumenta sacra et brofana, V. ii. 113-80, from one 
MS. ¢; chapters Ixxviii-Ixxxvi. 1-2, the Epistle of Baruch, in the London and Paris Polyglots ; Lagarde’s Libri Vet. 
Lest. Syriace, 88-93, 1861, from one MS. ; Charles, Apocalypse of Baruch, 125-67, from ten MSS. 


(6) MODERN TRANSLATIONS. 


Into Latin by Ceriani, of. céz., I. ii. 73-98, 1866 ; into English by Charles, of. cé¢. ; 


in German by Ryssel in Kautzsch’s 4 pok. und Pseud. ii. 413-46. 


(¢) CRITICAL INQUIRIES. 


Langen, De Agocalypsi Baruch, 1867 ; Hilgenfeld, Messias Ludaeorum, 63-4, 1869 ; 


Kneucker, Das Buch Baruch, 190-6, 1879; Rosenthal, Vier apocryphische Biicher, 72-103, 1885; Kabisch, ‘Die 
Quellen der Apocalypse Baruchs,’ Juhrbicher f. protest. Theol., 66-107, 1891; De Faye, Les Apocalypses juives, 
25-8, 76-103, 192-204, 1892; Ryle, Syith’s Dict. of the Bible,i. 361-2; Ginzberg in the Jewish Encyclopaedia, ii. 


554-6, 1902, a very valuable article. 


(d) Edition of the book. Charles, Apocalypse of Baruch, 1896. 
480 


THE BOOK OF THE APOCALYPSE OF BARUCH THE 
SON OF NERIAH 


[Translated from the Greek into Syriac. ] 


I—IV.1. Announcement of the coming Destruction of Ferusalem to Baruch. 


1: And it came to pass in the twenty-fifth year of Jeconiah, king of Judah, that the word of the Lord j-ix. 1 
2 came to Baruch, the son of Neriah, and said to him: ‘Hast thou seen all that this people are doing = B? 
to Me, that the evils which these two tribes which remained have done are greater than (those of) 
3 the ten tribes which were carried away captive? For the former tribes were forced by their kings 
to commit sin, but these two of themselves have been forcing and compelling their kings to commit 
4sin. For this reason, behold I bring evil upon this city, and upon its inhabitants, and it shall be 
removed from before Me for a time, and I will scatter this people among the Gentiles that they 
may do good to the Gentiles. And My people shall be chastened, and the time shall come when 
they will seek for the prosperity of their times. 
2:1 For I have said these things to thee that thou mayst bid Jeremiah, and all those that are like 
you, to retire from this city. 
For your works are to this city as a firm pillar, 
And your prayers as a strong wall.’ 


Ls) 


THE FIRST SECTION. I-V. 6. The first of the seven sections into which, according to the scheme of the final 
editor, the book was originally divided by fasts, generally lasting seven days. See v. 7, note ; ix, note. 

In this section the word of the Lord comes to Baruch announcing the coming, though temporary, destruction of 
Jerusalem (i); Baruch is to bid Jeremiah to withdraw (ii); Baruch then asks, Will this destruction be final? will chaos 
return ? (iii); God answers that the punishment is temporary (iv. 1). Yet even so, Baruch rejoins, The enemy will 
boast before their idols over God’s own nation (v. 1). Not so, God replies, the heathen will have no cause to glory, as 
it is not they who will destroy Zion (v. 2, 3). Baruch assembles the people, and delivers the message (v. 5). 

I. [Translated from the Greek into Syriac.] These words occur in the Syriac MS., and the statement is 
supported by (1) transliterations of Greek words ; (2) renderings explicable only on the hypothesis that the translator 
followed the wrong meaning of the Greek word before him. 

I. 1. in the twenty-fifth year of Jeconiah. The reckoning is by the years of Jeconiah’s life, and not of his 
reign. He was eighteen years old when he began to reign in 599, and thus his twenty-fifth year would be 592, or two 
years before Nebuchadrezzar’s approach. In vi. 1 only one day, and not two years, elapses between the prediction 
and its fulfilment. So, too, the siege of Jerusalem is there represented as lasting but one day, whereas it lasted two 
years. Moreover, Jeconiah was in captivity when the city fell, and Zedekiah was king, as the author was aware (viii. 5). 
Accuracy of detail is sacrificed to general dramatic effect. 

the Lord. This title of God is found in all sections of the book alike. 

Baruch, the son of Neriah. Cf. Jer. xxxil. 12; xxxvi. 43.1 Barmch dst... : 

2. the ten tribes. Elsewhere in this Apocalypse called ‘the nine and a half tribes’. See Ixxviii. 1 note. 

3. forced by their kings, e.g. Jeroboam, and other kings of Israel. : F 
these two... compelling their kings to commit sin. It was the princes of Judah rather than Zedekiah 

that resisted Jeremiah’s teaching and prophecy. i : 

4. for a time. This phrase recurs in iv. 1, vi. 9; xxxii, 3. It is thus peculiar to BY. Jerusalem has fallen under 
the Romans, but the writer of these chapters believes its desolation will be but ‘for a time’. Its future restoration is 
implied also in Ixxvii. 6, Ixxviii. 7, where the return of the ten tribes is foretold. In B’, and B? i.e. Ixxxv, no such 
restoration is looked for; Jerusalem is removed, xx. 2 (see note 27 Joc.) in order to usher in the judgement more 
speedily ; in x. 10 the writer abandons all hope of a restored Jerusalem. ; = 

do good to the Gentiles. This seems to mean to make proselytes of the Gentiles. Cf. xlii. 5. 

My people shali be chastened. Cf. xiii. 10, &c. Pss. Sol. vii. 3, &c. 

the prosperity of their times, a Messianic kingdom or period of blessedness for Israel on earth. 

II. 1. According to Jer. xxxviii. 13, 28 Jeremiah was a prisoner in the court of the guard till the capture of Jerusalem. 
those that are like you. This phrase recurs in three of the sections of this book. Cf. 4 Ezra iv. 36, &c. : 
retire from this city. Cf. 4 Baruch (‘The Rest of the Words of Baruch *)i, 1. ‘Jeremiah... go forth from this 

city’. The reason for this command appears in the Talmud. In Taanith 19 we are told a house cannot fall so long 
as a good man is init. In Pesikta 115 (Buber’s edition, 1868) it is said ‘So long as Jeremiah was in Jerusalem 
it was not destroyed, but when he went forth from it, it was destroyed’. Fae Ses yhoo 

2. your works are to this city as a firm pillar, &c. Here Jer. vi. 27 1s illegitimately applied, ‘I have made 
thee a tower and a fortress among my people.’ Cf., however, Gen. xviii. 23-33. ; 

your works. On the doctrine of works taught in this book see note on xiv. 7. 4 Baruch omits the reference to 
‘works’, as it is of Christian authorship. 


1105.2 


481 in 


‘ 


‘TT BARUCH See ae mee 


And I said: ‘O Lorb, my Lord, have I come into the world for this purpose that I might see the 
evils of my mother? Not (so) my Lord. If I have found grace in Thy sight, first take my spirit 
that I may go to my fathers and not behold the destruction of my mother. For two things 
vehemently constrain me: for I cannot resist Thee, and my soul, moreover, cannot behold the evils 
4, 50f my mother. But one thing I will say in Thy presence,O Lord. What, therefore, will there be 

after these things ? for if Thou destroyest Thy city, and deliverest up Thy land to those that hate 

6 us, how shall the name of Israel be again remembered? Or how shall one speak of Thy praises? 

7 or to whom shall that which is in Thy Jaw be explained? Or shall the world return to its nature (of 
aforetime), and the age revert to primeval silence? And shall the multitude of souls be taken away, 

9 and the nature of man not again be named? And where is all that which Thou didst say to Moses 

regarding us?’ 
Ay ; 
And the Lord said unto me: 
‘This city shall be delivered up for a time, 
And the people shall be chastened during a time, 
And the world will not be given over to oblivion. 


3 


OO b&b 


oe) 


IV. 2-7. The heavenly Ferusalem. 


[‘ Dost thou think that this is that city of which I said: ‘On the palms of My hands have I graven 
thee”? This building now built in your midst is not that which is revealed with Me, that which was 
prepared beforehand here from the time when I took counsel to make Paradise, and showed it to 
Adam before he sinned, but when he transgressed the commandment it was removed from him, as 
+ also Paradise. And after these things I showed it to My servant Abraham by night among the 
5 portions of the victims. And again also I showed it to Moseson Mount Sinai when I showed to him 
6 the likeness of the tabernacle and all its vessels. And now, behold, it is preserved with Me, as also 
7 Paradise. Go, therefore, and do as I command thee.’ ] 


Qo N 


III. 1. O LORD, my Lord. This title of God is confined, except in one instance (xxxviii. 1), to B? and B. It 
recurs in xiv. 8, 16; xvi. 1; xxili, 1; xlviii. 4, 5. While used only of God in this work, in 4 Ezra it is applied to an 
angel six times (see 4 Ezra iv. 38, &c.), as also ‘JN in Dan. x. 17,19. The words uzx hugo are to be rendered 
“O LORD, my Lord’, as above, and not Dominator Domine, as we find in Ceriani. The suffix is not moribund. The 
Syriac is a translation either of d€omora kvpre pov or Kipte KUpié pov; and these in turn would point either to MN" 35N 
or IN '. 

my mother. Cf. ili. 2, 3, x. 16; 1 Baruch iv. 9-16. This was a very natural term for a Jew to apply to Jerusalem, 
as Isa. xlix. 21. Cf. Matt. xxill. 37. The writer here (B?) uses it as an earthly Jerusalem, as St. Paul in Gal. iv. 26 of 
the heavenly. 

2. take my spirit. Cf. Ps. xxxi. 13; Jer. xv. 15. 

4-IV. 1. Baruch asks God if the end of all things will follow on the delivering up of Jerusalem; will Israel’s name 
be lost, and students of the law fail? Will chaos return and men die? In iv. 1 God answers that Jerusalem will again 
be restored, the chastening of its people soon be accomplished, and chaos will not return. 

6. to whom shall that which is in Thy law be explained? Answered by Baruch, xlvi. 4. 

Me The Syriac word here translated ‘world’ really means ‘ornament’. Thus the translator followed a wrong sense 
OI Koo pos. 
revert to primeval silence. Cf. 4 Ezra vii. 30 for the doctrine of a thousand years’ Sabbath, which may be 
referred to here and in xliv. 9 (B?) and denied in iv. 1. 

8. shall... be taken away. The MS. reads ams», which Ceriani emends into sco \'so, which I have 

rendered. Ryssel proposes Qeo\.x0 = ‘shall be destroyed’. 


IV. 2-7. Apparently an interpolation. The earthly Jerusalem is here derided, and contrasted with the one to be 
revealed. In vi. 9, Jerusalem, though to be delivered up for a time, as in iv. 1, will be again restored, and that for ever. 
Further in vi. 7-8, the actual vessels of the earthly temple are committed to the earth to be preserved for future use 
in the restored Jerusalem. 

2. ‘On the palms of My hands.’ Quoted from Isa. xlix. 16, Syriac Version, which alone has ‘palms’. This fuller 
phrase is usual, e.g. 1 Sam. v. 4. 

__3. This building .. . is not that which is revealed. The growing transcendence and enlargement of the 
idea of God, combined with the deepened consciousness of sin, and the consequent sense of the unfitness of Jerusalem 
as God’s habitation, led to the evolution of the doctrine of a heavenly Jerusalem complete in all its parts. Of heavenly 
antitypes of the Tabernacle and its furniture we are told as early as the Priests’ Code (Exod. xxv. 9, 40; cf. Heb. viii. 5). 
The purification or even total renewal of the earthly copies is postulated in Isa. lx; Ezek. xl-xlviii. The first full 
emergence of the idea of the heavenly city seems to be in 1 En. xc, 28, 29, where the old Jerusalem is removed, and 
the new is brought and set up by God Himself, though even there no prior existence is assigned to the latter, This 
would be about 166 B.c. But the purification of Jerusalem seems sufficient in Pss. Sol. xvii. 25 (70-40 B.C.); 1 En 
x. 16-19, xxv. I (180 B.C.), to prepare for the Messianic kingdom. See my Commentary. : : 
took counsel to make Paradise. Which Paradise is this? It may be, like the heavenly Jerusalem, the 

Paradise kept in heaven, or it may be the earthly counterpart in which Adam was placed at the first. ; 
4. I showed it to My servant Abraham. We are not told so in Gen. xv. 9-21. But in 4 Ezra iii. 13,14 Abraham 


is said to have been shown ‘the end of the times’, while the Beresh. rabba on Gen. xxviii, 17 tells us that the above 
vision was accorded to Jacob sleeping at Bethel 


482 


Mea UCH Ob 1206-6 A 


J 


V. Baruch’s Complaint and God's Reassurance. 


51 And I answered and said: 
‘So then I am destined to grieve for Zion, 
For Thine enemies will come to this place and pollute Thy sanctuary, 
And lead Thine inheritance into captivity, 
And make themselves masters of those whom Thou hast loved, 
And they will depart again to the place of their idols, 
And will boast before them : 
And what wilt Thou do for Thy great name?’ 
2 And the Lord said unto me : 
‘My name and My glory are unto all eternity ; 
And My judgement shall maintain its right in its own time. 
3 And thou shalt see with thine eyes 
That the enemy will not overthrow Zion, 
Nor shall they burn Jerusalem, 
But be the ministers of the Judge for the time. 
4 But do thou go and do whatsoever I have said unto thee.’ 
5 And I went and took Jeremiah, and Adu, and Seriah, and Jabish, and Gedaliah, and all the 
honourable men of the people, and I led them to the valley of Cedron, and I narrated to them all 
6, 7 that had been said to me. And they lifted up their voice, and they all wept. And we sat there 
and fasted until the evening. 


VI-VIII. JZnvasion of the Chaldeans and their Entrance into the City after the Sacred Vessels 
; were hidden and the Citys Walls overthrown by Angels. 


Gx And it came to pass on the morrow that, lo! the army of the Chaldees surrounded the city, 
and at the time of the evening, I, Baruch, left the people, and I went forth and stood by the 
2oak. And I was grieving over Zion, and lamenting over the captivity which had come upon 

3 the people. And lo! suddenly a strong spirit raised me, and bore me aloft over the wall of 

4 Jerusalem. And I beheld, and lo! four angels standing at the four corners of the city, each of 

s them holding a torch of fire in his hands. And another angel began to descend from heaven, 

6 and said unto them: ‘Hold your lamps, and do not light them till I tell you. For I am first sent 
to speak a word to the earth, and to place in it what the Lord the Most High has commanded 


V. 1. grieve. MS. reads Qaw (= guilty ’) which I have emended into o\9 = ‘grieve’. 
whom Thou hast loved, ixxviii. 3, xxi. 20, 21; 4 Ezra iv. 23. 
what wilt Thou do. Joshua vii.9. Cf. 4 Ezra iv. 25. es 
2. My judgement . . . shall maintain its right. Recurs in a slightly different form in xlvili. 27 and Ixxxy. 9. 
3. This is carried out in vi. 5 ; vil. ¥ : 
5. Adu. A priest of this name went up with Zerubbabel (Neh. xii. 4). The Mass. gives Iddo, but the Syriac and 
Vulgate Addo. : ; ; 
Seriah, brother of Baruch and chief chamberlain of Zedekiah with whom he went to Babylon (see Jer. li. 59, ih 
Gedaliah, son of Ahikam (see Jer. xl. 14). ; ee . 
narrated to them, &c. Baruch usually makes known his revelations to his friends and the elders. He is for- 
bidden to do so in the fourth section, i.e. xii. 5-xx. . “¢ 
7. fasted until the evening. The other fasts mentioned are of seven days. Of these there are four (ix. 2; xil. 55 
xxi. 1; xlvii. 2). The scheme of the final editor is first a fast, then generally a prayer, then a divine message or 
revelation, then an announcement of this either to an individual (e.g. v. 5) or to the people (e.g. Xxxi. 2-Xxxiv), 
followed occasionally by a lamentation. This scheme is broken through in the fifth section only, i.e. in xxi-xlvi, where 
another fast is required after xxxv. In 4 Ezra there are four fasts of seven days. 


THE SECOND SECTION. VI-VIII. This is a short section. After a day’s fast Baruch, while lamenting alone, 
sees in a vision the sacred vessels committed to the earth for a season and the city destroyed by angels lest the enemy 
should triumph (vi. 3-vil). The realization of this vision follows. 


V1. 1. on the morrow, &c. 4 Baruch (iv. 1) reproduces these words. 
by the oak. This oak is outside the city, probably near or in the valley of the Cedron, where Baruch and the 
thers had fasted. It cannot be the oak at Hebron. bes ; A i \ 
: It is noteworthy that no mention of this oak occurs In B2. In B’it is found twice (vi. 1 and Ixxvii. 18). A tree is 


sferred to in A® in lv. I. ; Ee 
i 4. Cf. Rev. vii. 1 ‘I saw four angels standing on the four corners of the earth’; 4 Baruch iii. 2. 
5. Cf, Rev. vil. 25 4 Baruch iii. 4. Ree “a 
6. The office of the angel here is executed by Jeremiah in 4 Baruch 111. 8. wags * 
the Lord the Most High. This full title occurs here only in this book; the ‘Most High’ is found in xvii. 1, 
&c., Ixxxiii. 1, and 4 Ezra. 483 ae 


Il BARUCH 6, 7~9. 1 Bf! 


» me. And I saw him descend into the Holy of Holies, and take from thence the veil, and the 
holy ark, and the mercy-seat, and the two tables, and the holy raiment of the priests, and the altar 
of incense, and the forty-eight precious stones, wherewith the priest was adorned and all the holy 

8 vessels of the tabernacle. And he spake to the earth with a loud voice: 

‘Earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the mighty God, 
And receive what I commit to thee, 
And guard them until the last times, 
So that, when thou art ordered, thou mayst restore them, 
So that strangers may not get possession of them. ; 
9 For the time comes when Jerusalem also will be delivered for a time, 

Until it is said, that it is again restored for ever.’ 

ro And the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them up. 

71 And after these things I heard that angel saying unto those angels who held the lamps: 

‘ Destroy, therefore, and overthrow its wall to its foundations, lest the enemy should boast and 
say : 

“We have overthrown the wall of Zion, 

And we have burnt the place of the mighty God.”’ 

2 And tye have seized the placet where I had been standing before. 

8: Now the angels did as he had commanded them, and when they had broken up the corners 
of the walls, a voice was heard from the interior of the temple, after the wall had fallen, 
saying : : 

2 ‘Enter, ye enemies, 

And come, ye adversaries ; 
For he who kept the house has forsaken (it).’ 

4 And I, Baruch, departed. And it came to pass after these things that the army of the Chaldees 

5 entered and seized the house, and all that was around it. And they led the people away captive, 
and slew some of them, and bound Zedekiah the king, and sent him to the king of Babylon. 


3 


IX-XII. 4. Virst Fast of seven Days: Baruch to remain amid the Ruins of Ferusalem and 
Feremiah to accompany the Exiles to Babylon. Baruch’s Dirge over Ferusalem. 


9: And I, Baruch, came, and Jeremiah, whose heart was found pure from sins, who had not been 


7. take from thence, &c. In 2 Macc. ii. 4-8 there is a very similar tradition. Jeremiah is warned of God to hide 
in the mountain where Moses climbed up ‘the tabernacle and the ark and the altar of incense’. This place was to 
remain unknown till God should gather His people again together. 

ark. MS.= 2S corrupt for 08. The converse corruption of 7158 into JN is found in 1 Sam. xiv. 18. In 
2 Macc. ii. 5 the things hidden are these—rjv oxnyny Kal THy KiBwroy Kal Td OvotacrnpLov Tod Oupidparos. 

According to Bammidbar rabba 15, five things were taken away and preserved on the destruction of Solomon’s 
temple: the candlestick, the ark, the fire, the Holy Spirit, and the Cherubim. 

the altar of incense. The Syriac implies Ovsrarnpiov. In the LXX this word = ‘censer’, but in Philo and 
Josephus it means not ‘censer’ but ‘altar of incense’. Cf. Heb. ix. 1-5 (?), and 2 Macc. as above (rd Ovovtagrnpioy rod 
Ovpudparos) which mention the altar but not a censer. See Appendix to my Commentary, p. 168. 

forty-eight precious stones. Why forty-eight? There were twelve on the breastplate (Exod. xxviii. 15-21) 
and two on the ephod (Exod. xxviii. 9). 

8. Earth ... of the mighty God, drawn from Jer. xxii. 29. ‘Earth’ is repeated three times also in Mass., Syr., 

Vulg. of that passage; in LXX only twice. 

Mighty God. This title recurs in vii. 1, and xiii. 2, 4. Not in 4 Ezra. 

guard them until the last times. Cf. 4 Baruch iii. 8, ‘Preserve the vessels of worship until the coming of the 
Beloved.’ 

g. restored for ever. A Messianic kingdom of indefinite duration is looked forward to with Jerusalem as its 
centre, and likewise the temple in which the sacred vessels of the former temple will again be used. During this 
kingdom the dispersion will again return to Palestine (Ixxvii. 6 ; Ixxviii. 7, notes). 


VII. 2. ye have seized the place. The text is impossible here. Possibly JodN wort ohean/ is corrupt for 


JoLM (WaMNs0/ or) whsks/ [ood ‘the spirit brought me to the place.’ In vi. 3 a strong spirit carried Baruch aloft 
over the walls for the vision: now he carries him back to the place beside the oak. 
VIII. 2. 4 Baruch iv. 1. 
_He who kept the house has forsaken it. Cf. Tacitus A/7zs¢. v. 13 ‘Apertae repente delubri fores et audita 
maior humana vox excedere deos’. 
5. The writer knows of Zedekiah and his captivity. See note oni. 1. 


IX. 1. heart ... pure from sins. In Pss, Sol. xvii. 41 the Messiah is said to be xaOapds dé dpaprias. 


THE THIRD SECTION. IX. 2-XII. 4. After a seven days’ fast amid the ruins of Zion, the word of the Lord bids 
Baruch to tell Jeremiah to go to Babylon, and promises a revelation of what should be in the end. Baruch tells 
Jeremiah the message, and laments before the temple gates for Zion. oe 


484 


Pe 
Il BARUCH 9. 2—10. ro § 


2 aie in the seizure of the city. And we rent our garments, we wept, and mourned, and fasted ix. 2=XXV. 
seven days. ae) 
HO 1,2 And it came to pass after seven days, that the word of God came to me, and said unto me: ‘ Tell 
3 Jeremiah to go and support the captivity of the people unto Babylon. But do thou remain here 
amid the desolation of Zion, and I will show to thee after these days what will befall at the end of 
4, 5j\days. And I said to Jeremiah as the Lord commanded me. And he, indeed, departed with the 
people, but I, Baruch, returned and sat before the gates of the temple, and I lamented with the 
following lamentation over Zion and said: 


6 ‘Blessed is he who was not born, 
Or he, who having been born, has died. 
7 But as for us who live, woe unto us, 
Because we see the afflictions of Zion, 
And what has befallen Jerusalem. 


8 I will call the Sirens from the sea, 
And ye Lilin, come ye from the desert, 
And ye Shedim and dragons from the forests : 


Awake and gird up your loins unto mourning, 
And take up with me the dirges, 
And make lamentation with me. 


9 Ye husbandmen, sow not again ; 
And, O earth, wherefore givest thou thy harvest fruits ? 
Keep within thee the sweets of thy sustenance. 


to - And thou, vine, why further dost thou give thy wine; 
For an offering will not again be made therefrom in Zion, 
Nor will first-fruits again be offered. 


IX. 2. The first fast of seven days. em ; 
Fasting was the usual preparation for supernatural communications. Cf. Dan. ix. 3, 20-21; and see note on v. 7. 


X. 1. God. This word is found only twice again, i.e. liv. 12; Ixxxii.9. Its use is more frequent in 4 Ezra. g 
2. We have here a violation of the true historical tradition. According to Jer. xliii. 4~7, both Jeremiah and Baruch 
were carried down into Egypt. In 1 Baruch i. 1, Baruch appears in Babylon five years after Jerusalem was taken. 
In 4 Baruch, too, Jeremiah is taken to Babylon, but by force. The references to Jeremiah in connexion with 
Babylon probably belong to B®. In Ixxvii. 17-19, &c., Baruch writes to the brethren in Babylon, never ie Jeremiah ; 
while in 4 Baruch he directs his letter to Jeremiah. But later Judaism, according to Pesik. R. 26 (131 ed. Fried- 

mann) held that Jeremiah accompanied the exiles part of the way to Babylon. ; 
support. So I render according to a recognized meaning of the Syriac verb pass. Ryssel thinks that this verb 


goes back to 2 f'30, and that 3 was to be understood with it. Thus he arrives at his rendering ‘care for’. But this 
is most nblikely ; for in xliii. 1 we have the actual Syriac phrase in full which corresponds to the Hebrew ab Pan, 
ie, OS coh. There we should render as in Hebrew, ‘direct thy heart,’ &c. Now it is noteworthy that the ESS 
in our text ‘go and support’ recurs practically in xxxiii. 2, but there ooh is used instead of pao). coh, is a Syriac 
equivalent of }'97. Hence there we render ‘make ready’. In Ixxvii. 12 yet another verb, Naw, is used in nearly the 


same sense as ? inx. 2. Returning now to xxxiii. 2 we recognize at once that there is a slight corruption in the 
text : ‘make ready the rest of the brethren tint Babylon, against whom has gone forth the sentence that they should 
be Jed into captivity.’ Here the brethren are first of all said to be already ‘ in Babylon . and then in the next clause 
to be sentenced to exile to Babylon. Thus ‘in Babylon’ may be corrupt for ‘for Babylon’. It must be confessed, 
however, that the original standing behind these words is very uncertain. 
. This lament of Baruch prepares for the third fast of xil. 5. J : : F 

: before the gates of the temple. This is the scene of the following lamentation, and also that In Xxxv. I. 
A passage in the beginning of 3 Baruch seems to be derived from our text: ovrws €xdOnro emi Tas wpaias widas 
érov ekeito Ta TOY dyi@v Gya. Mount Zion, on the other hand, is the scene where revelations are accorded to him 
xiii. I, &c.). 2 
6. Bina is he who was not born, &c. Cf. Eccles. iv. 2-3, from which the text may ultimately have been 
derived. Cf. 4 Ezra: it is said that it were better man had not been born at all than be born to have to face pers 
torment and judgement (e.g. vil. 66, 116, 117). But it is the present ets of Jerusalem that here are said to make the 

i i i i i living. 

unborn blessed, and those in Sheol (xi. 7) happy in comparison with the So 

8. Sirens. These are said in 1 En. xix. 2 (Greek version) to have been the wives of the angels who went astray. 
Here they are sea-nymphs, as in Greek legend. The Greek translators of the O.T. used the term for ostriches 


] k ] ~ * 1" . . 7 
ie Te cht demons, Male and female demons named Lil and Lilit belong to Assyrian and Babylonian demonology. 


The Lilith (nb) are mentioned in Isa. xxxiv. 14, along with the satyr ayy, 


Shedim. Male demons, to which various origins were assigned. See my aap Rey in loc. 
5 i i ili the word may mean ‘jackals’. 
dragons. So, too, Pesh. renders 0°3N in Isa. xiii. 22. But I : 
10. The writer of x. 6-xii. 4 resigns absolutely all hope of the restoration of Jerusalem, as B® does throughout. 


485 


LE 


12 


13 


I 4 


16 


17 


18 


r9 


ll: 


els 
Il BARUCH 10; 1-11.53 6 


And do ye, O heavens, withhold your dew, 
And open not the treasuries of rain : 
And do thou, O sun, withhold the light of thy rays. 


And do thou, O moon, extinguish the multitude of thy light ; 
For why should light rise again 
Where the light of Zion is darkened ? 


And you, ye bridegrooms, enter not in, _ 
And let not the brides adorn themselves with garlands ; 
And, ye women, pray not that ye may bear. 


For the barren shall above all rejoice, 
And those who have no sons shall be glad, 
And those who have sons shall have anguish. 


For why should they bear in pain, 
Only to bury in grief ? 
Or why, again, should mankind have sons ? 


Or why should the seed of their kind again be named, 
Where this mother is desolate, 
And her sons are led into captivity ? 


From this time forward speak not of beauty, 
And discourse not of gracefulness. 


Moreover, ye priests, take ye the keys of the sanctuary, 
And cast them into the height of heaven, 
And give them to the Lord and say: 


“Guard Thy house Thyself, 
For lo! we are found false stewards.” 


And you, ye virgins ; who weave fine linen 

And silk with gold of Ophir, 

Take with haste all (these) things 

And cast (them) into the fire, 

That it may bear them to Him who made them, 
And the flame send them to Him who created them, 
Lest the enemy get possession of them.’ 


Moreover, I, Baruch, say this against thee, Babylon: 
‘If thou hadst prospered, 

And Zion had dwelt in her glory, 

Yet the grief to us had been great 

That thou shouldst be equal to Zion, 


But now, lo! the grief is infinite, 
And the lamentation measureless, 
For lo! thou art prospered 

And Zion desolate. 


Who will be judge regarding these things ? 
Or to whom shall we complain regarding that which has befallen us? 
O Lord, how hast Thou borne (it) ? 


13. brides. . Syriac gives virgins, who first rightly occur in verse 19. The references here are to marriage. The 
ext midina, corrupt for m3 in the Hebrew original. 

14. Cf. Matt. xxiv. 19; Luke xxiii. 29, ‘ Blessed are the barren, &c.’ 

16. this mother, Jerusalem. See iii. 1 note. 

18. The priesthood are found false stewards and resign charge of the temple. Cf. 4 Baruch iv. 3, 4, where 
Jeremiah casts up the keys ‘before the sun’, and the JSalkut Shim. on Isa. xxi, where the flower of the priests cast 
them up aloft. The same incident is recounted in Taanith 29°; Lev. R. xix. 6, in connexion with the destruction 
of the first temple. In Ab. R. N. vii the incident is recorded in connexion with the destruction of the second temple. 


XI. 1. Babylon stands here for Rome, as in Rev. xiv. 8, &c. 


3- how hast Thou borne (it). Cf. 4 Ezra iii. 30, “how Thou dost bear with them that sin.’ Also Pss. Sol. ii. 1, 
and 4 Ezra iii. 8; Isa. xiv. 6. 
486 


12: 


2 


3 


4 


Ou 


MeBARUCH 11) 4—12: 5 


Our fathers went to rest without grief, 

And lo! the righteous sleep in the earth in tranquillity ; 
For they knew not this anguish, 

Nor yet had they heard of that which had befallen us. 
Would that thou hadst ears, O earth, 

And that thou hadst a heart, O dust: 

That ye might go and announce in Sheol, 

And say to the dead: 


“Blessed are ye more than we who live.”’ 


OXYRHYNCHUS GREEK FRAGMENT, from Grenfell and Hunt’s 
Oxyrhynchus Papyrt, vol. iti. 3-7, 1903. 


Verso. Verso. 

But I will say this as I (2-5) 12. x. But I will say this as I ( 17 letters adda r)ovro 12 1 
think. think, o1o(y) 

And I will speak against And speak against thee, the (ovopat epo Kat dadn)ow 
thee, O land, which art land that is prospering. Tpos o€ THV 
prospering. 

The noonday does not 2. Not always does the noon- (ynv tyv evodovear oyu 2 
always burn. day burn, TMAVTOTE PLETE 

Nor do the rays of the Nor do the rays of the sun 5 (@pia_ amroxaves ovd)e TO 
sun constantly give light. constantly give light. OiNVEKES GL AKTL 

Do not expect [and hope] (6-8) 3. And do not thou expect to (ves Tov nAtov Aa)umoveww" 3 
that thou wilt always be rejoice, KaL OV [Nn TOS 
prosperous and rejoicing. 

And be not greatly up- Nor ¢condemnj greatly. (Soxa Xatpnoew) pnoe 
lifted and boastful. em(t)moAv KaTadKa 

For assuredly in its own (8-10) 4. For assuredly in its season (Ce adnOws yap €v) Kap 4 
season shall the (divine) shall the (divine) wrath be awak- efimviOnoerar 
wrath awake against thee. ened against thee, 

Which now in long-suf- Which is now restrained by (mpos o€ n Opyn n VUY VTO 
fering is held in as it were long-suffering as it were by a Tyns paKpoOvpdt) 
by reins. rein. 


XIL. 5-XIII. Second Fast. Revelation as to the coming Fudgement on the Heathen. 
And when I had said (x0-16) 5. And having said these r10o(as ws xadww karexerar 


these things, I fasted seven things I fasted seven days. Kal) ELT@Y TATA 
days. 
4. went to rest .. . sleep in the earth. Cf. xxi. 24. Dan. xii. 2, ‘sleep in the dust of the earth.” 


5-6. In Berakh 18? there is a long legend narrated, the object of which is to teach that the departed know 
nothing of what is going on in this world. 

6. That ye might go. The Syriac = ‘and go ye’, a Hebrew idiom, i.e. an imperative used for a jussive : see 
Driver, Moods and Tenses,’ p. 82. 


XII. 3. [and hope]. A duplicate rendering. ae 
be... uplifted = Nin. The Greek ‘condemn *== WIN, is against the parallelism. 


boastful. I have emended eeoal = ‘do (not) oppress ’, into geioaheal. 


THE FOURTH SECTION. XII. 5-XX. After a fast of seven days follows a long revelation to Baruch (xiii. 2-xx. 2). 
The text is very confused. See next note. 


XIII-XXV. The text of these chapters is inexplicable as it stands. The difficulties are due not to corruption, 
though this exists, but to a recasting of the original text. In this process many passages were torn from their original 
contexts and placed in settings which are quite unsuitable. It appears impossible to restore the original order ; for 
not only were the chapters broken up and rearranged, but also mutilated and interpolated. It is only occasionally 
possible to explain the grounds for such dislocations of the text. But that they occur not infrequently is indubitable. 
We have it on a large scale in 2 Corinthians which is composed of two letters, and where the later in date is placed 
before the earlier. Other instances which can be consulted by the reader occur in this volume : see I Enoch xii-xvi ; 
where the dislocation and consequent confusion are almost as great as In our text: Ixxvili-lxxxli 5 XCi-xcill. ie 

But let us return and state the chief grounds for regarding this section as disarranged and confused. 1°. In xill. 4 
‘those prosperous cities’ are represented as speaking without a single note of introduction. — Before xili. 4 probably 
some reference was made to these cities. 2°. The retribution of the Gentiles referred to in xiii. 4, 5 has not been 


487 


1] BARUCH 8) ree = 


131 And it came to pass after 18.1. And it came to pass (evnotevoa nueypas ¢ kar ld 1 

these things, that I, Baruch, after these things that I, Baruch, EYEVETO [LE 
was standing upon Mount was standing upon Mount Zion, (ra TavTa ott eyw) Bapovx 
Zion, and lo! a voice came and lo! a voice came forth from ioTynKEl” ETL TO 
from the height and said the height and said unto me: (opos Soy Kar wWov pwv)n 

2 unto me: ‘Stand upon thy 2. ‘Stand upon thy feet, Baruch, e€ndOev €€ 0 f 
feet, Baruch, and hear the and hear the word of the mighty (Wous Kal eume ror ava)ora 2 
word of the mighty God.’ God.’ €7l TOUS 7FO 


15 (das cov Bapovy Kar akove) 
Tov Aoyov tcxv 
(pov Oeov 


3 Because thou hast been astonied at what has befallen Zion, thou shalt therefore be assuredly 
4 preserved to the consummation of the times, that thou mayst be for a testimony. So that, if ever 
5 those prosperous cities say: ‘Why hath the mighty God brought upon us this retribution?’ Say 


mentioned before, though the text presupposes some such mention. It is intelligible if xxv or xxiv. 4 precedes where 
Baruch asks what will befall the enemies of Israel. 3°. In xiv. 1 Baruch replies that God has shown him ‘the method 
of the times’, whereas in xx. 6 this is not yet done; for the promise is there given that Baruch shall receive directions 
with regard to them. 4° In xiv. 1 it is said that God has shown to Baruch the retribution that shall befall the 
Gentiles. But this is not done by God till xxv. 3. The Gentile cities in xiii. 4 sq. complain of it after it has come upon 
them. Hence xxv. should precede xiii. 4-xiv. 5°. In xxiv. 4° Baruch asks what retribution awaits the enemies of 
Israel and when would the judgement be. Now the answer to the first question has already been given in xiii. 4-12; 
and the answer to the second question follows in xxv. Hence xxiv. 4 should precede xiii. 3-12, xxv. 6°. In xiii. 5 
the words ‘thou and those like thee who shall have seen this evil’ are unexplained in their present context and 
are in fact inexplicable, unless xxiv. 2 precedes, in which God tells Baruch that he and many with him should see 
the judgement of God. But if xxiv. 2 ‘thou shalt see—and the many that are with thee ’ originally preceded xiii. 3-5, 
then everything is clear. Hence xxiv. 2-4 should precede xiii. 3-12. 7°. Again, there is no adequate explanation of 
the ‘therefore’ in xx. 1. But if xx is read immediately after xiii. 1-32 the text would at once become clear. 

Thus, provisionally, the text might be restored as follows :—xiil. I-37; XX; xxiv. 2-43 xiii. 30-12; xxv. 

Now we have to remark regarding these sections that their interest is at once theological and national. To 
reassure Baruch, who is plunged in grief over Jerusalem (xiii. 32), God declares (xx. 1-2) that the days and years will 
speed more quickly in order to usher in the judgement, which will right all wrongs, and that even Jerusalem has been 
removed with this end in view. Baruch is then promised that disclosures shall be made on ‘the method of the times’ 
(xx. 6) and that ‘he ‘tand the many that are witht him’ (xxiv. 2) shall witness God’s dealings. Baruch, thereupon, asks 
two questions (xxiv. 4): (a) What will befall Israel’s enemies? (4) when will this judgement be of which God has already 
spoken (xx. 2)? The answer to (a) is given in xiii. 3-12. But the first words of this answer are lost, somewhat to 
the effect that ‘retribution will come upon the prosperous cities of your enemies’. Baruch, moreover, will be preserved 
until those last days (xiii. 3) in order to testify together with the surviving righteous (xiii. 5, xxiv. 2) the reason of the 
retribution that had befallen those cities, and to answer the remonstrances of the tormented Gentiles. In answer to 
Baruch’s second question, he is informed (xxv. I-2) that he shall be preserved till the sign of the last days has come. 
This sign shall be a stupor that shall seize the inhabitants of the earth (xxv. 3, 4). Baruch, thereupon, acknowledges 
that God has shown him ‘the method of the times’, and told him of the retribution coming upon the Gentiles (xiv. 1). 
This verse closes the questions of theological and national interest in xiii-xxv. In xiv. 2-xix, which follows, we have 
a section that is of a purely theological and individual interest, as will be seen from the summary at the beginning of 
these chapters (p. 489). 

Xxi-xxiv. I is mainly of the same theological cast. Their substance, in a word, is that the end cannot come till all 
souls are born. 

_ Thus the original order of xiii-xxv appears to have been: xiii. I—3%, XX, xxiv. 2-4, xiii. 3-12, xxv, xiv-xix, xxi- 
XXIV. I. 


XIII. 1. Mount Zion is the scene of the revelation here; of the prayer in xxi. 4-25; of the revelation in XX1I-XXx } 
of the seven days’ fast in xlvii. 2; and of the prayer and revelation following in xlviii-lii. 

3. thou shalt therefore be assuredly preserved, &c. This promise recurs twice again in B’, i.e. in xxv. 1 and 
lxxvi. 2, Thus the assumption and preservation of Baruch till the last judgement is the teaching of B%. Cf. also xlviii. 
30 and xlvi. 7._ In B}, on the other hand, Baruch is to die a natural death (Ixxvill. 5; Ixxxiv. 1), and go the way of 
all the earth (xliv. 2). This conflict of accounts is due to the transference of a distinct Enochic function to Baruch in B?, 
For in Jub. iv. 24 it is said: ‘Enoch was set as a szgn there (in Eden), and that he should testify against all the 
children of men’ (Cf. also x. 17). Enoch’s acceptance among Christians was the ground for his rejection by the Jews. 
Though he was second only to Daniel in Jewish Apocalyptic prior to A.D. 40 his functions and achievements were in 
subsequent Jewish literature assigned to others, e.g. Moses, Ezra, or Baruch. By observing this tendency of Jewish 
thought we are enabled in lix. 4-11 to conclude that a document, seen to be on other grounds prior to A.D. 70, is later 
than the rise of Christianity. 

be assuredly preserved. The Syriac reveals a Hebraism; lit. = cwodels cocbnoet. 

4. those prosperous cities. The text preceding these words seems to have been lost ; or preferably (see note 
on xil1-xxv on p. 487) we should read xiii. 3-12 after xxiv. 2-4. In any case, xiii. 3-12 gives an answer to xxiv. 4. 
The cities here mentioned are Gentile cities. “A land’ is referred to as prospering in xii. 1, 3. 


brought upon us this retribution. Cf. the phrase in regard to Israel in Ixxvii. 4. Here the Gentile cities 
suffer as there Israel does. 
488 


6,7 
8 


10 


I! 


12 


141 


IPBARUCH IB) e141 [° 


thou to them, thou and those like thee who shall have seen this evil: ‘(This is the evil) and 
retribution which is coming upon you and upon your people in its (destined) time that the nations 
may be thoroughly smitten. And then they shall be in anguish. And if they say at that time: 
For how long? Thou wilt say to them: 

“Ye who have drunk the strained wine, 

Drink ye also of its dregs, 

The judgement of the Lofty One 

Who has no respect of persons.’ 


On this account he had aforetime no mercy on His own sons, 

But afflicted them as His enemies, because they sinned, 

Then therefore were they chastened 

That they might be sanctified. 

OXYRHYNCHUS GREEK FRAGMENT. 
Recto. Recto. 
A 

But now, ye peoples and (19-20) 11. (Ye) peoplesand... om 
nations, ye are guilty 

Because ye have always (Ye) have trodden down the ta €Ovn kat 14 letters 
trodden down the earth, earth KaTaTa 

And used the creation And misused thecreated things 20 tnoavtes Thy (ynv Kat Ka- 
unrighteously. in it. TAX PNTA/LEVOL 

For I have always bene- (21-22) 12. For ye were always being Tovs €y avTn KTiop(ace 
fited you. benefited UPELS yap EvEP 

And ye have always been But ye were always ungrateful. yeToupevor acu nxa(prote- 
ungrateful for the bene- LTE GEL 
ficence. 


XIV-XIX. The Righteousness of the Righteous has profited neither them nor their City; Gods 
Fudgements are incomprehensible; the World was made for the Righteous, yet they pass and the 
World remains (XIV). Answer--Man knows God’s Fudgements and has sinned willingly. 
This World is a Weariness to the Righteous but the next is theirs (XV), to be won through 
Character whether a Man’s Time here be long or short (XVI-XVII). Final Weal or Woe— 
the supreme Question (XVIII-XIX). 


And I answered and (23-25) 14. 1. And I answered and Kal amekplonyv Kat eumoyy 
said: ‘Lo! Thou hast said: ‘ Behold, thou hast shown Loov amedet 
shown me the method of me the methods of the times, Eas jou Kaupwv Tagers* Kae 
the times, and that which and that which shall be. To meddov 


5. thou and those like thee who shall have seen this evil. ‘those like thee’, i.e. ap DndIn, are the same 
as ‘tthe many (= 0°317 corrupt for D977) who are witht thee’ in xxiv. 2. All previous translations have wrongly 


rendered \ohshe as ‘have seen’, whereas the context requires that it should be rendered ‘ shall have seen’. The time 
referred to is in the future—the end of the world : the evil referred to is not the destruction of Jerusalem in the past, but 
the retribution which should befall the Gentiles in the last days. To this time of the end Baruch was to be preserved 
(xiii. 3) to testify to the Gentiles that full retribution had at last come upon them. (oleae 
those like thee. These are the righteous who shall be surviving in the last days, and who shall join with Baruch 
in his testimony. : ; ; 2 
5-7. This (is the evil) and retribution, &c. The text in this verse and the next is defective. First of all I have 
restored with Ryssel ‘this is the evil’, which fell out through hmt., and read ‘retribution’ in the singular, as in v. 4. 
Next the text reads ‘chastened’. But v. 8 shows that the punishment is not corrective, but vindictive. Text = mradevdoory, 
which I take to be corrupt, as in 1 Sam. xxvi. 10, for mraobdow = 13). Next, in v. 6, the text reads ‘ shall expect’, ° shall 


hope ’= éAmicovot = ony, corrupt for mn = ‘shall be in anguish’. The same confusion is found in Jer. iv. 19, in 
the Hebrew MSS. Finally, in v. 7, the text reads ‘when’ where we require ‘for how long’, he. NO7TY—not 


‘nD alone. i 
roy Gls PSmIRKVe 75 O- : : j 2 
the Lofty One. Here only in this book (see 4 Ezra iv. 34; Isa, vii. 15). 
XIV. 1. Baruch has not been shown “the method of the times q. Chapter xiii has only told us why the 
retribution has come on the Gentile cities, and when their punishment will be consummated. Disclosures about 
the method of the times are promised in xx. 6, and would seem to be given in xxiv. 2-xxv, taken together with xiil, 


or else in XXViI-xxx. 


489 


II 


141 


45 


ty 


ow 


5 
6 
7 


8 


Io, II 


I 


2 


Il? BARUCH 14trereene 


shall be after these things, (25-27) And thou hast said unto me 25 (e)eoar Kau eves p(o)e" 


and Thou hast said unto that the retribution which was (ort ut €Over 

me, that the retribution, spoken of by thee shall be fen- uTevexOnoe(rar n vO cov 
which has been spoken of duredt} by the nations. Nex Jevoa 

by Thee, shall come upon (27-32) 2. And now I know that those mpagis Kat vup (oda ort 
the nations. And now I who have sinned are many, and TBONNDU Ana Oe 

know that those who have they -have lived .< ., and »de- ELolv OL *papTupnoav(res 
sinned are many, and they parted from the world, but that ROL eee 

have lived in prosperity, few nations will be left in those e(yoav’ Kat etropevOn(oar 
and departed from the times to whom ... the words €K KOO MOU 

world, but that few nations (which) thou didst say. jo odtya be mepileorar €Ovy 
will be left in those times, €V €KELVOLS 

to whom those words shall Tots Kaipows’ oS .... . 
be said which Thou didst . 4 6 OUS ELTES 

say. For what advantage (32-33) 3. And what advantage (is Aoyous’ Kat TL m(Aeov ev 
is there in this, or what there) in this or what worse than TOUTW N TLVG XEL 

(evil), worse than what we (these?) aeolc. pova T(oyv T ay 


have seen befall us, are we 
to expect to see? 


But again I will speak in Thy presence : What have they profited who had knowledge before Thee, 
and have not walked in vanity as the rest of the nations, and have not said to the dead: “ Give 
us life,” but always feared Thee, and have not left Thy ways? And lo! they have been carried off, 
nor on their account hast Thou had mercy on Zion. And if others did evil, it was due to Zion, 
that on account of the works of those who wrought good works she should be forgiven, and 
should not be overwhelmed on account of the works of those who wrought unrighteousness. But 
who, O LorD, my Lord, will comprehend Thy judgement, 

Or who will search out the profoundness of Thy way ? 

Or who will think out the weight} of Thy path? 

Or who will be able to think out Thy incomprehensible counsel ? 

Or who of those that are born has ever found 

The beginning or end of Thy wisdom ? 

For we have all been made like a breath. Foras the breath ascends involuntarily, and again dies, 
so it is with the nature of men, who depart not according to their own will, and know not 
what will befall them in the end. For the righteous justly hope for the end, and without fear 


come upon the nations. This could also be rendered : ‘be of service to the nations.’ But xiii. 8 is against 
this rendering. 

2. few nations ...in those times, to whom, &c. Do these words refer back to xiii. 3? In that case 
Baruch complains that few of the Gentile nations will be alive to whom the words in xiii. 5, 8-11 are to be addressed. 

4-19. What has the righteousness of the righteous profited them or their city, though the latter should have profited 
by it ? (4-7). Man cannot understand Thy judgement (8,9), for he is but a breath, his end is a mystery (10, 11) ; though 
for that end the righteous may hope for they have treasures of works in heaven, but for us there is only woe 
here and hereafter (12-14). What Thou hast done on behalf of Thy servants, Thou knowest, but we cannot discover. 
Can the world be made for man? We pass away and the world abides (15-19). 

5. have not said to the dead. Cf. Isa. viii. 19: ‘on behalf of the living should they seek unto the dead ?’ 

6. nor on their account hast thou had mercy on Zion. A great difficulty for a Jew. Ten righteous men 
would have saved Sodom; why did Zion fall? Moreover, the preservation of the world, according to the Talmud 
(Weber, 208) depends on Israel. See xiv. 18, note. 

7. Cf. Gen. xviii. 23-33. Here, however, the works not the persons of the righteous avail for their city. On the 
question of good works the thought of the writers in this book, i.e. between A.D, 50 and 80 is: (a) the righteous are 
saved by their works (li. 7), and justified by the law (li. 3; Ixvii. 6). (@) They trust in them, and are heard of God 
as Hezekiah (Ixiii. 3, 5), and the prophets (Ixxxv. 2). (c) These works avail as a defence for their unrighteous fellow 
citizens (ii. 2), and after their death give merit to Zion (xiv. 7, lxxxv. 10). (d) These works go before them to the next 
world, and are there guarded in God’s treasure-chambers, till the final judgement (xxiv. 1); hence the righteous hope 
for the end, and leave the world without fear (xiv.12). In 4 Ezra we have no parallels to (4) and (c), and only seeming 
parallels to (a), as ix. 7, and xili. 23, where faith is included with works. But to (d) we have good parallels in vii. 77 
(Ezra’s ‘ treasury of works laid up with the Most High’) and in viii. 33. For the doctrine of justification see note on 
realy Oh 

8. weight (or ‘burdensomeness’). There is some corruption here. I see no obvious explanation. The text 
seems in some form to go back to 7PM }'€ 7377 =‘ Thy unsearchable paths’. In this case we should have to 
suppose that TPN was corrupted into 7p = ‘ weight’, which led to the omission of YN. 


10, Cf. Ps. Ixxviii. 39 ‘a wind that passeth away, and cometh not again’, 

11. involuntarily. Literally ‘not from the heart’. Cf. Peshitto on Num. xvi. 28 (Schulthess). 
depart not according to their own will. Cf. xviii. 15 ; 4 Ezra viii. 5. 

12, the righteous justly hope, 1 En. cii. 4. 


490 


oe) 


LP BARUCH: 14 12—16, + OLS * 


depart from this habitation, because they have with Thee a store of works preserved in tr i 
13 On this account also these without fear leave this world, and trusting i oe 
14 receive the world which Thou hast promised them. But as for us—woe to us, who alee are 
15 now shamefully entreated, and at that time look forward (only) to evils. But Thou knowest 

accurately what Thou hast done by means of Thy servants; for we are not able to understand 
16 that which is good as Thou art, our Creator. But again I will speak in Thy presence, O Lorp 
17 my Lord. When of old there was no world with its inhabitants, Thou didst devise ‘and speak 
18 with a word, and forthwith the works of creation stood before Thee. And Thou didst say that 

Thou wouldst make for Thy world man as the administrator of Thy works, that it might be 

known that he was by no means made on account of the world, but the world on account of him. 


1g And now I see that as for the world which was made on account of us, lo! it abides, but we 
15 on account of whom it was made, depart.’ 
I 


And the Lord answered and said unto me: ‘Thou art rightly astonied regarding the departure of 
2 man, but thou hast not judged well regarding the evils which befall those who sin. And as regards 
3 what thou hast said, that the righteous are carried off and the impious are prospered, And as 
4 regards what thou hast said: “Man knows not Thy judgement ”—On this account hear, and I will 
5 speak to thee, and hearken, and I will cause thee to hear My words. Man would not rightly have 

understood My judgement, unless he had accepted the law, and I had instructed him in understand- 


6ing. But now, because he transgressed wittingly, yea, just on this ground that he wot (thereof), 
he shall be tormented. 


7 And as regards what thou didst say touching the righteous, that on account of them has this 
8 world come, so also again shall that, which is to come, come on their account. For this world 
is to them a strife and a labour with much trouble; and that accordingly which is to come, a crown 
with great glory.’ 
16: And I answered and said: ‘O Lorb, my Lord, lo! the years of this time are few and evil, and 
who is able in his little time to acquire that which is measureless ?’ 


a store of works, or lit. a ‘supply’. Cf. 4 Ezra vii. 77 (a treasure of works’); Matt. vi. 19, 20; Pss. Sol. ix. 9. 

13. the world which Thou hast promised. Clearly the spiritual world, ‘which does not die’ (li. 3); cf. xliv. 
13, 15, Xv. 7, 8. B? promises no earthly felicity, but only spiritual blessedness. 

14. evils. What these are is given in xliv. 15; lxxxv. 13. 

15. what Thou hast done by means of Thy servants, or the Syriac may = ‘ What Thou hast made out of Thy 
servants ’, or, without the diacritic point, ‘What Thou hast wrought out of Thy works.’ With the rendering in the text, 
verse 16 comes better before 15, which then runs on naturally to 17 and 18. 

17. speak with a word. Cf. Ps. xxxill.6; Heb. xi. 33 4 Ezra vi. 38. 

18. Thou wouldst make for Thy world man, &c. Cf. Ps. viii.6; 4 Ezra vi. 54. 

the world on account of him. This view of man’s dignity seems to occur first in the first century of the 
Christian-era. Why was the world created? (1) Here and in 4 Ezra viii. I, 44 we are told‘ for man’; (2) 4 Ezra vi, 
55, 59, vii. 11; Ass. Mosis i. 12 say ‘for Israel’; (3) here in xiv. 19, xv. 7, xxi. 24 ‘for the righteous in Israel’. 
The real Jewish view from the Christian era onwards is (2) or (3). ‘On Israel stands the world’, Shemoth rabba, 
XXvill. 

19. The ‘us’ and the ‘we’ are the righteous in Israel, as xv. 7, xxi. 24. In Pesikta 200» God is said to have created 
the world on account of Abraham’s merit. 


ONG Be SIS SiG (Cb 
3. See xiv. 8, 9. : 
5. the law. The law and the Messianic expectation were the two centres round which Jewish thought and life 
revolved. The law predominated at all times, and in B’ where there is no Messiah, but Jerusalem’s restoration is 
expected, it is supremely exalted (e.g. Ixxvil. 15, i6). In B?, which does not look forward to restoration or Messiah, 
the law is further glorified (e.g. xlviii. 24, 27, li. 3, 7), as also in B® (e.g. Ixxxv. 3, 14). On the other hand, in the 
Messiah Apocalypses A! and S we find no mention of the law at all, and only once in A® (xxxviill. 2), though in A® it 
rises again into prominence (esp. Ixvii. 6, righteousness by the law). Thus the Messianic expectation tends to eclipse 
the supremacy of the law, and after the Messiah’s advent there is no allusion to it (Ixx-Ixxiv). For fuller treatment 
and comparison with 4 Ezra see my Commentary. ; s) " 
6. transgressed wittingly. Cf. xix. 3, xlvill. 40 (see note 77 loc.), lv. 2; 4 Ezra vii. 72; cf. Luke xii, 48. ; 
7. as regards . . . has this world come, See note on xiv. 18. On the parallel in the short hexaemeron in 
4 Ezra vi. 55, see xxix. 4, note. 
shall ... come. Emended according to Ryssel by reading Jhly instead of H?. ; a ae 
8. this world is to them... trouble, &c. Cf. xlviii. 50; li. 145 4 Ezra vii. 3-14; Ps. xc. 10° yet Is their pride 
labour and sorrow’; Rom. viii. 18 ; 2 Cor. iv. 17. B? regards this world as a place of trial, discipline, and sorrow, 
unlike B!. There is a still more ascetic tone about 4 Ezra, and above all in 1 Enoch cviii. 7, ‘the spirits of the humble 
and of those who have afflicted their bodies.’ : ; F. 
crown with great glory. Cf. 1 Pet. v. 4. In Hebrew we have here a paronomasia, as in Isa. Ixil. 3, 


m3 AAN|NA Mwy. 
XVI. 1. years... fewandevil. Gen. xIvii. 9. ; 
in his...time. For Joo (=‘ this’) read o43) = ‘his time’. Cf. xix. 2. There is no need to add ‘time’, and 
render ‘this his little time,’ with Ryssel. Text = ‘in this little’. 
491 


Lea 
il BARUCH T7aweoren 


171 And the Lord answered and said unto me: ‘With the Most High account is not taken of much 
2 time nor of a few years. For what did it profit Adam that he lived nine hundred and thirty ‘tee 
3 and transgressed that which he was commanded? Therefore the multitude of time that he = 
4 did not profit him, but brought death and cut off the years of those who were born from him. r 
wherein did Moses suffer loss in that he lived only one hundred and twenty years, and, inasmuch as 
he was subject to Him who formed him, brought the law to the seed of Jacob, and lighted a lamp 
for the nation of Israel ?’ : 
181 And I answered and said: ‘ He that lighted has taken from the light, and there are but few that 
2 have imitated him. But those many whom he has lighted have taken from the darkness of Adam 
and have not rejoiced in the light of the lamp.’ : 
19: And He answered and said unto me: ‘ Wherefore at that time he appointed for them a covenant 
and said: 
“ Behold I have placed before you life and death,” 
And he called heaven and earth to witness against them. 
For he knew that his time was but short, 
But that heaven and earth endure always. 
3 But after his death they sinned and transgressed, 
Though they knew that they had the law reproving (them), 
And the light in which nothing could err, 
Also the spheres which testify, and Me. ; 
4 Now regarding everything that is, it is I that judge, but do not thou take counsel in thy soul 
5 regarding these things, nor afflict thyself because of those which have been. For now it is the 
consummation of time that should be considered, whether of business, or of prosperity, or of shame, 
6 and not the beginning thereof. Because if a man be prospered in his beginnings and shamefully 
7 entreated in his old age, he forgets all the prosperity that he had. And again, if a man is shame- 
fully entreated in his beginnings, and at his end is prospered, he remembereth not again his evil 
Sentreatment. And again hearken: though each one were prospered all that time—all the time 
from the day on which death was decreed against those who transgress—and in his end was 
destroyed, in vain would have been everything.’ 


to 


XX. Zion has been taken away to hasten the Advent of the Fudgement. 


20: ‘Therefore, behold! the days come, 
And the times shall hasten more than the former, 
And the seasons shall speed on more than those that are past, 
And the years shall pass more quickly than the present (years). 


2 Therefore have I now taken away Zion, 
That I may the more speedily visit the world in its season. 


XVII. 3. brought death, &c. See xxiii. 4 (note). 
4. brought the law. Cf. 4 Ezra iii. 19. 
lighted alamp. Cf. lix. 2 ‘lamp of the eternal law’ ; Ps. cxix. 105 ‘ Thy word is a lamp’, &c. 


XVIII. 1. has taken from the light, i.e. has chosen the light, and not Adam’s darkness. 

2. The law is light, and Adam is darkness, the primary source of human transgression. This passage agrees with 
2 Enoch, and like it does not teach the doctrine of original sin, any more than A’ (i.e. liv. 15,16). In 1 Enoch and 
Jubilees human depravity is traced to the angels who sinned with the daughters of men. 


XIX. 1, 2. The choice of light or darkness was the choice of life or death. Later times concluded from Deut. xxx. rg, 
that the law was to last while heaven and earth should be. Cf. verse 2; Matt. v. 18. Contrast Luke xvi. 178 
Mark xiii. 31. 

3. the spheres which testify, i. e. heaven, and its unfailing lights. The law is part of the heavenly order. 
Cf, 1 Enoch ii, tv, 4 

5. Here the end of all things is looked for—not an earthly felicity in a rebuilt Jerusalem. 

6-8. We must consider the end of a man or a matter. Cf. Solon’s saying in Herodotus i. 32. 

8. on which death was decreed. See xxiii. 4 (note). 


XX. 1. Therefore. It is not clear that this word follows upon anything in xix. It might follow on Xviii, but better 


on Xili. 3%. Jerusalem has fallen, and the years intervening before the judgement will therefore be shortened. Cf. 
liv. 1; Matt. xxiv. 22, 


the times shall hasten. Cf. Ixxxiii. iy (ey, 


; - ae fall of Jerusalem prepares the way for final judgement: there is no hope here of its restoration. See 
i. 4 (note). 

speedily visit, lit. “speed and visit’, a Hebraism. 

visit, in Baruch in a bad sense, of God’s penal visitation. Contrast the N. T. associations of joy, Luke i. 68, &c., 
and usually in O.T. 


492 


MebARUCH 20;°3-21..1i0 J ~ 


3 Now therefore hold fast in thy hear i 
ay. y heart everything that I i 
And seal it in the recesses of thy mind. aioe ST Ranaioaa ta 


4 And then I will show thee the jud i 
judgement of My might, 
And My ways which are unsearchable. ke 


5 Go therefore and sanctify thyself i 
y thyself seven days, and eat no bread, nor drink water, n 
6 anyone. And afterwards come to that place and I will reveal Myself to thee, and eee 


with thee, and I will give thee commandment regardi : 
. ing the m ; 
coming and tarry not.’ 8 = ethod of the times; for they are 


XXI. 1-11. Fast of seven Days: Baruch’s Prayer: God’s Answer. 
The Prayer of Baruch the Son of Neriah. 


rt And I went thence and sat in the valley of Cedron in a cave of the earth, and i 
soul there, and I eat no bread, yet I was not hungry, and I drank no water, yet I panne He 
2 I was there till the seventh day, as He had commanded me. And afterwards I came to that place 
3 where He had spoken with me. And it came to pass at sunset that my soul took much thought 
4 and I began to speak in the presence of the Mighty One, and said: ‘O Thou that hast made the 
earth, hear me, that hast fixed the firmament by the word, and hast made firm the height of the 
heaven by the spirit, that hast called from the beginning of the world that which did not yet exist, and 
5 they obey Thee. Thou that hast commanded the air by Thy nod, and hast seen those things which 
6 are to be as those things which Thou art doing. Thou that rulest with great thought the hosts that 
stand before Thee: also the countless holy beings, which Thou didst make from the beginning, of 
+ flame and fire, which stand around Thy throne Thou rulest with findignationt. To Thee only 
8 does this belong that Thou shouldst do forthwith whatsoever Thou dost wish. Who causest the 
drops of rain to rain by number upon the earth, and alone knowest the consummation of the times 
9 before they come ; have respect unto my prayer. For Thou alone art able to sustain all who are 
and those who have passed away, and those who are to be, those who sin, and those who are 
ro righteous [as living (and) being past finding out]. For Thou alone dost live immortal and past 


4. the judgement of My might. Cf. Ixxxlll. 7. 
6. that place. See xiii. 1 (note). 
method of the times. See xiv. I note. 
are coming and tarry not. Heb. ii. 3. Cf. xlvili. 39. 
THE FIFTH AND SIXTH SECTIONS. XXI-XLVI. The words ‘The prayer of Baruch the son of Neriah’ are found 
in the MS. The fifth Section ends with xxxv. 


XOX 1 Cedron7 Scee-v. 5. 
2. that place. Probably Mount Zion. Cf. xx. 6; or else the temple, x. 5. 
3. the Mighty One. This is the first time this title occurs. It is found in B!, B’, B*, but not in At, A’. 


4. by the word = J\Nsa5, emended by Ryssel from olsas (= ‘in its fullness’). This emendation is justified 
and necessitated owing to the parallel ‘ by the spirit’ The text, as I pointed out in my Commentary, is dependent on 
Ps, xxxiii. 6 ‘By ¢he word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of His mouth. 

hast called... that which did not yet exist. Cf. xlviii. 8. We seem to have here creation ex mzhilo. Cf. 
Philo, de Justitia ; which contradicts his usual doctrine. For creation by the word, cf. Ps. cxlviii. 5; 2 Pet. iu. 5 ; 
Philo, de sacréf. Abel et Cain. 

6. hosts that stand before Thee. Cf. xlvill. 10; 4 Ezra viii. 21%. 

countless holy beings. Cf. lix. 11; lvi. 14. 

which Thou didst make from the beginning. In Jub. ii. 2 the angels are created on the first day (so Job 
xxxviii. 7 is interpreted). 2 En. xxix. I says the second day. And so Targ. Jer I. on Gen. i. 26. 

+with indignationt. Cf. xlviii. 8. Jhaa.cs = ‘indignation’ seems corrupt for JhLasasoj = ‘reproof’. 

7. Ps. cxv. 3, &c. a 

8. the drops of rain ... by number. Cf. lix. 5; Sirach i. 2; 2 En. xlvii. 5 (note). 

9. have passed away. Reading with Ryssel 0+» instead of eeead = ‘pass away’, 

those who sin, and those who are righteous. The Syriac here and in xxiv. 23 xxl. II, 12; Ixii. 7 follows 
a Greek mistranslation of the original Hebrew verb p7¥, which in this context meant ‘ to be righteous ’, i. e. dikaos 
eivat, and not ‘to be justified ’, dcaiodo at, though the LXX rendering is usually the latter. The antithesis in our text 
is actually found in Job x. 15 and xxxv. 36, 37. Hence in all these passages I have emended the text. Ryssel has 
accepted this emendation in these five passages, but without acknowledgement. _ 

The doctrine of justification in this Apocalypse differs from that taught in 4 Ezra. (1) In Baruch the law 
justifies (li. 3 ; Ixvii. 6; Ixxxi. 7). In Ezra salvation is by works and faith (1x. 7 5 sil. 23). (2) Baruch is absolutely 
sure of salvation (xiii. 3, &c.). Ezra assumes his future woe till assured otherwise in vill. 47-9, 51-4. 

For further treatment see Commentary. t 

[as living... out], bracketed as a dittography of the opening clause of the next verse. 


493 


T5s 


— 


II BARUCH 21. 10-23 B 


TI finding out, and knowest the number of mankind. And if in time many have sinned, yet others not 
a few have been righteous. 


XXI. 12-18. Baruch’s Depreciation of this Life. 


12 Thou knowest where Thou preservest the end of those who have sinned, or the consummation of 
13 those who have been righteous. For if there were this life only, which belongs to all men, nothing 
could be more bitter than this. 
t4 For of what profit is strength that turns to sickness, 
Or fullness of food that turns to famine, 
Or beauty that turns to-ugliness. 
16 For the nature of man is always changeable. For what we were formerly now we no longer are, 
17 and what we now are we shall not afterwards remain. For if a consummation had not been prepared 
18 for all, in vain would have been their beginning. But regarding everything that comes from Thee, 
do Thou inform me, and regarding everything about which I ask Thee, do Thou enlighten me. 


XXI. 19-25. Baruch prays to God to hasten the Fudgement and fulfil His Promise. 


19 How long will that which is corruptible remain, and how long will the time of mortals be 
prospered, and until what time will those who transgress in the world be polluted with much 
20 wickedness? Command therefore in mercy and accomplish all that Thou saidst Thou wouldst 
21 bring, that Thy might may be made known to those who think that Thy long-suffering is weakness. 
And show to those who know not, that everything that has befallen us and our city until now has 
been according to the long-suffering of Thy power, because on account of Thy name Thou hast called 


??, 23 us a beloved people. Bring to an end therefore henceforth mortality. And reprove accordingly 


the angel of death, and let Thy glory appear, and let the might of Thy beauty be known, and let 
Sheol be sealed so that from this time forward it may not receive the dead, and let the treasuries of 


Io. knowest the number of mankind. Gen. xxiii. 4, 5. 

II. not a few have been righteous. This optimism contrasts strongly with 4 Ezra’s pessimism, e. g. viii. 3 ‘multi 
quidem creati sunt, pauci autem salvabuntur’. Cf. too viii. 2. 

12-13. The balance of this life needs re-adjustment in another life. 

13. Quoted from 1 Cor. xv. 19, or else both come from a common source. Life ever changes for the worse (verses 
14, 15) and is mortal (16, 17, 22). 

14. We have here a stanza of three lines, in each of which there is either a paronomasia or a rhyme. In the second line 


the text reads ‘ food of fullness’. On two grounds I have changed this into ‘ fullness of food’. First we have ond nysay 
in Ezek. xvi. 49, and next the rhyme requires it. The stanza runs thus: 


snd sana Son Suey an 
nrond yan nm yay ow 
saymd Jano oDy ww 


Instead of nnond in the second line we might read md with Ginzberg. As I have shown in my edition of this book 
the third line of this stanza recurs in xlviii. 35. See Ixxxiii. 11, 12. ; 

19. How long will that which is corruptible remain? The final editors answer this question in xl. 3; B? 
answers it in xxili. 7—xxiv. 1. The writers of this book (esp. the writer of B®) are impressed with the corruptibility of 
this present world, the o/am hazzeh. It all belongs to the sphere of corruption. So too does the Messianic kingdom 
if it falls within the olam hazzeh, as in A}, A*, and A’. In A? it ends corruption, in A® it ends corruption and begins 
incorruption (Ixxiv. 2). See my Commentary, zx loc. 

transgress, or ‘ pass away’, as in verse 9. 
20. A prayer for the hastening of the final judgement. 
21. The fall of Jerusalem was brought about in God’s mercy to hasten the judgement. 


, that... has been. So I have emended ©f»o (=‘and they have seen ’) into Jooy. If the text is correct then 
it represents a Hebraism, the perfect with strong waw as a continuation of the imperative, and so =‘ and let them see’. 


22. Bring to an end. Text reads ‘everything’ = 55 which I take to be a corruption of b>. Schulthess and 


eect on the other hand, emend the Syriac Wao into wSoO = ‘ restrain ’, but the next verse supports the emendation in 
the text. 
23. To hasten the final judgement the writer prays to God to end death, to let his glory appear, and the dead ri 
= ae ise of death. Cf. Rev. vi. 8. Prominent in later Jewish writings. Bee (Pasteien: of Auta 
ed. James). 
be sealed. Cf. Isa. v. 14. 
treasuries of souls. To these chambers only the righteous were admitted. After his death a ri man’ 

: : righte 
soul was permitted for seven days to behold the seven ways of the righteous, and a wicked man’s the seven oe ee 
wicked. Then his soul entered these chambers, in Sheol (4 Ezra iv. 35, 41 ; vil. Io1), They were guarded by angels 
and were full of rest (1 En.c.5; 4 Ezra vii. 95). At the judgement they were to restore the souls (2 Bar. xxi. 2, 3, 


xxx. 2; 4 Ezra vii. 32). There were also treasuries of righteous works (see xxiv i 
ee g (see xxiv. 1). Note that the souls of the wicked 


494 


MAB ARUCH 21021-2387 “B* 


24 souls restore those which are enclosed in them. For there have been many years like those that are 


desolate from the days of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, and of all those who are like them, who 


25 sleep in the earth, on whose account Thou didst say that Thou hadst created the world. And now 
26 quickly show Thy glory, and do not defer what has been promised by Thee.’ And (when) I had 


22 


231, 


completed the words of this prayer I was greatly weakened. 


XXII-XXIII. God's Reply to Baruch’s Prayer: He will fulfil His Promise: Time needed for its 


Accomplishment: Things must be judged in the Light of their Consummation (XXII). Till 
all Souls are born the End cannot come (XXIII). 


BE And it came to pass after these things that lo! the heavens were opened, and I saw, and 
2 power was given to me, and a voice was heard from on high, and it said unto me: ‘ Baruch, Baruch, 
3 why art thou troubled? He who travels by a road but does not complete it, or who departs by sea 
4 but does not arrive at the port, can he be comforted? Or he who promises to give a present to 
5 another, but does not fulfil it, is it not robbery? Or he who sows the earth, but does not reap its 
6 fruit in its season, does he not lose everything? Or he who plants a plant unless it grows till the 
7 time suitable to it, does he who planted it expect to receive fruit from it? Ora woman who has 
8 conceived, if she bring forth untimely, does she not assuredly slay her infant? Or he who builds 
a house, if he does not roof it and complete it, can it be called a house? Tell Me that first. 
2 And I answered and said: ‘Not so, O LorRpD, my Lord.’ And He answered and said unto me: 
‘Why therefore art thou troubled about that which thou knowest not, and why art thou ill at ease 
3 about things in which thou art ignorant? For as thou hast not forgotten the people who now are 
4 and those who have passed away, so I remember those who are appointed to come. Because when 
Adam sinned and death was decreed against those who should be born, then the multitude of those 
who should be born was numbered, and for that number a place was prepared where the living might 
5 dwell and the dead might be guarded. Before therefore the number aforesaid is fulfilled, the 
creature will not live again [for My spirit is the creator of life], and Sheol will receive the dead. 
And again it is given to thee to hear what things are to come after these times. For truly My 
redemption has drawn nigh, and is not far distant as aforetime. 


~T 


24. Read probably after verse 19. 

25. what has been promised by Thee, i.e. ‘the world which Thou hast promised them’ (xiv. 13; cf. Ixxxili. 5). 

26. (when). Inserted with Ryssel. 

greatly weakened. Cf. xlviii. 25; Dan. x. 17, &c. 
XXII. 1. the heavens were opened andIsaw. Ezek.i.1; Matt. iii. 16; John i. 52; Rev. iv. 1, &c. 
a voice was heard, i.e. the dath-gél. Cf. xiii. 1; Matt. ill. 17; Rev. iv. I. 

3-8. In xxii. 3, 5 God replies, ‘What is work without the result, and how can it be judged? So this life requires 
the consummation for its explanation (xxii. 3, 8 answer xxi. 13-17). Again, God replies ‘all in due time’ to 
Baruch’s plea for haste (xxii. 6, 7 answer xxi. 19, &c.). Moreover, God is bound by His promise (xxii. 4 answers 
Xxi. 25). 

ve gee . .. assuredly slay. A Hebraism. 


XXIII. 1,2. The future and the end are known only to God, and they alone explain the present. All time is 
alike to God, and he keeps the due proportion. A reply to xxi. 


3. Text reads chile ello ere? ‘who are remembered, and those who are to come’, which I have emended 


into cohhee eek? = ‘ who are appointed to come.’ 

4. when Adam sinned and death was decreed. There are two different views in this work regarding the 
physical effect of Adam’s sin on mankind. (1) In B%, i.e. in xvii. 3, xix. 8, xxill. 4, Adam’s sin brought in physical 
death, otherwise man would have been immortal. Cf. St. Paul. (2) In AS, i-e. liv. 15, lvi.6, Adam is said to have 
brought in only premature death. 

See my Commentary 2 Joc. iN 

the multitude of those who should be born was numbered. God alone knew this secret (xxi. 10, xlviii. 46). 
‘The number was unalterable, and had to be completed before the judgement could come (xxiii. 5 ; 4 Ezra iv. 33-43). 

for that number a place was prepared. Cf. 2 Enoch xlix. 2, lviii. 5. In the Tractate Chagiga, fol. 15, col. 1, 
it is said a place is prepared for every man either in Paradise or hell. ; 

the dead might be guarded, i.e. the righteous by angels (I En. c. 5, &c.; the wicked by the guardians of 
the gates of Hades (2 En. xlii. Des : : ; 

5. The resurrection cannot come till mankind’s secret number is fulfilled. In Rev. vi. 115 4 Ezra iv. 36 the consum- 
mation comes with the fulfilling of the number of the saints, not of mankind. According to Jebam. 62% the Messiah 
is not to come till ‘all the souls have gone forth which are in the chambers’ of souls. This chamber is here called 


N5)). 
Before. I emend MW? (= ‘unless’ or ‘ but’) into Vex. 


7. Cf, lxxxii. 2; Luke xxi. 28; 1 Pet. iv. 7- 
495 


tf 
yp 
Il BARUCH 241592 6 et 


XXIV. The coming Fudgement. 


24: ‘For behold! the days come and the books shall be opened in which are written the sins of all 

those who have sinned, and again also the treasuries in which the righteousness of all those who have 

2 been righteous in creation is gathered. For it shall come to pass at that time that thou shalt 

see—and }the many that are witht thee—the long-suffering of the Most High, which has been 

throughout all generations, who has been long-suffering towards all who are ee (alike) those 

3 who sin and (those who) are righteous.’ And I answered and said: ‘ But, behold! O Lord, no one 

knows the number of those things which have passed nor yet of those things which are to come. 

4 For I know indeed that which has befallen us, but what will happen to our enemies I know not, 
and when Thou wilt visit Thy works.’ 


XXV-XXVI. 1. Sign of the coming Fudgement. 


251 And He answered and said unto me: ‘Thou too shalt be preserved till that time till that 
2 sign which the Most High will work for the inhabitants of the earth in the end of days. This 
3 therefore shall be the sign. When a stupor shall seize the inhabitants of the earth, and they 
4 shall fall into many tribulations, and again when they shall fall into great torments. And it will 
come to pass when they say in their thoughts by reason of their much tribulation: “ The Mighty 
One doth no longer remember the earth ”—yea, it will come to pass when they abandon hope, 
that the time will then awake.’ ; be 
261 And I answered and said: ‘ Will that tribulation which is to be continue a long time, and will xxvi=E 
that necessity embrace many years?’ 


XXVII-XXX. 1. The Twelve Woes that are to come upon the Earth: the Messiah and the 
temporary Messianic Kingdom. 


271 And He answered and said unto me: ‘ Into twelve parts is that time divided, and each one of xxvViimexx. 
2 them is reserved for that which is appointed for it. In the first part there shall be the begin- 1=A 
3, 4 ning of commotions. And in the second part (there shall be) slayings of the great ones. And in 
s, 6 the third part the fall of many by death. And in the fourth part the sending of the sword. And 


XXIV. 1. the books shall be opened. Dan. vii. 10 ; I En. xc. 20; Rev. xx. 12; 4 Ezra vi. 20. Here the books 
record the sins of sinners only, as in 1 En. xc and probably Rev. (as cited). 4 Ezra vi. 10 has also ‘another book 
of life’. 

the treasuries in which. Divine storehouses are a familiar idea in the O.T., e.g. of rain (Deut. xxviii. 12). 
Again, the idea of laying up spiritual things in store is found in the LXX, Prov. i, 18 Oncavpifovew éavrois Kaxd (cf. 
Pss. Sol. ix. 9). One may lay up treasures of works or faith (4 Ezra vii. 77, Vi. 5); treasures in heaven (Matt. vi. 19, 
20); stores of wrath (Rom. ii. 5). “YIN and Oncavpés may mean the treasure itself, and the place where it is stored. 

. the righteousness of all, &c. The standard of righteousness was the Law. The legalistic wing of the Pharisees 
held it consisted first and mainly in fulfilling ceremonial observances. See, e.g. the Book of Jubilees. The prophetical 
wing, from whom emanated most of the Messianic Apocalypses, understood it primarily as the fulfilling of moral duties. 


XXIV. 2-4. Probably followed originally on xx. See note on xiii-xxv. 
tthe many that are witht thee. See xiii. 5 (note). Read ‘those like thee’, i.e. the surviving righteous. 
3-4. Baruch objects that no man knows when the end may come, and he knows only that Israel is in distress. 


What will the Gentiles suffer as the penalty (answered xiii. 3-12), When will they suffer it ? (answered XXV). 
4. us. Text reads ‘me’. 


XXV. Answers the question ‘When wilt Thou visit Thy works’, 

1. the inhabitants of the earth, always in a bad ethical sense in Baruch. See note on 1 Enoch xxxvii. 5 (also note 
in my Commentary on 2 Baruch). 

3. stupor. Cf. Ixxx. 2, and excessus mentis 4 Ezra xiii. 30. 

4. At the end of the tribulation and torments the time of the judgement has come (cf. xiii. 8). This leaves no room 
for the Messianic kingdom in xxix, which precedes the judgement. 


XXVI. Added by the final editor in order to introduce xxvii-xxx. 1 ; XXxv was originally followed by xiv-xix. 


XXVII-XXX. 1. A fragment of a Messiah Apocalypse, AY. (1) After terrible tribulation over all the earth, 
imperilling even the elect, a glorious kingdom of joy and plenty was to be established under the Messiah, who 
afterwards was to return in glory to heaven. The resurrection was to follow. The outlook is thoroughly optimistic. 
(2) Palestine was to escape the prevailing woes, and since there is no mention of a restoration of Jerusalem or of the 
setting up of the New Jerusalem, Jerusalem must still have been standing (Contrast B! and 4 Ezra xiii. 36). Thus 
the events of A.D. 70 could not have happened as yet. (3) In B1 and B? Jerusalem is destroyed and its people in 
exile. The law, too, is the centre of interest and expectation in B' and B?, but the Messiah in A’, which has no 
allusion to the law, as B' and B? have no allusion to the Messiah. 


XXVII. 1. We have twelvefold divisions in AS (i.e. liii-lxxiv) and 4 Ezra xiv. II, 12, but there of world-history, 


here only of the tribulations preceding Messiah’s coming. These travail-pains (ddives Matt. xxiv. 8) in the Gospels 
precede Christ’s second coming, and not His first appearance. 
5. the sword. Cf. Jer. xxv. 16, 27. : 


496 


8, 


IEARUCH 27,1699. A 


7in the fifth part famine and the withholding of rain. And in the sixth 
: : : ; art earth 
9 terrors. [Wanting.] And in the eighth part a multitude of spectres and sce of hesnaen: 


[0,11,12 And in the ninth part the fall of fire. And in the tenth part rapine and much oppression. And in 


13 the eleventh part wickedness and unchastity. And in the twelfth part confusion from the mingling 
14 together of all those things aforesaid. For {these parts of that time are reserved and} sh flips 
15 mingled one with another and minister one to another. For some shall leave out some of theese ges 
and receive (in its stead) from others, and some complete their own and that of others, so that those 
may not understand who are upon the earth in those days that this is the consummation of the times. 


28 1,2 « Nevertheless, whosoever understandeth shall then be wise. For the measure and reckoning of 


29 


3 that time are two parts a week of seven weeks.’ And I answered and said: ‘It is goo 
4 come and behold, but it is better that he should not come lest he fall. [But I will 2 
5 Will he who is incorruptible despise those things which are corruptible, and whatever befalls in the 
case of those things which are corruptible, so that he might look only to those things which are not 
6 corruptible?| But if, O Lord, those things shall assuredly come to pass which Thou hast foretold 
7 to me, so do Thou show this also unto me if indeed I have found grace in Thy sight. Is it in one 
place or in one of the parts of the earth that those things are come to pass, or will the whole earth 
experience (them) ?’ 
1 And He answered and said unto me: ‘Whatever will then befall (will befall) the whole earth ; 
2 therefore all who live will experience (them). For at that time I will protect only those who are 
3 found in those self-same days in this land. And it shall come to pass when all is accomplished that 
4 was to come to pass in those parts, that the Messiah shall then begin to be revealed. And Behemoth 
shall be revealed from his place and Leviathan shall ascend from the sea, those two great monsters 
which I created on the fifth day of creation, and shall have kept until that time ; and then they shall 
5 be for food for all that are left. The earth also shall yield its fruit ten thousandfold and on each (?) 


6,7. famine . . . earthquakes, as signs of the end. Cf. lxx, 8; Matt. xxiv. 7, &c. 

g. spectres. Or ‘portents’, Cf. 4 Ezra vi. 21. 

10. the fall of fire. Cf. Ixx. 8; 4 Ezra v. 8. 

14. As Ryssel has observed, this is corrupt. By reading oo Sy instead of omy and omitting the following 9 we 
arrive at the following: ‘these parts which till that time had been reserved (?) shall (then) be mingled’, &c. 

15. leave out. Text reads 94020 = ‘leave over’. But the context requires the sense of ‘omitting ’, ‘leaving out’. 
The error can be explained, if we suppose that mapahetyyouor, which has both the above meanings, stood before the 
translator and that he followed the wrong one here. 

XXVIII. 1. Cf. Dan. xii. 10: ‘the wise shall understand’. 

2. Interpretation seems impossible. 

3. The difficulty of faithfulness during the woes (cf. xli. 1, Ixxv. 5; 4 Ezra xiii. 16-20; Matt. xxiv. 22) and the 
blessings which await those who endure. 

4-5. These verses break the connexion of thought, and no account is taken of them in the context. An answer is 
given to the question in xliii. 2. 

XXIX. 2. I will protect, &c. Here God protects His people who are found in the Holy Land, whereas in A? the 
Messiah does so (xl. 2), and in A® the Holy Land itself (Ixx. 1). In B? it is the law that protects the faithful, wherever 
they dwell (xxxii. 1). 

found... in this land. Cf. last note, and 4 Ezra xiii. 48, 49. A special blessing attached to residence in 
Palestine. It alone was to escape the woes that should befall all the earth besides. But this thought is found only 
in the sections of this book written prior to A.D. 70. It first appears in Joel ii. 32 in Apocalyptic literature, though 


XXVIil. 4-5 


it was before for a time, in the eighth century B.C., the belief of the Jews. For the privileges attached to residence - 


in Palestine see my Commentary 27 Joc. 

3. The Messiah’s réle here is passive. Cf. 1 En. xc. 37, 38; 4 Ezra vii. 28, 29. Contrast A? and A® (e.g. xl) where 
the Messiah fights, destroys His enemies, and sets up His kingdom. 

The phrase ‘ begin to be revealed’ may be corrected to ‘the principate of the Messiah will be revealed’ (xxxix. 7) 
or ‘ Messiah the prince shall be revealed’ (Dan. ix. 25). 

Whence will Messiah be revealed? Here, and in xxx. 1, it seems from heaven; elsewhere, perhaps, from some 
place on earth. Cf. John vii. 27: ‘When the Christ cometh, no man knoweth whence he is.’ Cf., too, 4 Ezra vii. 28, 
xiii. 32. The Messiah may be already born and yet not know his calling till Elijah comes and anoints him, in Justin’s 
Dial. c. Tryph. 8. 

‘The Talmud states that the Messiah was born at Bethlehem on the day of the destruction of the temple, was 
named Menahem, and afterwards suddenly carried away by a storm (Jer. Berachoth, p. 5). 

4. And Behemoth shall be revealed, &c. For the full form of this myth see 4 Ezra vi. 49-52. The diction is so 
similar that both must quote from the same source—a lost short hexaemeron, like that in 4 Ezra vi. 38-54. See my 
Commentary 77 loc. ’ 

Behemoth . .. and Leviathan. See 1 En. lx. 7-9, 24 notes; Targ. Jon. on Gen. i. 21 ‘And God created 
great beasts Leviathan and his wife which were prepared for the day of consolation’. Also Targum on Ps. 1. Io. 

all that are left. An indefinite statement ; guzbus vis in 4 Ezra vi. 52. 

5. We have here another fragment of an old Apocalypse, of which we find a version in Irenaeus, v. 33. Papias is 
there said to ascribe it to our Lord. Irenaeus preserves a longer and fuller form than our text, and all seeds and fruit- 
trees share in the miraculous fruitfulness in his quotation. I En. x. 19 gives a still more fragmentary quotation. 

We have, curiously, three diets provided in our syncretistic text for the members of the Messianic kingdom. In 


1105.2 497 ES 





11. BARUCH 29. /6-281. 7A ee 


vine there shall be a thousand branches, and each branch shall produce a thousand clusters, and each 
6 cluster produce a thousand grapes, and each grape produce a cor of wine. And those who have 
7 hungered shall rejoice : moreover, also, they shall behold marvels every day. For winds shall go 
forth from before Me to bring every morning the fragrance of aromatic fruits, and at the close of the 
8 day clouds distilling the dew of health. And it shall come to pass at that self-same time that the 
treasury of manna shall again descend from on high, and they will eat of it in those years, because 


these are they who have come to the consummation of time. eat 
1 ‘And it shall come to pass after these things, when the time of the advent of the Messiah is 


fulfilled, that He shall return in glory. 


XXX. 2-5. The Resurrection. 


2 Then all who have fallen asleep in hope of Him shall rise again. And it shall come to pass at ie 


that time that the treasuries will be opened in which is preserved the number of the souls of the pa. 
righteous, and they shall come forth, and a multitude of souls shall be seen together in ON€ suming 

3 assemblage of one thought, and the first shall rejoice and the last shall not be grieved. ' For xxv. 4. 
they know that the time has come of which it is said, that it is the consummation of the times. 

4 But the souls of the wicked, when they behold all these things, shall then waste away the more. 

5 For they shall know that their torment has come and their perdition has arrived.’ 


XXXI-XXXIII. Baruch exhorts the People to prepare themselves for worse Evils. 


1 And it came to pass after these things that I went to the people and said unto them : ‘ Assemble 
2 unto me all your elders and I will speak words unto them.’ And they all assembled in the valley 
3 of the Cedron. And I answered and said unto them: 


“Hear, O Israel, and I will speak to thee, 
And give ear, O seed of Jacob, and I will instruct thee. 


xxix. 4 flesh, in verse 5 vegetable, in verse 8 heavenly food, i.e. manna. The second is a return to Adam’s food in 
Paradise. 
As to the ten thousand-fold yield of corn and wine Dr. Rendel Harris gives a probable explanation ina misreading of 
+ = ‘plenty’ in the blessing of Isaac (Gen. xxvii. 28) as 227 = 10,000. 
each branch, &c. For ‘each’ the Syriac gives ‘ one’ three times over, following the idiom in the Hebrew original. 
a cor, about 120 gallons, 
6. rejoice. Cf. 4 Ezra vii. 28, xii. 34. 
behold marvels. Cf. 4 Ezra vii. 27, xiii. 50; Matt. xi. 4-6 + OME Vils sa 
8. the treasury of manna shall again descend. In Sibyll. Or. vii. 149 manna ts to be the food of the members 
of the Messianic kingdom. Cf. Rev. ii. 17 ‘hidden manna’. 
consummation of time, i.e. the Messianic age. Cf. xxvii.15.  Inxxx. 3 the phrase has a different meaning, but 
there we have the work of B?. 


XXX. 1. when the time of the advent of the Messiah is fulfilled. This seems to mean that after His reign 
the Messiah will return in glory to heaven. ‘Advent’ may be rendered ‘ presence’, i.e. visible reign on earth. 
return in glory, back to heaven, where He was before His revealing on earth. For His pre-existence see 
1 Enoch xlvi. 1. 2, xlviii. 3 (note), &c. In 4 Ezra vii. 29, 30 the Messiah and the righteous die at the close of the 
Messianic kingdom. 
Then all who have fallen asleep .. . shall rise again. The resurrection here follows immediately on the 
Messiah’s return to heaven: but on his death in 4 Ezra vii. 29, 30. The words ‘of Him’ spoil the sense, and the 
parallelism to LXX of Ps. xvi. 9 én édmidu. 
fallen asleep. We are not told the fate of the living, as Al is fragmentary. 
2. Here we return to B, and resume the text that ended at xxiv. 1. 
3. they know. Text reads ‘he knows’. 

the consummation of the times. Here = the final judgement. Contrast xxix. 8. 
4. waste away. Cf. li. 55; 4 Ezra vii. 87. 


XXXI-XXXV. Baruch assembles and addresses the elders of the people. He exhorts them not to forget Zion and 
its anguish ; the end of all that is corruptible is coming; the law, if they hold fast to it, will protect them when the whole 
creation is shaken ; they are to grieve for the coming woe more than for the past, when the creation shall be renewed. 
Thereupon Baruch sends away the people, and when they remonstrate against his forsaking them, he rejoins that he 
lege to the Holy Place to seek light from God. There he laments over Zion. (A fast of seven days should 
ollow here. 

The subject of Baruch’s address is to be Sound in each instance in the preceding revelation (as in v...5,,.x. 4), 
but it will be observed that this address, xxxi. 3-xxxii. 6, is out of relation to all that has gone before. The gist 
of the address is (a) the end of corruption is at hand; (4) the law will save in the coming crisis ; (c) the present creation 
must give place to a new and incorruptible creation. Now these questions are discussed later in the dialogues 
between Baruch and God. Thus, for (a) see xlii. 6-8 ; for (0) see xlviii. 22-4, 36-41; for (c) see xlviii. 49; lii. 3, 8-9, 
16. Thus originally xxxi-xxxv followed lii. Moreover, xliv. 8-15 really concludes Baruch’s address in XXX1, XXxil ; 
i.e. it follows xxxii. 6. Thus xludtt-lit originally preceded xxxt-xXXU. 


XXXI. 1. all your elders. See xliy. I, note. 


498 


Hie BARUCH 81, 4—3bd, 3 7A doe 


4 Forget not Zion, 
But hold in remembrance the anguish of Jerusalem. 


5 For lo! the days come, 


When everything that is shall become the prey of corruption 
And be as though it had not been. 


321 ‘But as for you, if ye prepare your hearts, so as to sow in them the fruits of the law, it shall pro- 
2 tect you in that time in which the Mighty One is to shake the whole creation. [Because after a 
3 little time the building of Zion will be shaken in order that it may be built again. But that 
building will not remain, but will again after a time be rooted out, and will remain desolate until 
5 the time. And afterwards it must be renewed in glory, and perfected for evermore.| Therefore 
we should not be distressed so much over the evil which has now come as over that which is 
6 still to be. For there will be a greater trial than these two tribulations when the Mighty One will 
7 renew His creation. And now do not draw near to me for a few days, nor seek me till I come to 
g you.’ And it came to pass when I had spoken to them all these words, that I, Baruch, went my way, 
g and when the people saw me setting out, they lifted up their voice and lamented and said : ‘ Whither 
departest thou from us, Baruch, and forsakest us as a father who forsakes his orphan children, and 
departs from them ? 
‘Are these the commands which thy companion, Jeremiah the prophet, commanded thee, and 
said unto thee: “ Look to this people till I go and make ready the rest of the brethren tint Babylon, 
against whom has gone forth the sentence that they should be led into captivity”? And now if 


thou also forsakest us, it were good for us all to die before thee, and then that thou shouldst withdraw 
from us.’ 


4 


iv 


33 


wn 


: XXXIV-XXXV. Lament of Baruch. 


34 And I answered and said unto the people: ‘ Far be it from me to forsake you or to withdraw 
from you, but I will only go unto the Holy of Holies to inquire of the Mighty One concerning you 


and concerning Zion, if in some respect I should receive more illumination: and after these things 
I will return to you.’ 


351 And I, Baruch, went to the holy place, and sat down upon the ruins and wept, and said: 


2 ‘QO that mine eyes were springs, 
And mine eyelids a fount of tears. 


3 For how shall I lament for Zion, 
And how shall I mourn for Jerusalem ? 


5. shall become the prey of, lit. ‘shall be taken to’. See xxi. 19, note. 
XXXII. 1. prepare your hearts. An O.T. phrase, and a favourite expression in Bb’ and B’*; cf. xlvi. 5, li. 7, &c. 
the fruits of the law, i.e. good works. Cf. 4 Ezra ili. 20, ix. 32. 
it shall protect. Cf. xlviii. 22-4, xliv. 13, 14. es 
shake the whole creation, i.e. to prepare for new heavens anda new earth. The thought comes originally from 
Haggai ii. 6; cf. Heb. xii. 26. ie = 
2-4. Here it is said that after a little time Zion will be destroyed. But according to xx. 1-2, xxxl. 4, Xxxil. 5, Xxxill. 
2-3, xxxv. I Jerusalem is already overthrown. These verses also break the connexion of thought between xxxii. 1 and 
xxxli. 5. The people are to prepare themselves by obedience to the law for the end of all things, xxxii.1. Compared 
with this the evils attendant on the fall of Jerusalem are slight. These three verses are closely akin to Tobit xiv. 4-5. 
Cf. Ber. R. 2 and Pesikta 145 for a similar hope. These verses are an intrusion here. 
2. Zion will be shaken. Apparently ‘after a little time’ = by Nebuchadnezzar in 588 B.c. 
be built again, i.e. by Ezra and Nehemiah. 
3. again . . . be rooted out, i.e. by the Romans in A. D. 70. 
4. On the heavenly Jerusalem, see iv. 3, note. ; ; : , f 
5. be distressed. 1 have here followed Bensly’s emendation of the Syriac, which has the active form instead of 
passive. 
the evil which has now come = Jerusalem’s fall. j 
6. two tribulations, i. e. those accompanying the destruction of Jerusalem and the renewal of creation. Perhaps 
‘than these two tribulations’ is an addition ; the text without them would run ‘For the trial will be great when’, &c. 
renew His creation, i.e. replace the corruptible by the incorruptible world. See further li and li. It was a 
current expectation after the captivity (cf. Isa. lxv. 17; 1 En. xlv. 4, note; 4 Ezra vii. 75; Matt. xix. 28; 2 Pet. ii. 
Ta Rev. xo 2)» : : 
7, This verse was originally preceded by xliv. 8-15. : , 
for a few days, i.e. for the seven days’ fast, omitted in xxxv. Cf. 4 Ezra v. 18, 19. 
XXXIII. 1. 2, Seex. 2, note. According to B! Jeremiah does not seem to have gone to Babylon. On ‘make ready ’ 
see note on x. 2. Here the ‘in’ is decidedly corrupt. See note on x. 2. 
3. Cf. 4 Ezra xii. 44, 48. 
XXXIV. Holy of Holies. Cf. x. 5, xxxv. 1; the holy place, xxxv. 4, where the altar stood. 
XXXV. 2. From Jer. ix. 1; cf. 1 En. xcv. 1. 


499 Kk2 


> 
Il BARUCH 85,4285, (,7) 40) mee 


4 Because in that place where I am now prostrate, 
Of old the high priest offered holy sacrifices, 
And placed thereon an incense of fragrant odours. 


5 But now our glorying has been made into dust, 
And the desire of our soul into sand.’ 


XXXVI-XXXVII. The Vision of the Forest, the Vine, the Fountain and the Cedar. 


36 1,2 And when I had said these things I fell asleep there, and I saw a vision in the night. And lo! xxxvi.—xl 
a forest of trees planted on the plain, and lofty and rugged rocky mountains surrounded it, and that = A* 
3 forest occupied much space. And lo! over against it arose a vine, and from under it there went forth 
4a fountain peacefully. Now that fountain came to the forest and was (stirred) into great waves, and 
those waves submerged that forest, and suddenly they rooted out the greater part of that forest, and 
5 overthrew all the mountains which were round about it. And the height of the forest began to be 
made low, and the top of the mountains was made low and that fountain prevailed greatly, so that it 
6 left nothing of that great forest save one cedar only. Also when it had cast it down and had 
destroyed and rooted out the greater part of that forest, so that nothing was left of it, nor could its 
place be recognized, then that vine began to come with the fountain in peace and great tranquillity, 
and it came to a place which was not far from that cedar, and they brought the cedar which had 
7 been cast down to it. And I beheld and lo! that vine opened its mouth and spake and said to that 
cedar: ‘Art thou not that cedar which was left of the forest of wickedness, and by whose means 
8 wickedness persisted, and was wrought all those years, and goodness never. And thou didst keep 
conquering that which was not thine, and to that which was thine thou didst never show compassion, 
and thou didst keep extending thy power over those who were far from thee, and those who drew 
nigh thee thou didst hold fast in the toils of thy wickedness, and thou didst uplift thyself always as 
9, 0 one that could not be rooted out! But now thy time has sped and thine hour iscome. Do thou 
also therefore depart, O cedar, after the forest, which departed before thee, and become dust with it, 
11 and let your ashes be mingled together. And now recline in anguish and rest in torment till thy 
last time come, in which thou wilt come again, and be tormented still more.’ 
37 And after these things I saw that cedar burning, and the vine growing, itself and all around it, the 
plain full of unfading flowers. And I indeed awoke and arose. 


XXXVITI-XL. Lnterpretation of the Vision. 


38:1 And I prayed and said: ‘O Lorp, my Lord, Thou dost always enlighten those who are led by 
2, 3 understanding. Thy law is life,and Thy wisdom is right guidance. Make known to me therefore 
4 the interpretation of this vision. For Thou knowest that my soul hath always walked in Thy law, 
and from my (earliest) days I departed not from Thy wisdom.’ . | 


THE SIXTH SECTION. XXXVI-XLVI. We must insert a seven days’ fast after xxxv to keep the symmetry of the 
book as constructed by the final editor. The structure of this section is then as follows: first, the omitted fast, then 
a Messiah vision and its interpretation (xxxvi-xl) with disclosures as to apostates and proselytes (xli. 2-xlii. 8), and an 
announcement as to Baruch’s coming death (xliii), and finally Baruch’s address to the people (xliv-xlvi). This 


section is very composite. xxxvi-xl is a Messiah Apocalypse earlier than A.D. 70; xlili-xliv. 7, xlv-xlvi. 6 belongs 
to B'; the rest mainly to B®. 


XXXVI-XL. The Second Messiah Apocalypse, A?. | 

(a) Date of A?—before a. D. 70. Unlike B! and B? it has no mention of the Roman destruction of Jerusalem ; 
nor has it a restoration of the city for the Messiah’s rule, or a return of the dispersion. A? is optimistic as regards this 
world, unlike B?; and centres its hope on the Messiah, not the law, unlike B! and B%, : 


_ (6) Relation of A? to A’. In Al the Messiah has a passive réle; here an active one, destroying the wicked and 
vindicating Israel. 





XXXVI. 1. These visions are only found in A? and A®. Elsewhere we have direct revelations. 
2. This vision is obviously founded in some respects on Ezek. xvii. 


8. rooted out. This word “Py is constantly used in the Talmud with reference to the future fate of Rome. 
II. in anguish. See xxx. 5, where the intermediate state involves some degree of happiness or pain. 


XXXVII. unfading flowers. Cf. Apoc. Pet. 





XXXVIII. 1. God Himself interprets this vision for Baruch: but Ramiel the vision in A? (see lv. 3). 

2. Thy law is life. Cf. xlv.2; Sir. xlv.5. Hillel (Aboth. ii. 7): ‘The more law the more life 
knowledge of the law gains life in the world to come.’ Also see John vii. 49. 

Thy wisdom is right guidance. This is based on the Massoretic text of Eccles. x. Io 

4. from my (earliest) days. This is the Hebrew idiom wD, as in 1 Kings i. 6. : 


500 





- - » he who gains 


where the versions vary. 





39 


40 


4) 


ye 


eee 0cH:39 148.3 AB 
1 And He answered and said unto me: ‘Baruch, this is the interpretation of the vision which thou 
> hast seen. As thou hast seen the great forest which lofty and rugged mountains surrounded, this is 
3 the word. Behold! the days come, and this kingdom will be destroyed which once destroyed Zion, 
4 and it will be subjected to that which comes after it. Moreover, that also again after a time will be 
destroyed, and another, a third, will arise, and that also will have dominion for its time, and will be 
; destroyed. And after these things a fourth kingdom will arise, whose power will be harsh and evil 
far beyond those which were before it, and it will rule many times as the forests on the plain, and it 
6 will hold fast for times, and will exalt itself more than the cedars of Lebanon. And by it the truth 
will be hidden, and all those who are polluted with iniquity will flee to it, as evil beasts flee and 
4 creep into the forest. And it will come to pass when the time of its consummation that it should 
fall has approached, then the principate of My Messiah will be revealed, which is like the fountain 
8 and the vine, and when it is revealed it will root out the multitude of its host. And as touching 
that which thou hast seen, the lofty cedar, which was left of that forest, and the fact, that the vine 
spoke those words with it which thou didst hear, this is the word. 
1 ‘The last leader of that time will be left alive, when the multitude of his hosts will be put to the 
sword, and he will be bound, and they will take him up to Mount Zion, and My Messiah will convict 
2 him of all his impieties, and will gather and set before him all the works of his hosts. And afterwards 
he will put him to death, and protect the rest of My people which shall be found in the place which 
3 I have chosen. And his principate will stand for ever, until the world of corruption is at an end, 
4 and until the times aforesaid are fulfilled. This is thy vision, and this is its interpretation.’ 


XLI-XLII. The Destiny of the Apostates and of the Proselytes. 


, And I answered and said: ‘For whom and for how many shall these things be? or who will be 


xli-xlii 


2 worthy to live at that time? For I will speak before thee everything that I think, and I will ask of = B? 


3 Thee regarding those things which I meditate. For lo! I see many of Thy people who have with- 

4 drawn from Thy covenant, and cast from them the yoke of Thy law. But others again I have seen 

5 who have forsaken their vanity, and fled for refuge beneath Thy wings. What therefore will be to 

6 them? or how will the last time receive them? Or perhaps the time of these will assuredly be 
weighed, and as the beam inclines will they be judged accordingly ?’ 


42,1,2 And He answered and said unto me: ‘These things also will I show unto thee. As for what 


thou didst say— To whom will these things be, and how many (will they be) ?”—to those who have 
believed there shall be the good which was,spoken of aforetime, and to those who despise there shall 
3 be the contrary of these things. And as for what thou didst say regarding those who have drawn 


XXXIX. 3-5. Of the four world-empires here mentioned undoubtedly the first is Babylon (ver. 3), and the fourth 
Rome (5-7 ; xxxvi. 5-10). The second and third are probably Persia and the Diadochi. The fourfold division of 
world-empires is due to Dan. vii, where the fourth kingdom is decidedly different, as 4 Ezra xii. 11-12 admits. 

6. the truth will be hidden. Cf. 4 Ezra v. 1, where the same statement is made about Rome. 


7. the principate of My Messiah. For oaeaed = ‘beginning ’, read oases = ‘ principate’, as in xl. 3, Ixxv. 8. 
See xxix. 3, note. 
XL. 1. Who is this last leader? Probably Pompey, as ‘his impieties ’ suggests (cf. Pss. Sol. ii. 24-35). 
The Talmud says a single leader, called Armilus, was to unite in himself all hatred and hostility against God’s 
people. See Weber, 365, 306. é : 
My Messiah. In A? (i. €. xxvii-xxx. 1) God Himself protects Israel and destroys their enemies, and the Messiah 
only appears after this (xxix. 3). Here the Messiah takes the active part. 
convict of ... impieties. So Ezra xii. 325 xili. 37. 
2. protect the rest, &c. See xxix. 2, note. 
3. for ever, until . . ., or ‘for the age’. Cf. Ixxili. 1. The Messianic kingdom belongs to the o/am hazzeh (see 
xxi. 19, note). 
XLI, XLII. These two chapters belong to B, and originally followed xxx. As in xx, the times are hastened (xlii. 6) 
in order to usher in the end, the resurrection, and the life of incorruption. The chief topics in these chapters are: 
(1) the ultimate destiny of the apostates ; (2) that of the proselytes. 


XLI. 1. Baruch’s question goes back to xxx. 2-5; which it originally preceded in B’. For the question cf. Ixxv. 5. 


3. These apostates may be Christians. ; 7 s z 
yoke of Thy law. ‘Yoke’ means ‘ obligation’. Cf. Sirach li, 26. Cf. for this phrase Pss. Sol. vil. 8, xvil. 32; 


Acts xv. 10; Gal. v. 1. Contrast Matt. Vi. 29, 30. 
4. The proselytes, i.e. the D'). Cf. 4 Ezra vil. 133. 


their vanity, i.e. idols (Deut. xxxii. 21). : ; 
fled for refuge beneath Thy wings. The writer follows the Hebrew text of Ps. xxxvi. 8, as against the LXX 


and Syriac. The phrase is used of a proselyte in Ruth ii. 12. Cf. Shabbath 31%. 
5. the last time, described in Xxx. 2-5. 


XLII. 2. those who have believed. See liv. 5, note; also xxi. 9, note. 
501 


- } 
Il BARUCH 42: 444, 2 [3 a 


4 near and those who have withdrawn this is the word. As for those who were before subject, and 

» afterwards withdrew and mingled themselves with the seed of mingled peoples, the time of these was 
5 the former, and was accounted as something exalted. And as for those who before knew not. but 
afterwards knew life, and mingled (only) with the seed of the people which had separated itself, the 

6 time of these (is) the latter, and is accounted as something exalted. And time shall succeed to time 
and season to season, and one shall receive from another, and then with a view to the consummation 
shall everything be compared according to the measure of the times and the hours of the seasons. 

7, 8 For corruption shall take those that belong to it, and life those that belong to it. And the dust shall 


be called, and there shall be said to it: “Give back that which is not thine, and raise up all that thou 
hast kept until its time ”.’ 


XLII. Baruch told of his Death and bidden to give his last Commands to the People. 


431 : But, do thou, Baruch, direct thy heart to that which has been said to thee, 
And understand those things which have been shown to thee ; 
For there are many eternal consolations for thee. 
2 For thou shalt depart from this place, 
And thou shalt pass from the regions which are now seen by thee, 
And thou shalt forget whatever is corruptible, 
And shalt not again recall those things which happen among mortals. 


3. Go therefore and command thy people, and come to this place, and afterwards fast seven days, 
and then I will come to thee and speak with thee.’ 


XLIV. 1-8, XLV-XLVI. Baruch tells the Elders of his impending Death, but encourages them to 
expect the Consolation of Zion. 


441 And I, Baruch, went from thence, and came to my people, and I called my first-born son and 
[the Gedaliahs] my friends, and seven of the elders of the people, and I said unto them: 


‘Behold, I go unto my fathers 
According to the way of all the earth. 


to 


4. The apostates have only this world. 
mingled peoples. Jer. xxv. 20, 24. 
5. of the people. The Syriac reads ‘ peoples ’, which does not suit Israel, though it does suit the proselytes. 


separated itself, i.e. the legalistic Israel by the ‘fence’ of the law (cf. xlviii. 23). The ‘separatists’ are the 
Pharisees. 


the latter. So Kabisch emends. 

6. Cf. 4 Ezra iv. 37. 
8. Give back, &c. Cf. 1.2. The earth gives back the body ; 
body is conceived as persisting, and even sensitive. Job xiv. 22. 


XLIII-XLVI. These chapters belong to B', with the exception of xliv. 8-15. They do not belong to B?, for in 
xliii, 2, xliv. 2, Ixxviii. 5, Ixxxiv. 1, Baruch is to de an ordinary death and forget all the concerns of mortals, whereas 
in B* he is to be preserved till the last day to testify against the Gentile oppressors Of Israel, xiii. 3, xxv. 1, xlviii. 30. 
Again the people are assured of good tidings in store for them xlvi. 6, as in Ixxvii. 12, and bidden to look for the 


restoration of Zion (Ixxxi. 1, 4 taken with i. 4, vi. 9), whereas in B? there is no consolation of any kind for them in this 
world. 


The text reads‘ the former’. Thus the proselytes inherit the world to come. 


Sheol the soul, in virtue of its relation to which the 


XLIV. 8-15 belongs to b?; for the present world is hopeless—defiled with evil xliv. 9, and with its corruption about 
to pass away xliv. 8 ; it is, moreover, to be given over to oblivion xliv. 9—a statement in flat contradiction with iv. I. 
Accordingly all hope is to be directed to the world to come xliv. 15, the promised inheritance xliv. 1 3, the world of 
incorruption xliv. 12. Zhe original Dosition of xliv. 8-15 was after xxxii. 6. These verses presuppose xlviii-lii, 
just as xxxi-xxxv presuppose them ; see note on XXXI-XXXV. 

XLIII. 1, Refers probably to some lost passage of B?. 

2. thou shalt depart. The word and the context indi 

whatever is corruptible. Cf. xxi. 19, note. 

3. command thy people, i.e. impart to them the disclosures 
of his coming death, the word ‘ command’ (M}¥) is here used in th 


this place. This conflicts with xlvii. 1—to Hebron. 
XLIV. 1. son. Elsewhere only in xlvi. 1. 
[the Gedaliahs]. Possibly this phrase belongs to the text, but has 
D’)739 ‘the great men’. 


seven of the elders. Seven only, as the city is now destroyed. 
2. Contrast xiii. 3 (see note), 


cate ordinary death here. Cf. xliv. 2. 


just made to Baruch. As Baruch has just been told 
e technical Hebrew sense of giving one’s last command. 
originated in a corrupt transliteration of 


In v. 5, before its fall, he summons them all. 


502 


xliii-xliv. 
Ug 














10 


II 


12 


13 


14 


[..*5 
45 2 
461 


WF; 


f 
forsarucn 4434671 5 


But withdraw ye not from the way of the law, 
But guard and admonish the people which remain, 
Lest they withdraw from the commandments of the Mighty One. 


For ye see that He whom we serve is just, 
And our Creator is no respecter of persons. 


And see ye what hath befallen Zion, 
And what hath happened to Jerusalem. 


For the judgement of the Mighty One shall (thereby) be made known, 
And His ways, which, though past finding out, are right. 


oO 
" 
ey 


For if ye endure and persevere in His fear, 
And do not forget His law, 

The times shall change over you for good, 
And ye shall see the consolation of Zion. 


Because whatever is now is nothing, 

But that which shall be is very great. 

For everything that is corruptible shall pass away, 

And everything that dies shall depart, 

And all the present time shall be forgotten, 

Nor shall there be any remembrance of the present time, which is defiled with evils. 
For that which runs now runs unto vanity, 

And that which prospers shall quickly fall and be humiliated. 


For that which is to be shall be the object of desire, 
And for that which comes afterwards shall we hope ; 
For it is a time that passes not away, 

And the hour comes which abides for ever. 


And the new world (comes) which does not turn to corruption those who depart to its blessedness, 
And has no mercy on those who depart to torment, 
And leads not to perdition those who live in it. 


For these are they who shall inherit that time which has been spoken of, 
And theirs is the inheritance of the promised time. 


xliv. 8-15 


These are they who have acquired for themselves treasures of wisdom, 
And with them are found stores of understanding, 

And from mercy have they not withdrawn, 

And the truth of the law have they preserved. 


For to them shall be given the world to come, 
But the dwelling of the rest who are many shall be in the Are; 


‘Do ye therefore so far as ye are able instruct the people, for that labour is ours. For if ye pape 
teach them, ye will quicken them.’ = 


And my son and the elders of the people answered and said unto me: ‘Has the Mighty One 
humiliated us to such a degree 
As to take thee from us quickly? 


_ commandments of the Mighty One. Cf. xlviil. 38. 
_ These words vividly recall vi-viii. See note on xliii-xlvi above. rats 
. which, though .. . right. The text = ‘ which are past finding out and right’. ; 

7. the consolation of Zion, i.e. its restoration. Cf, Ixxxi. 1, 4; for the temple was to be rebuilt, according to B*. 
(CE. vi. 9.) fe Mig TP 

8-15. These verses should be read after xxxu. 6. See note on xliii-xlvi above. 

g. corruptible. Cf. xxi. 19, note. : y: mn 

t2. the new world. Cf. the new creation (xxxil. 6), and li. 3; lil. 9, 16. é 

who depart to its blessedness. The text here has ‘on its beginning’, which gives no parallel to ‘to torment 

in the next clause, and no sense in itself. A corruption in the original Hebrew easily explains the difficulty and 
restores the sense, WN for WNT. Ryssel reproduces this emendation without acknowledgement. 

14. This verse presupposes li. 3, 7-. The treasures in xxiv. I are those of righteousness. 

15. in the fire. Cf. xlviii. 39, 43, lix. 2, Ixiv. 7, lxxxv. 13. 


Cnwn WD 


XLV. B! reappears here, and the connexion broken at xliv. 7 is resumed. ie 
2. if ye feck he. CE Ps. cxix. 50, 93. This is the true scribe’s work. Cf. xxxvili. 2, xliv. 7. 


993 


II BARUCH 46, 2—48. 5 


2 And truly we shall be in darkness, 
And there shall be no light to the people who are left. 


3 For where again shall we seek the law, ; 
Or who will distinguish for us between death and life ?? 


4 And I said unto them: ‘The throne of the Mighty One I cannot resist ; 
Nevertheless, there shall not be wanting to Israel a wise man 
Nor a son of the law to the race of Jacob. 


5 But only prepare ye your hearts, that ye may obey the law, 
And be subject to those who in fear are wise and understanding ; 
And prepare your souls that ye may not depart from them. 


6 For if ye do these things, 
Good tidings shall come unto you. 


[Which I before told you of ; nor shall ye fall into the torment, of which I testified to you before.’ an G87 
7 But with regard to the word that I was to be taken I did not make (it) known to them or to my son. | 


471 And when I had gone forth and dismissed them, I went thence and said unto them: ‘ Behold! mee 
2 I go to Hebron: for thither the Mighty One hath sent me.’ And I came to that place where the 
word had been spoken unto me, and I sat there, and fasted seven days. 


XLVIII. 1-47. PRAVER OF BARUCH. 


48: And it came to pass after the seventh day, that I prayed before the Mighty One and said 


2 ‘Omy Lord, Thou summonest the advent of the times, 
And they stand before Thee ; 
Thou causest the power of the ages to pass away, 
And they do not resist Thee ; 


Thou arrangest the method of the seasons, 
And they obey Thee. 


3 Thou alone knowest the duration of the genérations, 
And Thou revealest not Thy mysteries to many. 


4 Thou makest known the multitude of the fire, 
And Thou weighest the lightness of the wind. 


5 Thou explorest the limit of the heights, 
And Thou scrutinizest the depths of the darkness. 


ALVI. 4. a son of the law = 7)¥D 13, i.e. one bound to observe the Law. An answer to the question put in iii, 6». 
The expression seems to occur here first in existing literature. The verse means: There never should be lacking wise 


teachers and obedient servants of the Law. The expression has nothing to do with whan 13 as Ryssel suggests. 
5. be subject. Obedience to the Rabbis is here enforced. 
6c-7. This addition was made by the final editor to adapt the fragment of B! just given to its new context. Contrast 


xlvi. I. 
6c. the torment. This refers to xliv. 12-015, 
_7. I was to be taken. Cf. xiii. 3, note, xlviii. 30. The idea of the ascension into heaven of great heroes in Jewish 
history was a familiar one. See Commentary zz loc. Also N.T. (Mark xvi. 19; Acts i. 2, 11, 22; 1 Tim. iii. 16). 


THE SEVENTH SECTION. XLVII-LXXVII. First we have Baruch’s fast of seven days, followed by his prayer 
(xlvil. 2—xlviii. 24). Then in the dialogue ensuing various revelations are made to Baruch touching the coming woes 
and the judgement (xlviii. 26-41), and the resurrection (-lii). There follows a Messiah Apocalypse (liii-lxxiv = A$), 
In Ixxvi Baruch is told of his coming translation, and in Ixxvii he addresses the people. 

: nae section is composite; xlviii-lii is derived from B?; liti-lxxiv from A®; Ixxy-Ixxvi from B*; and Ixxvii 
rom . 


XLVII. 1. Why this journey to Hebron? Baruch has received no such command in our text. This verse is 
probably original to B! or B?; it Seems, moreover, corrupt. After dismissing the people, Baruch addresses them ! 
The ‘ gone forth’ and ‘went thence’ possibly refer to ‘the cavern in the earth’ in xxi. 1. As chapters xxi-xxiv. 1, 


Xxx, 2-5, xli, xlii belong to B?, and in some sense form a whole, they may be connected with the cavern as their scene, 
If so, xlvii. 1 belongs to B, 


2. Conflicts with verse 1, and is due, like xliii. 3, to the final editor. 


504 











10 


Il 


13 


14 
15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 


22 


—_ 
’ 


PeBARUCH 48. 6-03 (97 
Thou carest fer the number which pass away that they may be preserved, 
And Thou preparest an abode for those that are to be. 


Thou rememberest the beginning which Thou hast made, 
And the destruction that is to be Thou forgettest not. 


With nods of fear and tindignationt Thou commandest the flames, 
And they change into spirits, 


And with a word Thou quickenest that which was not, 
And with mighty power Thou holdest that which has not yet come. 


Thou instructest created things in the understanding of Thee, 
And Thou makest wise the spheres so as to minister in their orders. 


Armies innumerable stand before Thee 
And minister in their orders quietly at Thy nod. 


Hear Thy servant 
And give ear to my petition. 


For in a little time are we born, 
And in a little time do we return, 


But with Thee hours are as a time, 
And days as generations. 


Be not therefore wroth with man; for he is nothing 
And take not account of our works; For what are we? 


For lo! by Thy gift do we come into the world, 
And we depart not of our own will. 


For we said not to our parents, “ Beget us,” 
Nor did we send to Sheol and say, “ Receive us.” 


What therefore is our strength that we should bear Thy wrath, 
Or what are we that we should endure Thy judgement ? 


Protect us in Thy compassions, 
And in Thy mercy help us. 


Behold the little ones that are subject unto Thee, 
.And save all that draw nigh unto Thee: 


And destroy not the hope of our people, 
And cut not short the times of our aid. 


For this is the nation which Thou hast chosen, 
And these are the people, to whom Thou findest no equal. 


But I will speak now before Thee, 
And I will say as my heart thinketh. 


In Thee do we trust, for lo! Thy law is with us, 
And we know that we shall not fall so long as we keep Thy statutes. 


XLVIII. 6. See xxiii. 4, note. fh ; 
Thou carest for. The text here follows a wrong sense of 7P5 in the Hebrew original, and so gives ‘commandest es 
that they may. Text reads ‘and they are’, The Greek translator appears to have rendered 1") wrongly. 

8. tindignationt. See note on xxi. 6. : 
flames .. . spirits. Cf. Ps.civ. 4; Heb. i. 7. _ ‘ ; 

g. the spheres . . . in their orders. Cf. 1 En. ii, 1; 2 En. xxx. 2,33; Pss. Sol. xix. 2, 3. 

Io. in their orders. Jews held there were ten orders; Christians nine. 

. hould expect ‘ time is as hours’, &c. S 

ee aeaate ok. s xiv. 11 men ‘come not of their own will’, In 4 Ezra viii. 5 the two statements are combined. 

18. See Ixxv. 6. ef 

19. subject unto Thee. Cf. xlii. 4 = Jews. 
that draw nigh. Cf. xli. 4, xlil. 3 = proselytes. 

20. Cf. xxi. 2135 4 Ezra v. 27. ee: 
the nation, a necessary emendation (INso0/ for the unmeaning }se,%). Ceriani proposes ‘ the servant’. 


22. See xv. 5, note. 
505 


np 


~ WwW 


255 26 


27 


28 


29 
30 
31 
32 


33 


34 


iS) 
ou 


36 


| pe 
Il BARUCH 48, 23-3 Vio. 


[To all time are we blessed at all events in this that we have not mingled with the Gentiles. | 
For we are all one celebrated people, 
Who have received one law from One: 


And the law which is amongst us will aid us, 
And the surpassing wisdom which is in us will help us. 


And when I had prayed and said these things, I was greatly weakened. And He answered and 
said unto me: 


‘Thou hast prayed simply, O Baruch, 
And all thy words have been heard. 


But My judgement exacts its own 
And My law exacts its rights. 


For from thy words I will answer thee, 
And from thy prayer I will speak to thee. 


For this is as follows: he that is corrupted is not at all; he has both wrought iniquity so far as he 
could do anything, and has not remembered My goodness, nor accepted My long-suffering. There- 
fore thou shalt surely be taken up, as I before told thee. For that time shall arise which brings 
affliction ; for it shall come and pass by with quick vehemence, and it shall be turbulent coming in 
the heat of indignation. And it shall come to pass in those days that all the inhabitants of the 
earth shall be moved one against another, because they know not that My judgement has drawn nigh. 

For there shall not be found many wise at that time, 

And the intelligent shall be but a few: 

Moreover, even those who know shall most of all be silent. 

And there shall be many rumours and tidings not a few, 

And the doings of phantasmata shall be manifest, 

And promises not a few be recounted, 

Some of them (shall prove) idle, 

And some of them shall be confirmed. 

And honour shall be turned into shame, 

And strength humiliated into contempt, 

tAnd probity destroyed,} 

And beauty shall become ugliness. 

And many shall say to many at that time: 

“Where hath the multitude of intelligence hidden itself, 

And whither hath the multitude of wisdom removed itself?” 


23. This verse is bracketed as a prosaic intrusion. 
24. one law from One. Ixxxv. 14. This is directed against Christians. k 
the law... will aid us. Cf xxix. 2, note; and xxxil.1. Cf, too, De singularitate cler. 15 (Cyprian, Ed. 
Hartel ii, 190) ‘ sicut Esaias ait, legem inquit in adiutorium dedit.’ 
29. The Syriac text is unintelligible. 
31-41. The last woes and the final judgement. Cf. xxvii-xxix. 1; Ixx: 2-10. 


32. Shall be moved. Text reads combine (= ‘shall rest’) which I emended in 1896 into yoseshho ‘shall be 
moved’. 


33. Cf. Ixx. 5. This verse resembles what Cyprian (Zes¢zm, iii. 29) quotes as from Baruch: ‘ Erit enim sapientia in 
paucis vigilantibus et taciturnis.’ 


34. Cyprian again seems to quote ‘alii autem sapientes ad spiritum erroris et pronuntiantes sicut Altissimi et Fortis 
edicta’. For the many impostors cf. Matt. xxiv. 11, 24. 


35. Of the four lines in this stanza three give a series of paronomasiae when retranslated into Hebrew, as in xxi. 14. 
Thus the first, second, and fourth run: 


popd yan a5 

na dx say ty 

‘a> am vay 
As regards the third it is certainly corrupt. The analogy of the other three leads us to expect a paronomasia here 
also. The Syriac is Jhaso), Joa, where the first word may be corrupt for Jhobad, The text would then = ‘and 


understanding would become foolishness.’ This at once gives a good sense and a paronomasia on the Hebrew, i.e. 
bad may Soy. 


On the last line cf. xxi. 14; Ixxxiii. 12. 


36. Cf. 4 Ezra v. 9-11. Does Cyprian refer to this in his quotation (7Zes¢zm. iii. 29) ?—‘ Quaeretis me et vos et qui 
post vos venerint audire verbum sapientiae et intellectus et non invenietis.’ 


506 








ee ee 


44, 


Il BARUCH 48. 37-50 3 7 


37. And whilst they are meditating these things, 
Then envy shall arise in those who had not thought aught of themselves (?) 
And passion shall seize him that is peaceful, 
And many shall be stirred up in anger to injure many, 
And they shall rouse up armies in order to shed blood, 
And in the end they shall perish together with them. 


38 And it shall come to pass at the self-same time, 
That a change of times shall manifestly appear to every man, 
Because in all those times they polluted themselves 
And they practised oppression, 
And walked every man in his own works, 
And remembered not the law of the Mighty One. 


39 Therefore a fire shall consume their thoughts, 
And in flame shall the meditations of their reins be tried ; 
For the Judge shall come and will not tarry. 


40 Because each of the inhabitants of the earth knew when he was transgressing. 
But My Law they knew not by reason of their pride. 


41 But many shall then assuredly weep, 
Yea, over the living more than over the dead.’ 


42 And I answered and said : 
‘O Adam, what hast thou done to all those who are born from thee? 
And what will be said to the first Eve who hearkened to the serpent ? 


43 For all this multitude are going to corruption, 
Nor is there any numbering of those whom the fire devours. 


45 But again I will speak in Thy presence. Thou, O Lorp, my Lord, knowest what is in Thy 

46 creature. For Thou didst of old command the dust to produce Adam, and Thou knowest the 
number of those who are born from him, and how far they have sinned before Thee, who have 

47 existed and not confessed Thee as their Creator. And as regards all these their end shall convict 
them, and Thy law which they have transgressed shall requite them on Thy day.’ 


XLVIII. 48-50. Fragment of an Address of Baruch to the People. 


48  [‘ But now let us dismiss the wicked and inquire about the righteous. 
49 And I will recount their blessedness 
And not be silent in celebrating their glory, which is reserved for them. 
50 For assuredly as in a little time in this transitory world in which ye live, ye have endured much 
labour, 
So in that world to which there is no end, ye shall receive great light.’] 


2b). (Ci Iboee (6h 
38. walked every man, &c. Cf. 4 Ezra iil. 8. 
the law of the Mighty One. Cf. xliv. 3, 7. : 

40. knew when he was transgressing. Cf. Ep. Barn. v. 4, and see xv. 6 note, where Israel is referred to as 

knowing the law. Here all men know when they do wrong. Cf. Rom. ii. 14, 15. : : . 
My Law they knew not by reason of their pride. The Talmud says the Gentiles rejected the law, which 
was designed for all nations. See, too, 4 Ezra vil. 72, 73. 

41. The load of sin increases with time, and so will its penalty. _ : 

42-50. What havoc Adam and Eve have wrought by the spiritual death and torments they brought upon their 
posterity! Yet God, as Creator, knows what is in man; the number of men that are to be, and their sins (42-6). 
The law and the judgement will give all their due, so let us inquire rather about the blessedness to come for the 
righteous who now awhile endure labour. : : if ag 

42. The mention of fire shows that spiritual death is here traced to Adam and Eve, whereas in xvii. 3, &c., it is only 
physical death that is so traced. In 4 Ezra both are always traced to Adam (e. g. iil. 21, 22). But this spiritual death 
is not due to the incapacity of man for righteousness after the fall, but to his following of his own choice in the steps 
of Adam. 

46. command the dust to produce Adam. 4 Ezra iii. 4, 53 vii. 116. 

the number... born. See xxiii. 5, note. 

48-50. A fragment of an address delivered by Baruch to the people, as verse 50 shows, and not to God. Another 
fragment of this same address, originally preceding 48-50 here, is given in liv. 16-18, and yet another, following 
48-50, in lii. 5-7. a 

49. be silent in celebrating. A Hebrew idiom. 

so. Cf. xv..8. 


I? 7 


ye BE 
Il BARUCH 429i mezcinie ee 


XLIX-LII. The Nature of the Resurrection Body: the final Destinies of the Righteous 
and the Wicked. 


491 ‘Nevertheless, I will again ask from Thee, O Mighty One, yea, I will ask mercy from Him who 
made all things. 
2 “In what shape will those live who live in Thy day ? 
Or how will the splendour of those who (are) after that time continue ? 
3 Will they then resume this form of the present, 
And put on these entrammelling members, 
Which are now involved in evils, 
And in which evils are consummated, 
Or wilt Thou perchance change these things which have been in the world 
As also the world ?”’ 
50 : And He answered and said unto me: ‘ Hear, Baruch, this word, 
And write in the remembrance of thy heart all that thou shalt learn. 
2 For the earth shall then assuredly restore the dead, 
[ Which it now receives, in order to preserve them]. 
It shall make no change in their form, . 
But as it has received, so shall it restore them, 
And as I delivered them unto it, so also shall it raise them. 
3 For then it will be necessary to show to the living that the dead have come to life again, and that 
4 those who had departed have returned (again). And it shall come to pass, when they have severally 
recognized those whom they now know, then judgement shall grow strong, and those things which 
before were spoken of shall come. 
1x ‘And it shall come to pass, when that appointed day has gone by, that then shall the aspect of those 
2 who are condemned be afterwards changed, and the glory of those who are justified. For the 
aspect of those who now act wickedly shall become worse than it is, as they shall suffer torment. 
3 Also (as for) the glory of those who have now been justified in My law, who have had understanding 
in their life, and who have planted in their heart the root of wisdom, then their splendour shall be 
glorified in changes, and the form of their face shall be turned into the light of their beauty, that 
they may be able to acquire and receive the world which does not die, which is then promised to 
4 them. For over this above all shall those who come then lament, that they rejected My law, and stopped 
5 their ears that they might not hear wisdom or receive understanding. When therefore they see those, 
over whom they are now exalted, (but) who shall then be exalted and glorified more than they, they 
shall respectively be transformed, the latter into the splendour of angels, and the former shall yet 
6 more waste away in wonder at the visions and in the beholding of the forms. For they shall first 
behold and afterwards depart to be tormented. 


XLIX. 2. In what shape, &c. Cf. 1 Cor. xv. 35 ‘How are the dead raised up? and with what manner of 
body do they come?’ 
splendour, or perhaps ‘ appearance’; also in li. 3, 5. 
3. entrammelling members, lit. ‘members of bonds’. 


L-LI, The nature of the resurrection body. The world in its renewal becomes undying (li. 3), incorruptible (Ixxiv. 2) 
and invisible to mortal vision (li. 8). This conception of transformation, which is as old as Isa. lxv. 17-Ixvi, was 
applied in due course to those who were to live in the renewed world. This is done partially in Isa. lxv. 17-25, but 
fully in Dan. xii. 2. Also in 1 Enoch civ. 4,6, &c. Thus the spiritual transformation was a familiar idea to the 
Pharisees before the writers of Baruch lived; while 1 Cor. xv. 35-50 is in one of its aspects the logical sequel of 
Isa. liv. 17. Paul was not altogether an innovator, but an able and advanced expositor of some current Jewish views. 

Opposed to this spiritual view of the future life lay the materialistic one prevalent among people and Rabbis 
alike, which said the blessed should beget children, and eat the flesh of Leviathan. (Weber 383, 384.) 

L. 2. See notes on xi. 4; xlii.8; 1 Enoch li.1. The resurrection united soul (from Sheol, its abode, xxi. 23) and 
body (resting in the earth, xlii. 8). Note that here the earth preserves the body intact, as committed to it. 

4. The object for which the dead are raised is for common recognition. So also Beresh. rab. 95 and the later 
Judaism. Contrast the silence of the N.T. 


LI. 1. This transformation of the living also is mentioned in 1 Cor. xv. Bit, 
aspect. So Ceriani emends the text. 
3. justified in My law. See xv. 5, note. 
root of wisdom. lix. 7; Sir. i. 6, 20; Wisdom iii. 1 5. 
their splendour. Their bodies gradually are assimilated to their new environment. 
4. rejected, i.e. wicked Gentiles as well as Israelites. 
stopped their ears, follows Hebrew of Zech. vii. 11 POC eAXONG, 
5. waste away, not ‘be annihilated’. Cf. 4 Ezra vii. 87. 


508 








ig’) 


Il BARUCH 51. 7—52. 7 PR, 2 


7 But those who have been saved by their works, 
And to whom the law has been now a hope, 
And understanding an expectation, 

And wisdom a confidence, 
Shall wonders appear in their time. 


8 For they shall behold the world which is now invisible to them, 

And they shall behold the time which is now hidden from them : 

9 And time shall no longer age them. 

to . For in the heights of that world shall they dwell, 
And they shall be made like unto the angels, 
And be made equal to the stars, 
And they shall be changed into every form they desire, 
From beauty into loveliness, 
And from light into the splendour of glory. 


For there shall be spread before them the extents of Paradise, and there shall be shown to them the 
beauty of the majesty of the living creatures which are beneath the throne, and all the armies of 
the angels, who [are now held fast by My word, lest they should appear, and] are held fast by a 
12 command, that they may stand in their places till their advent comes. Moreover, there shall then be 

13 excellency in the righteous surpassing that in the angels. or the first shall receive the last, those 

whom they were expecting, and the last those of whom they used to hear that they had passed away. 

14 For they have been delivered from this world of tribulation, 

And laid down the burthen of anguish. 

15 For what then have men lost their life, 

And for what have those who were on the earth exchanged their soul ? 

16 For then they chose (not) for themselves this time, 

Which, beyond the reach of anguish, could not pass away: 

But they chose for themselves that time, 

Whose issues are full of lamentations and evils, 

And they denied the world which ages not those who come to it, 

And they rejected the time of glory, 

So that they shall not come to the honour of which I told thee before.’ 
521 And I answered and said: 

‘How can we forget those for whom woe is then reserved ? 

2 And why therefore do we again mourn for those who die? 

Or why do we weep for those who depart to Sheol ? 


3 Let lamentations be reserved for the beginning of that coming torment, 
And let tears be laid up for the advent of the destruction of that time. 
4 [But even in the face of these things will I speak. 
5 And as for the righteous, what will they do now? 
6 Rejoice ye in the suffering which ye now suffer: 
For why do ye look for the decline of your enemies ? 
» Make ready your soul for that which is reserved for you, 
And prepare your souls for the reward which is laid up for you.’] 


If 


. After this verse read probably verses 13 and 14, then Io, 11, and 12 as climax, — 

a Note spiritual conception. The risen righteous live in the heights of the invisible world (8, 10), and their glory 

is more than that of the angels (12). 
equal to the stars. 4 Ezra vii. 97, 125. } 
11. living creatures . . . beneath the throne. Rev. iv. 6. as ; 
armies of the angels. Cf. 2 Enoch xvii; Test. Lev. ill. 3. The brackets indicate a gloss or dittograph. 
13. Cf. 4 Ezra v. 42; also Matt. Ries Os : 
. Cf. Matt. xvi. 26. he Be ‘ . 

aa nike added a negative in the first clause, as the sense requires 1t—an addition accepted by Ryssel. So too in 

i. 14, where Ceriani also inserts it. 
a of glory. So Ryssel has emended text which reads ‘and glory’. 


ants . Text reads ‘1’ which Ryssel has emended. 
‘ : Tie ahead weep rather for those destined to torments than those who depart to Sheol. 
a. See note on xlviii. 48-50. : oe 
i. 6. Cf Ixxxviii. 6; James i. 2. The sentiment looks Christian. 


3e9 





3 
I] BARUCH 68, 1—54,3 Al 


LITI-LXXIV. THE MESSIAH APOCALYPSE. 


LIU. The Vision of the Cloud with black and white Waters. 


53: And when I had said these things I fell asleep there, and I saw a vision, and lo! a cloud was liti-hexiv 
ascending from a very great sea, and I kept gazing upon it, and lo! it was full of waters white and = A 
black, and there were many colours in those self-same waters, and as it were the likeness of great 

2 lightning was seen at its summit. And I saw the cloud passing swiftly in quick courses, and it 
3 covered all the earth. And it came to pass after these things that that cloud began to pour 
4 upon the earth the waters that were in it. And I saw that there was not one and the same like- 
5 ness in the waters which descended from it. For in the first beginning they were black and many 
for a time, and afterwards I saw that the waters became bright, but they were not many, and 
after these things again I saw black (waters), and after these things again bright, and again 
6 black and again bright. Now this was done twelve times, but the black were always more numerous 
7 than the bright. And it came to pass at the end of the cloud, that lo! it rained black waters, 
and they were darker than had been all those waters that were before, and fire was mingled 
8 with them, and where those waters descended, they wrought devastation and destruction. And 
after these things I saw how that lightning which I had seen on the summit of the cloud, seized 
9 hold of it and hurled it to the earth. Now that lightning shone exceedingly, so as to illuminate 
the whole earth, and it healed those regions where the last waters had descended and wrought 

10, 11 devastation. And it took hold of the whole earth, and had dominion over it. And I saw after 

these things, and lo! twelve rivers were ascending from the sea, and they began to surround 
12 that lightning and to become subject to it. And by reason of my fear I awoke. 


LIV-LV. Baruch’s Prayer for an Interpretation of the Vision: Ramiels advent for 
this Purpose. 


54:1 AndI besought the Mighty One, and said: 


‘Thou alone, O Lord, knowest of aforetime the deep things of the world, 

And the things which befall in their times Thou bringest about by Thy word, 

And against the works of the inhabitants of the earth Thou dost hasten the beginnings of the 
times, 

And the end of the seasons Thou alone knowest. 


ho 


(Thou) for whom nothing is too hard, 
But who dost everything easily by a nod: 


(Thou) to whom the depths tcomef as the heights, 
And whose word the beginnings of the ages serve: 


ae) 


LIII-LXXIV. The third Messiah Apocalypse, or A*. In date it seems to be prior to A.D. 70 (Ixviii. 5-6), and 
subsequent to A.D. 50. If this is the date of this section, it is distinct from B! and B?, which were composed 
subsequently to the fall of the Temple. In B! and B? there is no expectation of the Messiah, whereas in AS the | 
Messiah is the centre of interest. Again, it appears to be distinct from A‘; for in Al the Messiah does not appear till | 
the enemies of Israel are destroyed, whereas in A? the Messiah is the agent of their destruction. The relations of A® 
to A? peat eles They could come from the same hand. The warlike character of the Messiah in this section is 
noteworthy. 








LIII. In this vision a cloud rises from the sea with its summit crowned with lightning. After six successions of 
black and bright waters, comes the blackest shower of all. Then the lightning flashes forth and heals the earth. 
I. avery greatsea. Cf. Dan. vii. 2. 


5. and many. Here, as the words in the next line not many’ show, we expect ‘and many’. Hence with Ryssel 
Temend uge into cehaqcoo. 

6. For the twelvefold division of history see 4 Ezra xiv. 11, 12. 

7. These black waters are interpreted in lxix, Ixx, They symbolize the travail pains of the Messiah. 

8. The lightning on the cloud symbolizes the Messiah. The imagery is derived from Dan. vii. 1 3. 


é 9. ene shone .. . whole earth. Cf. Matt. xxiv. 27 ‘as the lightning . . . so shall be the coming of the 
on of man’. 


12. Are these twelve rivers the Gentiles submitting to the Messiah, or the twelve tribes of Israel ? 


LIV. 1. Before this chapter the MS. inserts the words ‘ The Prayer of Baruch’. 
2. I have with Ryssel restored ‘ Thou’ at the beginning of verses 2, 3, 4.. The context requires this restoration. 
for whom nothing is too hard. This is a rendering of the phrase found in Gen. xviii. 14; Jer. xxxii. 17, 27, 
510 





ee - 


ou 


) 


10 


II 


13 


T4 


15 


16 
7, 


18 


Il BARUCH 54. 4-18 A 3 


(Thou) who revealest to those who fear Thee what is prepared for them, 
That thenceforth they may be comforted. 


Thou showest great acts to those who know not ; 

Thou breakest up the enclosure of those who are ignorant, 

And lightest up what is dark, 

And revealest what is hidden to the pure, 

[Who in faith have submitted themselves to Thee and Thy law. | 


Thou hast shown to Thy servant this vision ; 
Reveal to me also its interpretation. 


For I know that as regards those things wherein I besought Thee, I have received a response, 
And as regards what I besought, Thou didst reveal to me with what voice I should praise Thee, 
And from what members I should cause praises and hallelujahs to ascend to Thee. 

For if my members were mouths, 

And the hairs of my head voices, 

Even so I could not give Thee the meed of praise, 

Nor laud thee as is befitting, 

Nor could I recount Thy praise, 

Nor tell the glory of Thy beauty. 


For what am I amongst men, 

Or why am I reckoned amongst those who are more excellent than I, 
That I have heard all these marvellous things from the Most High, 
And numberless promises from Him who created me? 


Blessed be my mother among those that bear, 
And praised among women be she that bare me. 


For I will not be silent in praising the Mighty One, 
And with the voice of praise I will recount His marvellous deeds. 


For who doeth like unto Thy marvellous deeds, O God, 
Or who comprehendeth Thy deep thought fof lifef. 


For with Thy counsel Thou dost govern all the creatures which Thy right hand has created, 
And Thou hast established every fountain of light beside Thee, 
And the treasures of wisdom beneath Thy throne hast Thou prepared. 


And justly do they perish who have not loved Thy law, 
And the torment of judgement shall await those who have not submitted themselves to Thy power. 


For though Adam first sinned 

And brought untimely death upon all, 

Yet of those who were born from him 

Each one of them has prepared for his own soul torment to come, 
And again each one of them has chosen for himself glories to come. 


[For assuredly he who believeth will receive reward. 


But now, as for you, ye wicked that now are, turn ye to destruction, because ye shall speedily 
be visited, in that formerly ye rejected the understanding of the Most High. 


For His works have not taught you, 
Nor has the skill of His creation which is at all times persuaded you. | 


4. Thee. So I emend text = ©Him’. Se ys 

5. in faith. See note on liv. 21. I have bracketed this line as a later addition. 

to. An interpolation? it breaks the connexion. Cf. Luke xi. 27. 

14. Cf. xlviil. 40. : : ; 

15-19. The two doctrines of fate and free-will, though seen to be mutually exclusive, were accepted theoretically as 
equally imperative by the Pharisees. St. Paul alone develops them into naked antagonism. The general tendency 
was to insist on free-will as here, and in the Talmud (Weber, Jiid. Theol. 224 sq.). See my Commentary, 27 loc. 

15. The effect of Adam’s sin is limited to physical results—the premature death of his descendants. Contrast the 


pessimism of 4 Ezra. 


untimely. See xxiii. 4, note. 
16-18. eed xlvili. 48-50, note. These verses break the context and are out of place here. They properly precede 
xlviii. 48-50. A direct address to the wicked could not occur in a prayer to God. 
~~ +8. God’s law can be learnt in nature. Cf. Rom. i. 20. This argument is as old as the Psalter, Jok, and Isaiah 
12) Ps. xix. 1): 
(eg ) - 


s va\ 3 
‘II BARUCH 54, 19—56. 5 


19 Adam is therefore not the cause, save only of his own soul, 
But each of us has been the Adam of his own soul. 


20 But do Thou, O Lord, expound to me regarding those things which Thou hast revealed to me, 
And inform me regarding that which I besought Thee. 


2x For at the consummation of the world vengeance shall be taken upon those who have done 
wickedness according to their wickedness, 
And Thou wilt glorify the faithful according to their faithfulness. 


22 For those who are amongst Thine own Thou rulest, 
And those who sin Thou blottest out from amongst Thine own.’ 


551 And it came to pass when I had finished speaking the words of this prayer, that I sat there under 

2a tree, that I might rest in the shade of the branches. And I wondered and was astonied, and 
pondered in my thoughts regarding the multitude of goodness which sinners who are upon the earth 
have rejected, and regarding the great torment which they have despised, though they knew that 

3 they should be tormented because of the sin they had committed. And when I was pondering on 
these things and the like, lo! the angel Ramiel who presides over true visions was sent to me, and 
he said unto me: 

4 ‘Why does thy heart trouble thee, Baruch, and why does thy thought disturb thee ? 

5 For if owing to the report which thou hast only heard of judgement thou art so moved, 

What (wilt thou be) when thou shalt see it manifestly with thine eyes ? 


6 And if with the expectation wherewith thou dost expect the day of the Mighty One thou art so 
overcome, 


What (wilt thou be) when thou shalt come to its advent ? 


7 And, if at the word of the announcement of the torment of those who have done foolishly thou 
art so wholly distraught, 


How much more when the event will reveal marvellous things ? 


8 And if thou hast heard tidings of the good and evil things which are then coming and art 
grieved, 
What (wilt thou be) when thou shalt behold what the majesty will reveal, 
Which shall convict these and cause those to rejoice.’ 


LVI-LXXIV. Interpretation of the Vision. The black and bright Waters symbolize the World’s 
Llistory from Adam to the Advent of the Messiah. 


56 ‘Nevertheless, because thou hast besought the Most High to reveal to thee the interpretation 
2 of the vision which thou hast seen, I have been sent to tell thee. And the Mighty One hath 
assuredly made known to thee the methods of the times that have passed, and of those that 

are destined to pass in His world from the beginning of its creation even unto its consummation, 

3 of those things which (are) deceit and of those which (are) in truth. For as thou didst see a 
great cloud which ascended from the sea, and went and covered the earth, this is the duration 

of the world (= aidév) which the Mighty One made when he took counsel to make the world. 

4 And it came to pass when the word had gone forth from His presence, that the duration of the 
world had come into being in a small degree, and was established according to the multitude of 

5 the intelligence of Him who sent it. And as thou didst previously see on the summit of the 


cloud black waters which descended previously on the earth, this is the transgression wherewith 
Adam the first man transgressed. 


_ 19. See verse 15, note. Man’s guilt and sin are due to his own action, and are not derived from Adam. The evil 
impulse is not sin unless obeyed. It is placed in man, say the Talmudists, to be overcome (Weber, 217 sq.). 
21. the faithful according to their faithfulness. Here ‘faithfulness’ is contrasted with “wickedness ’, so it 


= ‘righteousness’ or ‘fidelity to the law’; but elsewhere in this work ‘faith’ — < belief’. Cf. 4 Ezra vi. 5 for the 
former sense. 


LV. 3. Ramiel. Cf. lxiii. 6; 1 En. xx. 7 (Greek); 4 Ezra iv. 36 (Syriac) ; ‘Sibyll, Or, ii. 215-17. In 4 Ezra Ramiel 
answers a question, as here. Elsewhere he has charge of souls for judgement. 

5. owing ... which. The text is defective. [I have added © after ts. and 9 before MSxoe. Ceriani 
a e> after sax,. With the latter reading we should render ‘if when thou hast only heard a rumour of His 
judgement’. 

LVI. 3. a great cloud... this is the duration of the world. The tw 
and the last black water, symbolize the thirteen periods of the world’s histor 
is foreshadowed by the lightning that shone on the cloud’s summit. 

4. was established. So Ceriani has emended. 


elve alternate black and bright waters, 
y prior to the Messiah’s kingdom, which 


512 








i BARUCH 56.6592 AY 


For [since] when he transgressed 

Untimely death came into being, 

Grief was named 

And anguish was prepared, 

And pain was created, 

And trouble consummated, 

And disease began to be established, 

And Sheol kept demanding that it should be renewed in blood, 
And the begetting of children was brought about, 
And the passion of parents produced, 

And the greatness of humanity was humiliated, 
And goodness languished. | 


7,8 What therefore can be blacker or darker than these things? This is the beginning of the black 


II, 


9 waters which thou hast seen. And from these black (waters) again were black derived, and the 
ro darkness of darkness was produced. For he became a danger to his own soul: even to the angels 
12 became hea danger. For, moreover, at that time when he was created, they enjoyed liberty. And 
13 some of them descended, and mingled with the women. And then those who did so were tormented 
14in chains. But the rest of the multitude of the angels, of which there is (no) number, restrained 


15 themselves. And those who dwelt on the earth perished together (with them) through the waters 
16 of the deluge. These are the black first waters. 


571 ‘And after these (waters) thou didst see bright waters: this is the fount of Abraham, also his 


2 generations and advent of his son, and of his son’s son, and of those like them. Because at that 
time the unwritten law was named amongst them, 
And the works of the commandments were then fulfilled, 
And belief in the coming judgement was then generated, 
And hope of the world that was to be renewed was then built up, 
And the promise of the life that should come hereafter was implanted. 
These are the bright waters, which thou hast seen. 


581 ‘And the black third waters which thou hast seen, these are the mingling of all sins, which the 


59 


nations afterwards wrought after the death of those righteous men, and the wickedness of the land of 
2 Egypt, wherein they did wickedly in the service wherewith they made their sons to serve. Never- 
theless, these also perished at last. 
1 ‘And the bright fourth waters which thou hast seen are the advent of Moses and Aaron and 
2 Miriam and Joshua the son of Nun and Caleb and of all those like them. For at that time the lamp 
of the eternal law shone on all those who sat in darkness, which announced to them that believe the 
3 promise of their reward, and to them that deny, the torment of fire which is reserved for them. But 
also the heavens at that time were shaken from their place, and those who were under the throne of 
4 the Mighty One were perturbed, when He was taking Moses unto Himself. For He showed him 
many admonitions together with the principles of the law and the consummation of the times, as 
also to thee, and likewise the pattern of Zion and its measures, in the pattern of which the 


6. disease. Text = ‘boasting’ = aban, corrupt for non = ‘ disease 7, or Jsqnnam = ‘boasting’ is corrupt for 

01909 = ‘disease’, as in Ixxiii. 2. ‘Disease’ comes with the Fall, but it disappears on the advent of the kingdom, 
gure ...@emanding. For Sheol’s hunger, cf. Prov. xxvii. 20 ; Isa. v. 14, ae 

10. Man’s physical nature became a danger to his spiritual ; because of it the angels fell through lust, and in it 
resided the evil impulse. * 

11. they enjoyed liberty, i.e. the angels. Cf. 1 En. vi. 2,note. 

14. (no) number. Ceriani restored the negative. 


LVIIL. The first bright period is from Abraham to Jacob. , ‘ 
- 9. This tendency to trace the observance of the law to the patriarchs had already reached its most extreme expres- 
sion in the Book of Jubilees. 


the world... to be renewed. In A‘ and A? at the close of the Messianic kingdom, which in A* ends this 
world and begins the next (Ixxiv. 2). 
LVIII. 1. the service ... serve. The text follows the Hebrew of Exod. i. 4, not the LXX. 


LIX, 2. the lamp .. . darkness. A Rabbinic application of Isa, ix. 2. 
the eternal law. Cf. xvii. 6; xv. 5, note. : ; 
torment of fire, i.e. a material fire to torment the wicked after the resurrection. Cf. xliv. 15, &c. 


4: law... times. Text reads ‘laws... ae 2 
ttern of Zion. Cf. Exod. xxv. 40, &c. ; 
nag oe ne kort of which ... made. So by a change of a single letter I have emended the text, which read 


‘ which was to be made in the pattern of the sanctuary’, &c. This emendation is followed by Ryssel. 
513 L 
11052 


4, 


‘II BARUCH 59. s—62.6 AY 


5 sanctuary of the present time was to be made. But then also He showed to him the measures of 
the fire, also the depths of the abyss, and the weight of the winds, and the number of the drops of 
6 rain: And the suppression of anger, and the multitude of long-suffering, and the truth of judgement : 
8 And the root of wisdom, and the riches of understanding, and the fount of knowledge: And the 
height of the air, and the greatness of Paradise, and the consummation of the ages, and the beginning 
9 of the day of judgement: And the number of the offerings, and the earths which have not yet come: 
10 And the mouth of Gehenna, and the station of vengeance, and the place of faith, and the region of 
11 hope: And the likeness of future torment, and the multitude of innumerable angels, and the flaming 
hosts, and the splendour of the lightnings, and the voice of the thunders, and the orders of the chiefs 
of the angels, and the treasuries of light, and the changes of the times, and the investigations of the 
12 law. These are the bright fourth waters which thou hast seen. 


GO: ‘And the black fifth waters which thou hast seen raining are the works which the Amorites 


61 


62 


wrought, and the spells of their incantations which they wrought, and the wickedness of their 
2 mysteries, and the mingling of their pollution. But even Israel was then polluted by sins in the days 
of the judges, though they saw many signs which were from Him who made them. 
1 ‘And the bright sixth waters which thcu didst see, this is the time in which David and Solomon 
were born. 


And there was at that time the building of Zion, 
And the dedication of the sanctuary, 


And the shedding of much blood of the nations that sinned then, 
And many offerings which were offered then in the dedication of the sanctuary. 


nN 


And peace and tranquillity existed at that time, 
4. And wisdom was heard in the assembly : 


And the riches of understanding were magnified in the congregations, 
5 And the holy festivals were fulfilled in blessedness and in much joy. 


Ww 


6 And the judgement of the rulers was then seen to be without guile, 

And the righteousness of the precepts of the Mighty One was accomplished with truth. 
7 And the land [which] was then beloved by the Lord, ; 

And because its inhabitants sinned not, it was glorified beyond all lands, 

And the city Zion ruled then over all lands and regions. 


8 These are the bright waters which thou hast seen. 


x ‘And the black seventh waters which thou hast secn, this is the perversion (brought about) by the 
2 counsel of Jeroboam, who took counsel to make two calves of gold: And all the iniquities which 
3 kings who were after him iniquitously wrought. And the curse of Jezebel and the worship of idols 
4 which Israel practised at that time. And the withholding of rain, and the famines which occurred 
5 until women eat the fruit of their wombs. And the time of their captivity which came upon the nine 
6 tribes and a half, because they were in many sins. And Salmanasar king of Assyria came and led 


5-11. Here one of Enoch’s functions is for the first time transferred to Moses. Cf. another such transference to 
Ezra in 4 Ezra xiv. 50.__Enoch, like the LXX, was much appealed to by Christians, and like it, therefore, fell into 
disuse by the Jews. This aggressive attitude of Judaism cannot be earlier than 50 A.D., and therefore places this 
writing (A*) after that date. It is prior to A. D. 70 (Ixviii. 5). 

5. the depths of the abyss. 1 Enoch xviii. 11; xxi. 7~10, &c; 2 Enoch xxviii. Si 

the weight of the winds. 2 Enoch xl. 11. Cf. 1 Enoch xli. 4. 
‘8. the aden in of Paradise. The measures of Paradise are taken by the angels for Enoch. Cf. 1 Enoch 
Xl, I-45 Ixx. 3, 4. 

the beginning of the day of judgement. A definite reckoning is given in 2 Enoch xxxii. 2—xxxiii.2; Ixv. 7-10; 
and indefinite measures in 1 Enoch Ixxxiii-xc; xci-civ. é 

Io. the mouth of Gehenna. Cf. Ixxxv. 13; 1 Enoch xxvii. 2, 3, KC. 

_the station of vengeance. Many places of vengeance are described in the two books of Enoch: 1 Enoch 
XVIll. 12-16 5 xix; XX1 5; xxii. 10-13; liv. 1-6; xc. 24-7; 2 Enoch padi d byes 

the place of faith, and the region of hope. These seem to be the places of intermediate bliss. Cf. 1 Enoch 


XXIl. 5-9. 
11. the likeness of future torment. 2 Enoch xl. 12. 
lightnings . . . thunders. 1 Enoch xli. 3, &c. 


the orders of the chiefs of the angels. The Syriac has ‘chief’ (sing.). Cf, xlviii. 10; 2 Enoch xx. T, 3. 
LX. 1. mingling of their pollution. Cf. Pss. Sol. ii. 1 5 ev upp@ avapieas, 
2. of the judges. The Syriac has ‘judgement’. 


LXI. 7. by the Lord. The text = év éekeiv@ 76 xaipo, where I take xaipé to be corrunt f f Kel ) 
iis : ern a t a or K 
later addition. I have bracketed the ‘ which ’. te e : a BAG hee e 


LXII. 4. Cf. 2 Kings vi. 28, 29. 
6. 1.e. Shalmaneser, 2 Kings xvii. 3, 6. Cf. 4 Ezra xiii, 4o. 


514 











Se ee 


64 


4) 


fl BARUCH 62. 765.2 A” 


7 them away captive. But regarding the Gentiles it were tedious to tell how they always wrought 

8 impiety and wickedness, and never wrought righteousness. These are the black seventh waters 
which thou hast seen. 

t ‘And the bright eighth waters which thou hast seen, this is the rectitude and uprightness of 

2 Hezekiah king of Judah and the grace (of God) which came upon him. +For when Sennacherib was 
stirred up in order that he might perish, and his wrath troubled him in order that he might thereby 

3 perish, for the multitude also of the nations which were with him.t| When, moreover, Hezekiah the 
king heard those things which the king of Assyria was devising, (i.e.) to come and seize him and 
destroy his people; the two and a half tribes which remained: nay, more he wished to overthrow 
Zion also: then Hezekiah trusted in his works, and had hope in his righteousness, and spake with 

4 the Mighty One and said: “ Behold, for lo! Sennacherib is prepared to destroy us, and he will be 
boastful and uplifted when he has destroyed Zion.” 

5 And the Mighty One heard him, for Hezekiah was wise, 

And He had respect unto his prayer, because he was righteous. 


6,7 And thereupon the Mighty One commanded Ramiel His angel who speaks with thee. And I 


went forth and destroyed their multitude, the number of whose chiefs only was a hundred and 
8 eighty-five thousand, and each one of them had an equal number (at his command). And at that 
time I burned their bodies within, but their raiment and arms I preserved outwardly, in order that 
the still more wonderful deeds of the Mighty One might appear, and that thereby His name might 
9 be spoken of throughout the whole earth. And Zion was saved and Jerusalem delivered : Israel also 
ro was freed from tribulation. And all those who were in the holy land rejoiced, and the name of the 
tr Mighty One was glorified so that it was spoken of. These are the bright waters which thou hast 
seen. 
1 ‘And the black ninth waters which thou hast seen, this is all the wickedness which was in the days 
2 of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah. For he wrought much impiety, and he slew the righteous, and 
he wrested judgement, and he shed the blood of the innocent, and wedded women he violently 
polluted, and he overturned the altars, and destroyed their offerings, and drove forth their priests 
3 lest they should minister in the sanctuary. And he made an image with five faces: four of them 
looked to the four winds, and the fifth on the summit of the image as an adversary of the zeal of the 
4 Mighty One. And then wrath went forth from the presence of the Mighty One to the intent that 
; Zion should be rooted out, as also it befell in your days. But also against the two tribes and a half 
6 went forth a decree that they should also be led away captive, as thou hast now seen. And to such 
a degree did the impiety of Manasseh increase, that it removed the praise of the Most High from 
, the sanctuary. On this account Manasseh was at that time named “the impious”, and finally his 
g abode was in the fire. For though his prayer was heard with the Most High, finally, when he was 
cast into the brazen horse and the brazen horse was melted, it served as a sign unto him for the 
9 hour. For he had not lived perfectly, for he was not worthy—but that thenceforward he might 
10 know by whom finally he should be tormented. For he who is able to benefit is also able to 
torment. 


65x ‘Thus, moreover, did Manasseh act impiously, and thought that in his time the Mighty One would 


2 not inquire into these things. These are the black ninth waters which thou hast seen. 


LXIII. 1. the grace. The MS. originally read ‘bounty’. I have with Ryssel added ‘ of God a Ryssel emends 
and reads ‘ the benignity of God’. 

2. This verse is very corrupt. ; : 

3. Hezekiah trusted in his works. See xiv. 7, note. There is a play on Hezekiah’s name in the words when 


retranslated into Hebrew by pinnn mMpin. Cf. Sirach xviii. 22, and 17. 

4. There is a play again on ‘Sennacherib’ and ‘ destroy * in Hebrew nnd wny 2nd. % 

7. In 2 Kings xix. 35 ; Isa. xxxvii. 36, 185,000 is the complete number of the slain. In 2 Chron. xxxil. 21, only the 
slaughter of the chiefs is mentioned. The text combines the two accounts. 

8. Cf. Sanh. 94°, where it is said that the souls were burnt up but the bodies preserved. 

LXIV. 3. he made an image with five faces: four of, &c. 2 Chron. xxxiii. 7 says ‘he set the graven image 
of the idol’. The Syriac version, however, gives ‘and he set the four-fronted image’. Cf. the Arabic, and also the 
Talmud, Sanh. 103» ‘at first he made for it one face, and in the end he made for it four faces that the Shechinah 
might see and be provoked’. ie 

6. removed the praise. Sanh. 103 says Manasseh erased the divine name and overturned the altar. 

7, 2 Chron. xxxiii. 11-19, on the other hand, implies that Manasseh was really forgiven on his repentance. 

8. his prayer. 2 Chron. xxxiii. 19; The Prayer of Manasseh in the Apocrypha. < 

the brazen horse. Cf. the Targum of Chronicles on 2 Chron. xxxiil. 11. Also Apost. Const. ii.22; Anastasius 
on Ps. vi; Suidas (under Mavavojjs). 

g. Text corrupt. 

LXV. The writer holds thus that Manasseh, though he prayed, did not really repent. Cf. Sanh. 1o1, and Sanh. Io, 
and contrast Debarim rabba 2, where Manasseh is to be saved at the last. 


515 L1la 


II BARUCH 66, 1-68. 3 A” 


6: ‘And the bright tenth waters which thou hast seen: this is the purity of the generations of Josiah 


67 


68 1, 


king of Judah, who was the only one at the time who submitted himself to the Mighty One with all 
2 his heart and with all his soul. And he cleansed the land from idols, and hallowed all the vessels 
which had been polluted, and restored the offerings to the altar, and raised the horn of the holy, and 
exalted the righteous, and honoured all that were wise in understanding, and brought back the priests 
to their ministry, and destroyed and removed the magicians and enchanters and necromancers from 
3 the land. And not only did he slay the impious that were living, but they also took from the 
4 sepulchres the bones of the dead and burned them with fire. [And the festivals and the sabbaths 
he established in their sanctity], and their polluted ones he burnt in the fire, and the lying prophets 
which deceived the people, these also he burnt in the fire,and the people who listened to them when 
5 they were living, he cast them into the brook Cedron, and heaped stones upon them. And he was 
zealous with zeal for the Mighty One with all his soul, and he alone was firm in the law at that time, 
so that he left none that was uncircumcised, or that wrought impiety in all the land, all the days of 
6 his life. Therefore he shall receive an eternal reward, and he shall be glorified with the Mighty One 
7 beyond many ata later time. For on his account and on account of those who are like him were 
8 the honourable glories, of which thou wast told before, created and prepared. These are the bright 
waters which thou hast seen. 
x ‘And the black eleventh waters which thou hast seen: this is the calamity which is now befalling 
Zion. 


2 Dost thou think that there is no anguish to the angels in the presence of the Mighty One, 
That Zion was so delivered up, 
And that lo! the Gentiles boast in their hearts, 
And assemble before their idols and say, 


“She is trodden down who ofttimes trod down, 
And she has been reduced to servitude who reduced (others) ” ? 


3 Dost thou think that in these things the Most High rejoices, 
Or that His name is glorified ? 


4 [But how will it serve towards His righteous judgement ?| 


5 Yet after these things shall the dispersed among the Gentiles be taken hold of by tribulation, 
And in shame shall they dwell in every place. 


6 Because so far as Zion is delivered up 
And Jerusalem laid waste, 
Shall idols prosper in the cities of the Gentiles, | 
And the vapour of the smoke of the incense of the righteousness which is by the law is 
extinguished in Zion, 
And in the region of Zion in every place lo! there is the smoke of impiety. 


~r 


But the king of Babylon will arise who has now destroyed Zion, 
And he will boast over the people, 
And he will speak great things in his heart in the presence of the Most High. 


8 But he also shall fall at last. These are the black waters. 


ho 


‘And the bright twelfth waters which thou hast seen: this is the word. For after these things 
a time will come when thy people shall fall into distress, so that they shall all run the risk of 
3 perishing together. Nevertheless, they will be saved, and their enemies will fall in their presence. 


LXVI. 2. necromancers, i.e. WN. Cf. 2 Kings xxi. 6. 

4. The words bracketed might come after ‘ to their ministry’ in verse 2. 

6. Therefore. Here I have emended 9 e-? ao (=‘now’, to wit, ‘he who’) into \.oo =‘therefore’. But the 
original is doubtful. 

Fie Cheriton 


LXVII. 2. assemble. ‘The Syriac reads fesd (=‘ crowds’) corrupt for aas9 (=‘assemble’). 

6-7. With Jerusalem’s destruction godlessness is everywhere triumphant. Ais unaware of the divine interposition 
to save the sacred vessels and destroy Zion by angels which B! narrates (vi. 4-10; Ixxx. 1-3), Here in A® too, the 
Gentiles (Ixvii, 2) and the King of Babylon (Ixvii. 7) boast over the fall of Zion. Contrast the ideas of Blin vii. 1 and 
Ixxx. 3, where such boasting is provided against. 

6. righteousness which is by the law. See xv. 5, note. 


LXVIII. 2,3. The danger of the Jews according to the book of Esther d their deliver is i 
earliest allusion to this O.T. book. The first is in Phe XVess Ane AREHGE WCraneRs | This ieethe Second 


516 


Il BARUCH 68: ,—70.8 A? 


4, 5 And they will have in (due) time much joy. And at that time after a little interval Zion will again 


be builded, and_its offerings will again be restored, and the priests will return to their ministry, and 


6, 7 also the Gentiles will come to glorify it. Nevertheless, not fully as in the beginning. But it will 


69 


70 


8 come to pass after these things that there will be the fall of many nations. These are the bright 
waters which thou hast seen. 
1 ‘For the last waters which thou hast seen which were darker than all that were before them, those 
2 which were after the twelfth number, which were collected together, belong to the whole world. For 
3 the Most High made division from the beginning, because He alone knows what will befall. For as 
to the enormities and the impieties which should be wrought before Him, He foresaw six kinds of 
4them. And of the good works of the righteous which should be accomplished before Him, He 
foresaw six kinds of them, beyond those which He should work at the consummation of the age. 
5 On his account there were not black waters with black, nor bright with bright; for it is the 
consummation. 
1 ‘Hear therefore the interpretation of the last black waters which are to come [after the black]: this 
2is the word. Behold! the days come, and it shall be when the time of the age has ripened, 
And the harvest of its evil and good seeds has come, 
That the Mighty One will bring upon the earth and its inhabitants and upon its rulers 
Perturbation of spirit and stupor of heart. 
3. And they shall hate one another, 
And provoke one another to fight, 
And the mean shall rule over the honourable, 
And those of low degree shall be extolled above the famous. 


4 And the many shall be delivered into the hands of the few, 
And those who were nothing shall rule over the strong, 
And the poor shall have abundance beyond the rich, 

And the impious shall exalt themselves above the heroic. 

5 And the wise shall be silent, 

And the foolish shall speak, 

Neither shall the thought of men be then confirmed, 
Nor the counsel of the mighty, 

Nor shall the hope of those who hope be confirmed. 


6 And when those things which were predicted have come to pass, 
Then shall confusion fall upon all men, 
And some of them shall fall in battle, 
And some of them shall perish in anguish, { 
, And some of them shall be destroyed by their own. Then the Most High will reveal those 
peoples whom He has prepared before, 
And they shall come and make war with the leaders that shall then be left. 


8 And it shall come to pass that whosoever gets safe out of the war shall die in the earthquake, 
And whosoever gets safe out of the earthquake shall be burned by the fire, 
And whosoever gets safe out of the fire shall be destroyed by famine. 


6. The second temple was less esteemed. See Mal. i-ii; 1 En. Ixxxix. 73, 74; Ass. Mos. iv. 8. This temple 
then was standing when liii-lxxiv was written. 


EXIX. 2. last: Syriac = other’. 
the last waters, &c. See lili. 7. 
2-4. This division recalls Sirach xlii, 24. _ 
3. and. So I emend the Syriac (=‘ of’) with Ryssel. 
kinds: or ‘methods’. ; : 2 
4. beyond those which. The travail-pains of the Messiah are developed in Ixx-Ixxil. 


LXX. 1. The words bracketed spoil the scheme of the writer. In Ixviii the last black waters come after the bright 
twelfth waters. ‘ ; 
2. harvest ... spirit. In both cases in the plural in the MS. ; aes 
3-10. For these last woes cf. xxv. 2-4; xxvii; xlviii. 31-9 ; 4 Ezra v. 1-123 vi. 20-4; 1X. I-95 XMl. 29-31. 
2. -&. Cfoxlviii. 6. . 
5. ‘ihe ties nave here changed the singular into the plural ; in Ixx. 2 the plural into the singular. Sok 
6. destroyed by their own. Cf. Mic. vii. 6; Matt. x. 35, 36. The Syriac ‘hindered’ is due to a corruption In 
the original Hebrew, a3 for a>, A 
7. whom He has prepared before. Are these the hosts of Gog and Magog? 
8. the earthquake ... fire. Cf. xxvii. 7, 10; 4 Ezra 1x. 3 and v. 8. 
shall be destroyed. So Ceriani emends text, which =‘ shall add’. 
famine. Cf. xxvii. 6. 
517 


Ht BARUCH Or peeTL ey a 


y [And it shall come to pass that whosoever of the victors and the vanquished gets safe out of and 


10 escapes all these things aforesaid will be delivered into the hands of My servant Messiah.] For all 


71 


72 


73 


74 


the earth shall devour its inhabitants. 
: ‘And the holy land shall have mercy on its own, 
And it shall protect its inhabiters at that time. 


3 This is the vision which thou hast seen, and this is the interpretation. For I have come to tell 
thee these things, because thy prayer has been heard with the Most High. 
1 ‘Hear now also regarding the bright lightning which is to come at the consummation after these 
2 black (waters): this is the word. After the signs have come, of which thou wast told before, when 
the nations become turbulent, and the time of My Messiah is come, he shall both summon all the 
3 nations, and some of them he shall spare, and some of them he shall slay. These things therefore 
4 shall come upon the nations which are to be spared by Him. Every nation, which knows not Israel 
5 and has not trodden down the seed of Jacob, shall indeed be spared. And this because some out of 
6 every nation shall be subjected to thy people. But all those who have ruled over you, or have 
known you, shall be given up to the sword. 


1 ‘And it shall come to pass, when He has brought low everything that is in the world, 
And has sat down in peace for the age on the throne of His kingdom, 
That joy shall then be revealed, 
And rest shall appear. 


And then healing shall descend in dew, 

And disease shall withdraw, 

And anxiety and anguish and lamentation pass from amongst men, 
And gladness proceed through the whole earth. 


No 


3 ind no one shall again die untimely, 
Nor shall any adversity suddenly befall. 


4 And judgements, and revilings, and contentions, and revenges, 
And blood, and passions, and envy, and hatred, 
And whatsoever things are like these shall go into condemnation when they are removed. 


5 For it is these very things which have filled this world with evils, 
And on account of these the life of man has been greatly troubled. 


6 And wild beasts shall come from the forest and minister unto men, 
And asps and dragons shall come forth from their holes to submit themselves to a little child. 


7 And women shall no longer then have pain when they bear, 
Nor shall they suffer torment when they yield the fruit of the womb. 


r ‘And it shall come to pass in those days that the reapers shall not grow weary, 
Nor those that build be toilworn ; 
For the works shall of themselves speedily advance 
Together with those who do them in much tranquillity. 

2 For that time is the consummation of that which is corruptible, 

And the beginning of that which is not corruptible. 

Therefore those things which were predicted shall belong to it: 

Therefore it is far away from evils, and near to those things which die not. 

4 This is the bright lightning which came after the last dark waters.’ 


(3) 


g. An interpolation? Verse to is the natural sequel to verse 8. The appearance of the Messiah and the 
extermination of the Gentiles are at least anticipated if not premature here. 


LXXI. See xxix. 2, note. 
SCI live te 


LXXII. 1. the bright lightning. The Syriac has ‘the bright waters’, which contradicts the vision in litt. 7-11. 
The same emendation is necessary in Ixxiv. 4. The verb must be read in the sing. to agree with its subject. 

4-6. The Messiah was to extend his dominion over the Gentiles (Ps. Ixxii. 11, 17; Isa. xiv. 2; Ixvi. 12, 19-21; 
Zech. xiv; 1 En. xc. 20; Pss. Sol. xvii. 32). A harsher view grew up in the first century B.C. In 1 Enoch xxxviilxx 
and Assumpt. Mos. x the Gentiles are to be annihilated ; so in 4 Ezra xiii. 37, 38, 49, and later Judaism. The 
Messiah here, as in xxxix. 7-xl; 4 Ezra xii, 32, is a warrior who slays Israel’s enemies with his own hand. Cf. 
Isa. xi. 4. Contrast His passive réle in xxix. 2 of this book, 

LXXIII. 1. Cf. 1 Cor. xv. 24, 25. 

6. Cf. Isa. xi. 6-9; Ixv. 25; Sibyll. Or. iii. 620-3, 743-50. 


518 


751 And I answered and said: 


‘2 or ek 


II BARUCH 75. 1—76. 4 


LXXV. Baruch’s Hymn on the Unsearchableness of God's Ways and on His Mere¢ies through — \xxv- 


which the Faithful shall attain to a blessed Consummation. ah mae 


‘Who can understand, O Lord, Thy goodness ? 
For it is incomprehensible. 


2 Or who can search into thy compassions, 
Which are infinite? 


3. Or who can comprehend Thy intelligence? 

4 Or who is able to recount the thoughts of Thy mind ? 

5 Or who of those who are born can hope to come to those things, 
Unless he is one to whom Thou art merciful and gracious? 


6 Because, if assuredly Thou didst not have compassion on man, 
Those who are under Thy right hand, 
They could not come to those things, 
But those who are in the numbers named can be called. 


, But if, indeed, we who exist know wherefore we have come, 
And submit ourselves to Him who brought us out of Egypt, 
We shall come again and remember those things which have passed, 
And shall rejoice regarding that which has been. 


g But if now we know not wherefore we have come, 
And recognize not the principate of Him who brought us up out of Egypt, 
We shall come again and seek after those things which have been now, 
And be grieved with pain because of those things which have befallen.’ 


LXXVI. Baruch bidden to instruct the People for forty days and then to hold himself ready for his 
Assumption on the Advent of the Messiah. 


* And He answered and said unto me: [‘Inasmuch as the revelation of this vision has been in- 

terpreted to thee as thou besoughtest], hear the word of the Most High that thou mayst know what 

? is to befall thee after these things. For thou shalt surely depart from this earth, nevertheless not 
unto death, but thou shalt be preserved unto the consummation of the times. Go up therefore to 
the top of that mountain, and there shall pass before thee all the regions of that land, and the figure 
of the inhabited world, and the top(s) of the mountains, and the depth(s) of the valleys, and the 
depths of the seas, and the number of the rivers, that thou mayst see what thou art leaving, and 

4 whither thou ait going. Now this shall befall after forty days. Go now therefore during these days 
and instruct the people so far as thou art able, that they may learn so as not to die at the last time, 
but may learn in order that they may live at the last times.’ 


LXXV-LXXVI. Here B? returns. Baruch addresses God and not Ramiel, who in ly. 4~Ixxiv. has been explaining 
the vision in liii. 

LXXV. 1. understand. Syriac reads \s69k\5 =‘ be likened to’, which I have emended into %-® Ny =‘ understand ’, 
omitting the following >. : ; ; f : 

2. The mercies of God are not much dwelt on in this book. The righteous are fully conscious of their own merit 
(cf. xiv. 7). But cf. Ixxxi. 4; Ixxv. 5, 6. 

6. who are under Thy right hand. Cf. Ps. Ixxx.17. _ 

7, 8. We shall come again, i.e. we shall rise and meet with our fate according as we are obedient and righteous 
or not. 


LXXVI.. 1. The words bracketed are inserted by the final editor. 
hear the word of the Most High. Cf. xili. 2; xxv. I. 
2. thou shalt be preserved until the consummation of the times. The Syriac here has unto the preservation 
of the times’. From xxv. I we see we must read ‘thou shalt be preserved unto the times’, or rather the fuller form 
we find in xiii. 3 ‘thou shalt be preserved unto the consummation of the times’. Ryssel has adopted this suggestion. 
3. Cf. Deut. xxxiv. 1-3; Matt. iv. 8. 
4. forty days. Cf. Exod. xxiv. 18, and 4 Ezra xiv. 23, 42-5. 


519 


TA 


2 


3 
4 


Io 


It 


/ 
li BARUCH. 77.?t-1r3 15 


LXXVII. Baruch’s Admonition to the People and his writing of two Letters—one to the nine and a 


half tribes in Assyria and the other to the two and a half in Babylon. 


And I, Baruch, went thence and came to the people, and assembled them together from the Ixxvii- 
greatest to the least, and said unto them: ‘ Hear, ye children of Israel, behold how many ye are who hood = 


remain of the twelve tribes of Israel. For to you and to your fathers the Lord gave a law more 
excellent than to all peoples. And because your brethren transgressed the commandments of the 
Most High, 

He brought vengeance upon you and upon them, 

And He spared not the former, 


And the latter also He gave into captivity : 
And He left not a residue of them, 
But behold! ye are here with me. 


If, therefore, ye direct your ways aright, 
Ye also shall not depart as your brethren departed, 
But they shall come to you. 


For He is merciful whom ye worship, 
And He is gracious in whom ye hope, 
And He is true, so that He shall do good and not evil. 


Have ye not seen here what has befallen Zion ? 
Or do ye perchance think that the place had sinned, 
And that on this account it was overthrown ? 


Or that the land had wrought foolishness, 
And that therefore it was delivered up? 


And know ye not that on account of you who did sin, 

That which sinned not was overthrown, 

And, on account of those who wrought wickedly, 

That which wrought not foolishness was delivered up to (its) enemies ?’ 


And the whole people answered and said unto me: ‘So far as we can recall the good things which 
the Mighty One has done unto us, we do recall them; and those things which we do not remember 


12 Hein His mercy knows. Nevertheless, do this for us thy people: write also to our brethren in- 


f 
13 


Babylon an epistle of doctrine and a scroll of hope, that thou mayst confirm them also before thou 
dost depart from us. 


For the shepherds of Israel have perished, 
And the lamps which gave light are extinguished, 
And the fountains have withheld their stream whence we used to drink. 


LXXVII-LXXXVI. These chapters belong to B! with the exception of Ixxxiii and lxxxv. The chief differences 
between B* and B? are: in B! an earthly felicity is looked for, the dispersion is to return, and the earthly Jerusalem 
to be rebuilt; in B* none of these things are expected. In B? Baruch is to die, in B? to be translated; in B? 
Jeremiah is not sent to Babylon, in B? he is. 


LXXVII. 1. from the greatest to the least. This order belongs to the later books; cf. 2 Chron. xxxiv. 30; 
Esther i. 5, 20. Contrast Gen. xix. 11; 1 Sam. v. G5 Jervis 13; 6c. 
4. upon you, i.e. the two and a half tribes =‘ the former’ in the next line. 
upon them, i.e. the nine and a half tribes =‘ the latter’. 
left not a residue. This denies the Samaritan claim. 
5. here with me. Cf. 4 Ezra xiv. 33. Ryssel misunderstands and tries to emend. 
6. they shall come to you. Seems to include the nine and a half tribes. Ch ixxvitie7. 
7. do good and not evil. Cf. Jer. xxi. 10; Amos ix. 4. 
aahe place itself had not sinned, therefore the angels, instead of the king of Babylon, had destroyed it. Cf 
v—-vill; Ixxx. 
10, Note that Jerusalem’s fall is attributed here not only to the sins of the two and a half tribes, but also of the 
nine and a half. Cf. Jer xi. 17; 1 Bar. ii. 26; Ass. Mos, iii. 5. 
12. to our brethren in Babylon, i.e. the two and a half tribes. Cf. verse 19. In 4 Baruch the letter is addressed 
to Jeremiah ; not so here. See x. 2, note. This letter is lost. 
depart, i.e. die (xliii. 2, note), 


520 


24, 


f 
Meek OCH Wiig. J> 


14 And we are left in the darkness, 
And amid the }trees of the forest}, 
- And the thirst of the wilderness.’ 


15 And I answered and said unto them: 
“Shepherds and lamps and fountains come from the law: 
And though we depart, yet the law abideth. 


16 Iftherefore ye have respect to the law, 
And are intent upon wisdom, 
A lamp will not be wanting, 
And a shepherd will not fail, 
And a fountain will not dry up. 


17 Nevertheless, as ye said unto me, I will write also unto your brethren in Babylon, and I will send 
by means of men, and I will write in like manner to the nine tribes and a half, and send by means of 
18 a bird.’ And it came to pass on the one and twentieth day in the eighth month that I, Baruch, 
came and sat down under the oak under the shadow of the branches, and no man was with me, but 
19 I was alone. And I wrote these two epistles: one I sent by an eagle to the nine and a half tribes; 
20 and the other I sent to those that were at Babylon by means of three men. And I called the eagle 
21 and spake these words unto it: ‘ The Most High hath made thee that thou shouldst be higher than 
22 all birds. And now go and tarry not in (any) place, nor enter a nest, nor settle upon any tree, till 
thou hast passed over the breadth of the many waters of the river Euphrates, and hast gone to the 
23 people that dwell there, and cast down to them this epistle. Remember, moreover, that, at the time 
of the deluge, Noah received from a dove the fruit of the olive, when he sent it forth from the ark. 
25 Yea, also the ravens ministered to Elijah, bearing him food, as they had been commanded. Solo- 
mon also, in the time of his kingdom, whithersoever he wished to send or seek for anything, 
26 commanded a bird (to go thither), and it obeyed him as he commanded it. And now let it not 
weary thee, and turn not to the right hand nor the left, but fly and go by a direct way, that thou 
mayst preserve the command of the Mighty One, according as I said unto thee.’ 


LXXVIII-LXXXVI. THE EPISTLE OF BARUCH THE SON OF NERIAH WHICH HE 
WROTE TO THE NINE AND A HALF TRIBES. 


78 These are the words of that epistle which Baruch the son of Neriah sent to the nine and a half 


2 tribes, which were across the river Euphrates, in which these things were written. Thus saith Baruch 
3 the son of Neriah to the brethren carried into captivity: ‘Mercy and peace. I bear in mind, my 
brethren, the love of Him who created us, who loved us from of old, and never hated us, but above 
4 all educated us. And truly I know that behold all we the twelve tribes are bound by one bond, 
5 inasmuch as we are born from one father. Wherefore I have been the more careful to leave you the 
words of this epistle before I die, that ye may be comforted regarding the evils which have come 
upon you, and that ye may be grieved also regarding the evil that has befallen your brethren; and 
again, also, that ye may justify His judgement which He has decreed against you that ye should be 


14. left in the darkness: xlvi. 2; 4 Ezra xiv. 20. 
+trees = "SY, possibly corrupt for ‘AYP =‘toils’.. But whether this is so or not, the general sense is clear. In 

verse 13 three things have been lost: shepherds to guide the people, lamps to- give light to them, and fountains to 
satisfy their thirst. Now, owing to the loss of the lamps, the people are ‘left in darkness’, owing to the loss of the 
fountains they suffer from the ‘thirst of the wilderness’. Hence the second line must deal with the evils that followed 
on the loss of the shepherds, and its restoration must satisfy this requirement. Accordingly I offer the following suggestion : 
that Jas Jos is corrupt for Ladd odd ¢© =‘ without pasture ?, or ‘without a shepherd ’. 

16. shepherd. So Ceriani emends Jaxxd =‘ mind’, into ads. 

17. by means of men. In 4 Baruch an eagle carries Baruch’s letter to Jeremiah at Babylon. 

21. Cf. 4 Baruch vii. 3: ‘Elect above all the birds of heaven.’ 

23. Cf. Gen. viii. 11; 4 Baruch vii. 10. 


LXXVIII. 1. The nine and a half tribes. In this book the tribes of Israel carried away by the king of Assyria are 
always so designated, except ini. 2. Cf. John Malalas 158. In 4 Ezra xiii. 4o they are called ‘ the ten tribes’ in the 
Latin version, ‘ the nine and a half tribes’ in the Syriac and Arabic versions, and ‘the nine tribes’ in the Ethiopic 
version. yer: 

2. Mercy and peace + ‘unto you’c. Cf.1 Tim.1.2. | : ; 

3. In the genuine parts of B Baruch speaks frequently in the first person singular, but not in the interpolated 
portions. d 

5. justify. See xxi. 9, note. Cf. Ps. li. 4. 

521 


6 


= 
d 


ee 


/ 
‘IT BARUCH 78. 6—82. 2 13 


carried away captive—for what ye have suffered is disproportioned to what ye have done—in order 
that, at the last times, ye may be found worthy of your fathers. Therefore, if ye consider that ye 
have now suffered those things for your good, that ye may not finally be condemned and tormented, 
then ye will receive eternal hope; if above all ye destroy from your heart vain error, on account of 
which ye departed hence. For if ye so do these things, He will continually remember you, He who 
always promised on our behalf to those who were more excellent than we, that He will never forget 
or forsake us, but with much mercy will gather together again those who were dispersed. 


79 x Now, my brethren, learn first what befell Zion: how that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came 


BY 
A 
2 
o 


80: 


2) 


3 


up against us. For we have sinned against Him who made us, and we have not kept the command- 
ments which he commanded us, yet he hath not chastened us as we deserved. For what befell you 
we also suffer in a pre-eminent degree, for it befell us also. 
And now, my brethren, I make known unto you that when the enemy had surrounded the city, 
the angels of the Most High were sent, and they overthrew the fortifications of the strong wall, and 
they destroyed the firm iron corners, which could not be rooted out. Nevertheless, they hid all 
the vessels of the sanctuary, lest the enemy should get possession of them. And when they 
had done these things, they delivered thereupon to the enemy the overthrown wall, and the plundered 
house, and the burnt temple, and the people who were overcome because they were delivered up, lest 
the enemy should boast and say: ‘ Thus by force have we been able to lay waste even the house of the 


4 Most High in war.’ Your brethren also have they bound and led away to Babylon, and have caused 
5, 6 them to dwell there. But we have been left here, being very few. This is the tribulation about 
7 which I wrote to you. For assuredly I know that (the consolation of) the inhabitants of Zion 


81 1,2 


3 


consoleth you: so far as ye knew that it was prospered (your consolation) was greater than the 
tribulation which ye endured in having to depart from it. 

But regarding consolation, hear ye the word. For I was mourning regarding Zion, and I prayed 
for mercy from the Most High, and I said: 

* How long will these things endure for us ? 

And will these evils come upon us always?’ 


4 And the Mighty One did according to the multitude of His mercies, 


82: 


bo 


And the Most High according to the greatness of His compassion, 

And He revealed unto me the word, that I might receive consolation, 

And He showed me visions that I should not again endure anguish, 

And He made known to me the mystery of the times. 

And the advent of the hours he showed me. 

Therefore, my brethren, I have written to you, that ye may comfort yourselves regarding the 
multitude of your tribulations. For know ye that our Maker will assuredly avenge us on all our 
enemies, according to all that they have done to us, also that the consummation which the Most 
High will make is very nigh, and His mercy that is coming, and the consummation of His judgement, 
is by no means far off. 


5. the last times, i.e. the Return, verse 7. 
7. those who were more excellent. The patriarchs. 
with much mercy. In 4 Ezra xiv. 34, 35, after death the righteous obtain mercy. Here Israel obtains it in 
their Return. ge 
gather together .. . dispersed. Cf. Ixxvii. 6; Ixxxiv. 2, 8, 1c. For the Return spoken of in the O.T. and 
elsewhere, see my Commentary, zz Joc. The return in B! accords well with the rebuilding of Jerusalem expected in 
BY. See i. 4; vi. 9, notes. 


LXXIX. 2. chastened. Cf. i. 5; xiii. Lo. 

LXXX. This chapter resembles and implies vi-viii, but conflicts with xvii. 

2. all the vessels. Syr. ‘the vessels of the vessels’ = 310 ods, corrupt for spa ba. 

lest the enemy should get possession of them. Syr. reads ‘lest they should be polluted by the enemy’ = 
DMN ION 4D, corrupt for DINK DISA 4D, as in vi. 8. 

4. Jeremiah not mentioned. See x. 2, note. 

Sy cis sabi 

7. <the consolation of) the inhabitants of Zion consoleth, &c. aso requires a subject. In Ixxvii. 12 the 
people ask Baruch to send to their brethren in Babylon ‘a scroll of hope’. Hence some such word is needed here, 
1.€. Jk}¥A> = ‘ consolation ’ as in Ixxxi. 1, 4. Ryssel proposes most extraordinarily to insert ‘tribulation’ where I have 
added ‘consolation’. The tribulation of the Jews in Zion is to comfort the exiles in Babylon ! 

LXXXI. As in Ixxx. 7 the nine and a half tribes were consoled when Jerusalem prospered and were grieved at its 
eels Baruch has now a word of consolation for them touching Zion ; for God has comforted him by a revelation 
regarding it. 

1. consolation, i.e. Zion’s restoration. Cf. xliv. He 

4. mystery. ch read ‘ mysteries.’ 

LXXXII. I am doubtful whether Ixxxii. 2-9 belongs to B! or B®; perhaps the latter. 

522 


6 


~r 


83 1 


4 
5 


6 


H 
8 


L 


ro 
II 


I2 


ae 


Il BARUCH 82. 3—83. 12 


For lo! we see now the multitude of the prosperity of the Gentiles, 
Though they act impiously, 
But they shall be like a vapour: 


And we behold the multitude of their power, 
Though they do wickedly, 
But they shall be made like unto a drop; 


And we see the firmness of their might, 
Though they resist the Mighty One every hour, 
But they shall be accounted as spittle. 


And we consider the glory of their greatness, 
Though they do not keep the statutes of the Most High, 
But as smoke shall they pass away. 


And we meditate on the beauty of their gracefulness, 
Though they have to do with pollutions, 
But as grass that withers shall they fade away. 


And we consider the strength of their cruelty, 
Though they remember not the end (thereof), 
But as a wave that passes shall they be broken. 


And we remark the boastfulness of their might, 
Though they deny the beneficence of God, who gave (it) to them, 
But they shall pass away as a passing cloud. 


[For the Most High will assuredly hasten His times, Ixxxiii = 
And He will assuredly bring on His hours. BS 


And He will assuredly judge those who are in His world, 
And will visit in truth all things by means of all their hidden works. 


And He will assuredly examine the secret thoughts, 
And that which is laid up in the secret chambers of all the members of man. 
And will make (them) manifest in the presence of all with reproof. 


Let none therefore of these present things ascend into your hearts, but above all let us be expec- 
tant, because that which is promised to us shall come. And let us not now look unto the delights 
of the Gentiles in the present, but let us remember what has been promised to us in the end. For 
the ends of the times and of the seasons and whatsoever is with them shall assuredly pass by 
together. The consummation, moreover, of the age shall then show the great might of its ruler, 
when all things come to judgement. Do ye therefore prepare your hearts for that which before ye 
believed, lest ye come to be in bondage in both worlds, so that ye be led away captive here and be 
tormented there. For that which exists now or which has passed away, or which is to come, in all 
these things, neither is the evil fully evil, nor again the good fully good. 


For all healthinesses of this time are turning into diseases, 

And all might of this time is turning into weakness, 

And all the force of this time is turning into impotence, 

And every energy of youth is turning into old age and consummation. 


3,4. avapour...adrop. Cf. 4 Ezra vii. 61, vi. 56 (Isa. xl. 15)4 ; 
5. accounted as spittle. The text here and in 4 Ezra vi. 56 agrees with LXX against the Hebrew. 


LXXXIII. This chapter seems to belong to B2. The times are to be hastened (Ixxxiii. 1, 6) and everything brought 
to judgement (2, 3, 7) ; let them attend not to the present but to the end and its joys (4, 5), and hold to their old faith, 
to avoid torment in the world to come (8), for this world is passing away with its strength, its virtues and its lusts 
(9-23). There is a close connexion between Ixxxiii and xx. This chapter seems to have formed originally part of 
Baruch’s address to the people, and to have followed on xliv. 8-15. 

3. See 4 Ezra xvi. 65. Cf. 1 Cor. iv. 5; also Heb. iv. 12. 

4. Let none therefore, &c. ‘Cf. Col. iii. 2 ra dvo ppoveite. 

promised. See xiv. 13, ee ¥ : 
. prepare your hearts. See xxxi. I, note. ; ; 
: that which itore ye believed, refers to apostates, i.e. Christians who had left Judaism. Cf. xli. 3. 


10. Probably we have here a play on words mand Jam ANY NDW"P9. 
II, 12,13. might ... beauty ... dominion. xxi. 14; xlvill. 35. 
5%3 


2 ' 2 
IT BARUCH 88, 43568 6 7 eee 


And every beauty of gracefulness of this time is turning faded and hateful, 
13 And every proud dominion of the present is turning into humiliation and shame, 
And every praise of the glory of this time is turning into the shame of silence, — 
And every vain splendour and insolence of this time is turning into voiceless ruin. 


15 And every delight and joy of this time is turning to worms and corruption, 
16 And every clamour of the pride of this time is turning into dust and stillness. 


17 “And every possession of riches of this time is being turned into Sheol alone, 
18 And all the rapine of passion of this time is turning into involuntary death, 
And every passion of the lusts of this time is turning into a judgement of torment, 


19 And every artifice and craftiness of this time is turning into a proof of the truth, : 
20 And every sweetness of unguents of this time is turning into judgement and condemnation, 
21 And every love of lying is turning to contumely through truth. 


22 Since therefore all these things are done now, does anyone think that they will not be avenged? 
But the consummation of all things will come to the truth. | 


84 1 Behold! I have therefore made known unto you (these things) whilst I live; for I have said (it) ig) = 
that ye should learn the things that are excellent; for the Mighty One hath commanded me to 
instruct you: and I will set before you some of the commandments of His judgement before I die. 

2 Remember that formerly Moses assuredly called heaven and earth to witness against you and said; 
3 ‘If ye transgress the law ye shall be dispersed, but if ye keep it ye shall be kept.’ And other 
4 things also he used to say unto you when ye the twelve tribes were together in the desert. And after 
his death ye cast them away from you: on this account there came upon you what had been 
5 predicted. And now Moses used to tell you before they befell you, and lo! they have befallen you : 
6 for ye have forsaken the law. Lo! I also say unto you after ye have suffered, that if ye obey those 
things which have been said unto you, ye will receive from the Mighty One whatever has been laid 
7 up and reserved for you. Moreover, let this epistle be for a testimony between me and you, that ye 
may remember the commandments of the Mighty One, and that also there may be to me a defence 
8 in the presence of Him who sent me. And remember ye the Jaw and Zion, and the holy land and 
9 your brethren, and the covenant of your fathers, and forget not the festivals andthe sabbaths. And 
deliver ye this epistle and the traditions of the law to your sons after you, as also your fathers 
10 delivered (them) to you. And at all times make request perseveringly and pray diligently with 
your whole heart that the Mighty One may be reconciled to you, and that He may not reckon the 
11 multitude of your sins, but remember the rectitude of your fathers. For if He judge us not accord- 
ing to the multitude of His mercies, woe unto all us who are born. 


851 [Know ye, moreover, that Laxxv = 
In former times and in the generations of old our fathers had helpers, BS 
Righteous men and holy prophets: 


2 Nay more, we were in our own land 
[And they helped us when we sinned], 


12. beauty ... hateful. Cf. xlviii. 35. 
14. glory ... shame. Again a play on words in the Hebrew 713)... ndp. 


LXXXIV. I. learn... instruct you. So bdghilWP. c reads ‘above all things learn the commandments 
of the Mighty One wherein I should instruct you’. 

2. See xix. 2, note. In this verse we get several traces of the Hebrew original: the idiom YN IyN; the play on 
‘keep’ and ‘kept’; and perhaps a paronomasia in ‘ transgress’ and ‘ be dispersed’ 1}DN and IN. 

be kept. So all MSS. but c which reads ‘be planted *. 

6. The nine and a half tribes must endure chastisement before they could attain to the promised happiness. This 
chastisement was for their well-being (Ixxviii. 6) ; was less than they deserved (Ixxix. 2), and was intended to make 
them worthy of their fathers in the last days (Ixxviii. 5). 

10. that the Mighty One may be reconciled to you. Cf. 4 Ezra x. 24. The return to Palestine is to follow the 
reconciliation (Ixxviii. 7). 

the rectitude of your fathers. For their merit see xiv. 7, note; and contrast this next verse. 

LXXXV. An interpolation, B*. The restored Jerusalem and the return expected in B! is here implicitly denied, as 
in B*. This world is lost, and only spiritual blessedness is looked for in the world of incorruption. B* is more 
individualistic than B?, and moreover was written outside Palestine (Ixxxv. 2, 3), whereas B? seems to have been 
written in Jerusalem. Bis the most pessimistic part of this book. 

1-3. In these verses we have a strophe of five lines and an antistrophe. I have bracketed two clauses in verse 2 as 
interpolations. 

I. Jeremiah’s generation seems far in the past. 

2. The writer is among the Dispersion. 

they helped us. Cf. 4 Baruch ii. 3. 


524 


6 


Io 


EE 
I2 


MeBARUCH 85: o-12° DO? 


And they interceded for us with Him who made us, 
[Because they trusted in their works], 
And the Mighty One heard their prayer and forgave us. 


But now the righteous have been gathered 

And the prophets have fallen asleep, 

And we also have gone forth from the land, 

And Zion has been taken from us, 

And we have nothing now save the Mighty One and His law. 


If therefore we direct and dispose our hearts, 
We shall receive everything that we lost, 
And much better things than we lost by many times. 


For what we have lost was subject to corruption, 
And what we shall receive shall not be corruptible. 


[ Moreover, also, I have written thus to our brethren to Babylon, that to them also I may attest 
these very things. | 


And let all those things aforesaid be always before your eyes, 
Because we are still in the spirit and the power of our liberty. 


Again, moreover, the Most High also is long-suffering towards us here, 
And He hath shown to us that which is to be, 
And hath not concealed from us what will befall in the end. 


Before therefore judgement exact its own, 

And truth that which is its due, 

Let us prepare our soul 

That we may possess, and not be taken possession of, 

And that we may hope and not be put toshame, 

And that we may rest with our fathers, and not be tormented with our enemies. 


For the youth of the world is past, 
And the strength of the creation already exhausted, 
And the advent of the times is very short, 

Yea, they have passed by ; 

And the pitcher is near to the cistern, 

And the ship to the port, 

And the course of the journey to the city, 

And life to (its) consummation. 


And again prepare your souls, so that when ye sail and ascend from the ship ye may have rest 
and not be condemned when ye depart. For lo! when the Most High will bring to pass all these 
things, 


There shall not there be again [a place of repentance, nor] a limit to the times, 
Nor a duration for the hours, 

Nor a change of ways, 

Nor place for prayer, 

Nor sending of petitions, 

Nor receiving of knowledge, 

Nor giving of love, 


trusted in their works. The dead righteous avail not, only the living. See xiv. 7, note; Ixiii. 3. 

3. we have nothing now save the Mighty One and His law. The law was Israel’s everlasting and 
unconditional possession. Cf. Josephus, ¢. Afzon. ii. 38. The land, the sanctuary, and the kingdom of David were 
conditional (Mechilta, 68»). Cf. xviii. 22. With the law Israel could not fall. 

6. This verse is due to the final editor. } * 

7. the power of our liberty, i.e. enjoy free-will. Cf. 4 Ezra ix. 11 ; 1 Cor. vii. 37; Actsi.7; v.43 Pss. Sol: 1x. 7. 
On the doctrine see liv. 15, note. ee y, 

8. hath shown to us. In Bt Baruch does not use the plural ‘we’ and ‘us’ in this connexion. See Ixxvill. 3 note. 

9. that we may possess, c. Probably corrupt. 

rest with our fathers. Cf. xi. 4. : 

10. the youth of the world is past. Cf. 4 Ezra xiv. Io, 16 ; v. 50-66. ; esi 

12. [a place of repentance nor|. This phrase is a dittograph of what follows later. The idea is here inits wrong 
context, whereas it is in its right context later. Finally it is against the parallelism. 


279 


g 
ll BARUCH*S5. 1h28% Goa 


Nor place of repentance for the soul, 
Nor supplication for offences, 
Nor intercession of the fathers, 
Nor prayer of the prophets, 
Nor help of the righteous. 
13 There there is the sentence of corruption, 
The way of fire, 
And the path which bringeth to Gehenna. 


t4 On this account there is one law by one, 
One age and an end for all who are in it. 
15 Then He will preserve those whom He can forgive, 
And at the same time destroy those who are polluted with sins. ] 


86 1,2 When therefore ye receive this my epistle, read it in your congregations with care. And meditate 
3 thereon, above all on the days of your fasts. And bear me in mind by means of this epistle, as 
I also bear you in mind in it, and always. Fare ye well. 


LXXXVII. The Dispatch of the Letter to the Nine and a Half Tribes. 


871 And it came to pass when I had ended all the words of this epistle, and had written it sedulously 
to its close, that I folded it, and sealed it carefully, and bound it to the neck of the eagle, and dis- 
missed and sent it. 


HERE ENDS THE BOOK OF BARUCH THE SON OF NERIAH. 


nor place of repentance. 4 Ezra ix. 12. This is the universal teaching in the Books of Enoch and 4 Ezra. 
intercession of the fathers. Cf. 4 Ezra vii. 102-15 ; 2 Enoch liii. 1. 
14. one law by one. Moses is meant ; in the Ass. Mos. iii. 12, he is called the mediator of the law. Thus this 
verse is directed against Christians. It seems out of place. 


LXXXVI. 3. Fare ye well(abdefghiWP). >c 


LXXXVII. This chapter is found only in c, but it belongs to the book. Cf. Ixxvii. 17, 20-6. 
bound it to the neck of the eagle. 4 Baruch vii. 8. 


526 


THE GREEK APOCALYPSE OF BARUCH 
OR III BARUCH 


INTRODUCTION 


$1. SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE BOOK. 


UNTIL the end of the last century this apocalypse was unknown. Its existence was surmised 
from a passage in Origen (de Princip. ii. 3. 6), ‘Denique etiam Baruch prophetae librum in asser- 
tionis huius testimonium vocant, quod ibi de septem mundis vel caelis evidentius indicatur.? About 
1896 the Kev. E. C. Butler, O.S.B., drew the attention of Dr. M. R. James to a manuscript in the 
British Museum of a Greek apocalypse which answered in part to Origen’s description. It contains 
an account not of seven heavens but of five, but the conclusion is evidently incomplete, and the 
existence of other heavens is implied. This text was edited and published by Dr. James in 1897. 
A Slavonic version of the book had been known previously, and was published in the Szarine, 
vol. xviii, pp. 205-9, by Novakovic in 1886. This version, however, is less complete than the 
Greek, and mentions only two heavens. : 

Neither the Greek nor the Slavonic represents more than a condensation of the original. 

In its present form the work is a composite production, belonging to the second century A. D. 
The Jewish original has been worked over by a Christian redactor, whose purpose it is to sound 
a note of stern warning to the unconverted Jews, and also to instil into the minds of Christians the 
need of patience and forbearance in dealing with them (see § 8 below). 


§ 2. THe: TITLE. 


There are two superscriptions to the book. The first begins Aujynots kal amoxadvyis Bapovy 
xTA. 3 the second ’AmoxadAvyis Bapov>y xrA. Dr. James names it Apocalypsis Baruchi Tertia Graece, 
and it is referred to as 3 Baruch in this edition. 


$3. THE MSS. 


The only known Greek manuscript of this apocalypse is that numbered Add. 10073 in the 
British Museum, which contains in addition several other works and fragments. It is a minuscule 
MS. on Italian paper, of the beginning of the sixteenth century. The Slavonic text published by 
- Novakovic was found in a manuscript which possibly dates from the sixteenth century. This 
version is more abridged than the Greek. The main points of contact and difference between the 
two versions are indicated in the notes. 


§ 4. RELATION TO OTHER BARUCH LITERATURE. 


1. The apocryphal book of Baruch (1 Baruch). There is no point of contact between this book 

and 3 Baruch save that both raise the problem of the sufferings of Israel (cf. 1 Bar. iti. 1-8 and 
Bar. i). 
: 2 he Syriac Apocalypse of Baruch (2 Baruch). There are several similarities of expression in 
this apocalypse and our text. They are indicated in the notes. The parallelisms are not so close 
as to imply the necessary dependence of our apocalypse upon the Syriac. In 2 Baruch Ixxvi. 3, 
Baruch is promised certain cosmical revelations, but the book contains no record that the promise 
was fulfilled. It has been contended that 3 Baruch was written to supply the deficiency in 2 Baruch. 
Ginzberg (Fewish Encyclopaedia) holds it to be questionable whether the author of 3 Baruch used 
2 Baruch, and thinks that 2 Bar. Ixxvi. 3 makes against rather than for such a supposition. ‘The 
assumption is untenable that the Gk. apoc. was written to show the actual fulfilment of the promise. 
The critical point in the Syr. apoc. lies in this chapter, when Baruch before leaving the earth obtains 
a full survey of it, that he may see what he is leaving, and whither he is going. This idea is based 
upon an opinion held by Akiba b. Joseph (Szfre Nam. 136) and others, that God allowed not only 
rial 


Ill BARUCH 


Moses, but other favoured pious men, to behold before their death the whole world and all the 
mysteries of nature. Now if the Gk. apoc. was complementary to the Syriac, the author of the 
former would not have failed to join his story of Baruch’s passage through the heavens to that of his 
last act on earth,’ Anat ; roan 

3. The Rest of the Words of Baruch (4 Baruch), In the Christian interpolation as to the vine in 
3 Bar. iv occurs 76 muxpov TovTov peraBAnOjoerar ely yAvKd, which recalls ra yAvkéa toata GApupa 
yeryoovta in 4 Bar. ix. 16. But this cannot be held to be a very close parallelism. In ch. xi of our 
apocalypse Michael is called 6 kAedovxos THs BaciWelas TOV olpavGyv and in 4 Bar. ix. 5 (Aeth.) he is 
described as the archangel who holds open the gates of righteousness until the righteous enter in. 
The closest references to 4 Baruch in 3 Baruch are in the superscription, in which mention is made of 
the long sleep of Abimelech in the Garden of Agrippa (cf. 4 Bar. iii. g-v. 30). But it is impossible to 
avoid the suspicion that the superscription is a later addition, especially as it is in the third person, 
whereas ch. i is in the first. 


§ 5. RELATION TO OTHER APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE, 


1, Slavonic Enoch. ‘There is a very close connexion between 2 Enoch xi-xv and 3 Bar. vi—ix. 
In each case there is a reference to the chariot of the sun and of the moon, the attendant angels, the 
renewing of the sun’s crown. 2 En. contains the only reference in literature to the existence of 
more than one phoenix at a time, and associates with them other birds called chalkydri. In 3 Baruch 
there is only one phoenix, and it, in language like that of the birds in 2 En. xv. 1 f,, sings ‘ Light- 
giver, give to the world radiance.’ 

2. Apoc. Pault. The reference to the defilement of the sun by the unrighteousness of men 
(3 Bar. viii) finds a parallel in Apoc. Pauli 4 ‘Multum etenim sol quidem, luminare magnum, 
interpellauit dominum dicens: Domine deus omnipotens, ego prospicio super impietates et iniusticias 
hominum: permitte me et faciam eis (quae) sunt virtutes meae, ut cognoscant quia tu es solus deus. 
Et facta est uox ad eum dicens: Haec omnia noui; oculus enim meus uidit et auris audit, sed 
paciencia mea sustinet eos, dum ad usque conuertentes peniteantur. Sin uero non reuertuntur ad me 
omnes ego iudicabo.’ 

Chs. xii and xiii of our apoc. find a close parallel in chs. 7-10 of Apoc. Pauli (see note below 
under ch. xii). James thinks it likely that Afoc. Pauli is a pasticcio of a rather late date. The 
relation of the two books to each other is not clear. It is not likely that 3 Baruch has been altered to 
bring it into conformity with Afoc. Pauli, for as we shall endeavour to show (see § 8 below), the three 
classes of angels with their respectively full, half-full, and empty baskets were essential to the purpose 
of the Christian redactor. It is not improbable that the motive which induced him to work over this 
apocalypse to give it a Christian form is to be found in the didactic use he could make of this 
incident. Either then the passage in Agoc. Pauli is derived from 3 Baruch, or both are taken from 
a common source. 

3. A few points of contact with the Story of Zosimas (Apoc. Anecdota 1) are indicated in the 
notes. They are not such as to imply necessary dependence. 


§ 6. COMPOSITE NATURE OF THE TEXT. 


The framework of this apocalypse is characteristically Jewish. The story that the vine was the 
forbidden tree, the cosmic revelations, showing kinship with the Enoch literature, and the angelology 
—all mark it out as a work of Jewish origin. The hand of a Christian redactor can be traced in 
certain interpolations. In ch. iv a long passage is introduced to reconcile the story that the vine 
was the forbidden tree with the use of wine in the Eucharist. This section is full of Christian 
phrases (see notes). The Editor’s influence is most evident in the concluding chapters (xi—xvii). 
The original conclusion is missing from our text, and these chapters probably represent a somewhat 
drastic treatment of the groundwork. It is probable that we have to deal here not merely with 
interpolations, but with a partial reconstruction of the text. So far as possible the influence of the 
redactor is indicated in the notes. 

__ James attributes the lists of sins in chs. iv, viii, xiii to Christian influence, and compares them 
with Matt. xv. 19 and Gal. v. 21 (cf. also Rom. i. 29-31). It may of course be so, but it is not 
a necessary assumption. The lists are by no means the same. Our apocalypse does not reproduce 
the order of either Matt. or Paul, and it omits some of the sins enumerated by them. It must be 
admitted, however, that all included in the lists of 3 Baruch occur in some form in the Pauline Epistles 
(except javre(a). But on the other hand it must be remembered that such lists were part of the 
stock-in-trade of the Jewish, and indeed of other ancient writers, Te Lests. of the Twelve Patri- 

528 


INTRODUCTION 


archs speak of spirits of wopvetas, amAnotelas yaorpds, waxns, dpeckelas Kal payyavelas, bmepnpavetas, 
Wevdous, ddixias (T. Reub. iii. 3-6) ; 108 Cjdov kal ris ddaovetas (T. Dan. i. 6) ; ris tAdvys Kal Tod POdvov 
(T. Sim. iii. 1) ; rod Oxpod (T. Dan. ii. 4); émOvuias, Tupdcews, dowrias, aloxpoxepdias (T. Jud. xvi. 1). 
There are also similar lists in Wisd. xiv. 25 f. atua cal pédvos, kAom Kal dddos, POopd, amoria, Tdpaxos, 
emopkia . . . poixela cal doédyea; and in 2 En. x. 4, sodomy, witchcraft, enchantments, devilish 
magic, stealing, lying, calumnies, envy, evil thoughts, fornication, and murder. 

Deissman (Light from the Ancient East, pp. 320 ff.) contends that the Primitive Christian lists 
of virtues and vices were based on Jewish and pagan series. He refers to counters used in an ancient 
game, which have been discovered, upon which are inscribed a large number of popular names of 
vices and virtues. ‘ Although we have not yet recovered all the counters necessary for the game 
. . . the parallels with St. Paul strike us immediately. Take for instance the list of vices in 1 Cor. 
vi. 9,10. With the exception of “ covetous”’, which is rather colourless, and “ idolaters ”, which is not 
to be expected in a pagan list, all these will be found substantially word for word on the counters,’ 
He also points to some striking parallels between the lists in St. Paul and Plautus. 


6755 LHe AUEHOR. 


Ginzberg (Fewesk Encyc.) is of opinion that the author was a Jewish Gnostic of the beginning 
of the second century, ‘ when gnosis was at its height both among Jews and Christians’. He bases 
his view upon the mediatorial functions ascribed to Michael and his angels, and upon the traces of 
Greek and Oriental mythology found in the Apocalypse. But it is difficult to discern Gnostic 
influences in the teaching as to mediation, since it shows little advance on Tobit and T. Levi (see 
§ 10 below, and note on ch. xii).. But if there is not sufficient evidence to show that the author was 
a Gnostic, it is clear that his Judaism was tempered by a Hellenic-Oriental syncretism. 


§ 8. THE CHRISTIAN REDACTOR. 


Apart from the interpolation as to the vine, the hand of the Christian redactor is most evident 
in the concluding chapters. It is said of the men committed to the charge of the angels who bring 
empty baskets, that they will not enter the Church, nor among spiritual fathers (ch. xiii) ; they are 
to be ‘ provoked against a people that is no people, a people that has no understanding’; they are 
‘despisers of God’s commandments, and insolent towards the priests who proclaim God’s words to 
them’ (ch. xvi). The Slavonic says: ‘They donot gather together in the church of God for the sake 
of prayer, and instead of prayer they bring cursings.’ It is difficult to avoid the suspicion that in 
each case the reference is to the Jews. Their provocation ‘against a people that is no people’ when 
read in the light of Rom. x. 19 can only refer to the anger of the Jews against the Gentile Christians. 
To whom is the phrase ‘ instead of prayer they bring cursings’ so applicable as to the Jews? 

4 Baruch like 3 Baruch seems to be in part at any rate a Jewish work recast by a Christian editor. 
According to Dr. Rendel Harris the former was issued in its present form soon after A.D. 136 
as an eirenicon to the synagogue after Hadrian’s edict banishing the Jews from Jerusalem. It was in 
effect an invitation to the Jews to evade that edict by submitting to baptism and joining the church, 
since the edict did not apply to Christians. According to Dr. Harris the book reflects a conflict 
between the old school of Jews and the Gentile Christians for the possession of the intermediate 
party, the Judaeo-Christians of various types. ‘What makes one a little more confident in this 
interpretation that it was an appeal on the part of the Gentile Christians, or at least of the Gentilizing 
Christians to the more conservative, half-convinced among their Jewish brethren, is that we find from 
the account that some undecided people in the middle ground came part way to Jerusalem, and then 
returned ; and that on their returning to Babylon they were received with an intimation that as they 
had secretly departed from them, they would not be received again: Babylon would have none of 
them. This, according to the story, leads to the formation of a new colony which is derisively called 
Samaria. Now this is not difficult of interpretation, if we imagine that there were those who had 
gone so far from Judaism as to provoke an edict against their being received again into ecclesiastical 
fellowship,‘and yet had not come so near to Christianity as to be able to pass the baptismal standards. 
In this case, then, one result of the Hadrian edict is the formation of a new Ebionite movement in 
Palestine. This exactly agrees with the statements of Epiphanius and Jerome as to the origin of 
Ebionism ; they attempted to be both Jews and Christians, and ended by being neither’ (Kest of the 

Baruch, p. 15). 
ee were eas three parties in the writer's mind, the Jews who stubbornly resisted the 
Gospel, the middle party of waverers, and the Christians. It seems to me that the same parties are 
reflected in 3 Baruch. The angels with the full baskets represent the Christians (ch. xii) ; cae with 

1105.2 , 529 


III BARUCH 


the half-full baskets the half-converted Jews (ch. xii); and those with the empty baskets the Jews 
who stubbornly resisted and opposed the Gospel (chs. xiii, xvi). _ Ch. xvi (especially in the Slavonic) 
exhorts the angels to be patient with Israel, and at the same time announces terrible judgements 
against the people if they continue unrepentant. The purpose of the Christian redactor was there- 
fore to appeal to the church for patience and long-suffering in their endeavour to convert the Jews, 
and also to utter a note of stern warning to the Jews themselves. 


§9. THE DATE. 


The limits within which our Apocalypse must have been written are, on the one hand, 2 Enoch 
(A.D. I-50), of whose influence it bears traces, and, on the other hand, Origen, who describes it. If 
the reference to Abimelech’s long sleep, in the superscription, occurred in the original, then it must 
be dated subsequent to 4 Baruch (A.D. 136). But as we have seen, it is possible that the superscription 
is a later addition. We shall probably not err in dating the original 3 Baruch near the beginning 
of the second century, especially as its syncretism harmonizes with the tendency of that age. 

The data for determining the date of the Christian redaction are even fewer, for as the 
Apocalypse which Origen saw contained an account of seven heavens, the passage in de Princip. 
does not fix a zerminus ad quem for our form of the text. But since (as shown in § 7 above), like 
4 Baruch, its motive seems to be the conversion of Jews and Ebionites, it is probable that the same 
circumstances called it forth, and that it was written soon after A.D. 136. The suggestion may be 
hazarded that the superscription referring to Abimelech was added by the Christian redactor as 
a result of his acquaintance with 4 Baruch. 

On the other hand, it must be admitted that rvevuartixots marépas and tepevds, as applied to a 
Christian minister, are undoubtedly later expressions, but it is possible that a later editor or 
scribe is responsible for them. 


§ 10. THEOLOGY OF THE BOOK. 


1. The Seven Heavens. Traces of the belief in a plurality of heavens are to be found in the 
O.T. (Deut. x. 14, 1 Kings viii. 27, Ps. exlviii. 4), and more clearly in the N.T. (2 Cor. xii. 2, 
Eph. i.:3,.20, 4. 6/411. to, vi. 12.5 Heb..av., 4.0 vil. 26). The conception is found in Babylonian, 
Parsee, and Greek thought, as well as in apocalyptic and Rabbinic literature. It also appears in 
early Christian writings. The subject is treated at length in its relation to Greek, Oriental, Jewish, 
and Christian literature in Charles’s Book of the Secrets of Enoch (pp. xxx-xlvii), and by Salmond 
in Hastings’ D. B. (ii. 321-3). It will suffice here to indicate the teaching of apocalyptic and 
Rabbinic literature on the subject. 

Lhe Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs. The account is found in T. Levi ii. 7-11. 8, which 
contains several redactions of the original text. Charles is of opinion that the original description 
of three heavens has been transformed into a description of the seven. 

The First Heaven. The waters above the firmament, and the treasuries of fire, ice, and snow. 
It is a gloomy place and contains the instruments for the punishment of wicked men (a). 

Lhe Second Heaven. Characterized by brightness. Abode of the angels who are to destroy 
the hosts of Belial (a). Treasuries of fire, snow, and ice (A’a, 6, ALG; 'S?): 

The Third Heaven. Angelic armies who are to destroy the hosts of Belial (8, A B, S}). 

The Fourth Heaven. ‘Thrones and dominions’ who sing praise to God. 

The fifth Heaven. Angels who carry up men’s prayers to the angels of the presence, 

The Sixth Heaven. Archangels who make propitiation to God for the sins of men. 

The Seventh Heaven. The abode of God. 

2 Enoch. 

The First Heaven. Great sea. 
and their guardians (iii—vi), 

Lhe Second Heaven. Darkness. Imprisoned angels awaiting judgement (vii). 

The Third Heaven. Paradise prepared for the righteous ; and, on the north, Hell for the 
wicked (viii-x). Cf. 2.Cor. xii. 2-4. 

The Fourth Heaven. Sun, moon, and attendant angels; phoenixes and chalkidri. 
host of angels praising God (xi-xvii), 

The Fifth Heaven. The Watchers whose brethren are imprisoned in the Second Heaven (A). 
Great hosts (B), 

The Sixth Heaven. 
men (xix). 


Rulers of the stars. Treasuries of snow, ice, clouds, and dew 


An armed 


Seven bands of angels, set over the works of creation, and the souls of 


530 


INTRODUCTION 


Lhe Seventh Heaven. Abode of God and the archangels (xx), 

Ascension of Isaiah. Sammael and his angels are located in the firmament. Then follow six 
heavens, each with a throne and angels increasing in glory with each successive heaven. Isaiah is 
transfigured as he ascends from heaven to heaven. The seventh heaven is the abode of God and all 
the righteous. Here too are stored the garments of the saints (vii-xi; cf. iv. 14 ff.). 

3 Baruch. 

The First Heaven. A plain. The builders of the Tower of Babel. 

The Second Heaven. A plain. The designers of the Tower of Babel. 

The Third Heaven. A great serpent. Hades. Sun, moon, and attendant angels. The 
Phoenix. 

The Fourth Heaven. Plain. A pool. Birds (= souls of the righteous) singing praise to God. 

The Fifth Heaven. Michael receives men’s prayers from the angels. There is a suggestion of 
other heavens beyond. 

Chagigah 12. The Seven Heavens are enumerated according to name. 

Vilon serves no purpose whatever, save that it enters in the morning and goes forth in the 
evening, and renews every day the work of creation. 

Rakia is that in which are set sun and moon, stars and constellations. 

Shechakim is that in which the millstones stand, which grind manna for the righteous. 

Z bul contains the heavenly Jerusalem and the Temple. The altar is built there, and Michael 
offers sacrifice upon it. 

Makhon contains the treasuries of hail, the high dwelling-place of harmful dews, the chamber 
of the whirlwind and of the storm, and the retreat of noisome vapour. And their doors are made 
of fire. 

Araboth is that in which are righteousness, judgement, and grace; the treasuries of life and peace 
and blessing ; the souls of the righteous; the spirits and souls which are about to be created; and 
the dew with which the Holy One is about to quicken mortals. There are also celestials and 
seraphs, and holy beings and ministering angels, and the throne of glory and the King, the 
Living God. 

2. Doctrine of the Mediation of Angels. Perhaps the most characteristic doctrinal feature of 
this Apoc. is its teaching as to the mediation of Angels (xi—xvii). There are traces of this doctrine 
in the O.T. (Gen. xvi. 7 ff., xxi. 17 ff, xxviii. 12). There was a great development in Israel’s 
angelology in post-exilic days (Is. Ixiii.9, Dan. x. 13, 21, xii. 1). This was due to three causes: 
(2) Advancing ideas of the Divine transcendence, and a growing feeling against anthropomorphic 
conceptions of God. () ‘A tendency to personify abstract conceptions such as the “spirit” of 
a nation, and a further tendency to locate these personified forces in the supersensible world, from 
whence they ruled the destinies of men’ (Davidson). (c) The stimulus of contact with Persian 
thought. The seven archangels, e.g., are connected with the Zoroastrian Amesha Spentas. It is 
important to notice, however, that there is only one clear instance in the O.T. of angels interceding 
on behalf of men (Zech. i. 12). They are the messengers of God to man, not of man to God. 

But the belief in the mediation of angels was not by any means universally accepted in post- 
exilic times. P never mentions angels, nor do they play a prominent part in the Apocrypha. 
Tobit, a book which bears evident marks of Persian influence, refers to the intercession of Raphael 
(iii. 16f, xii. 12, 15). The mediation of a supernatural being is referred to in 2 Macc. xv. 12-15, 
but he is not called an angel. There is a marked dearth of references to angels in the other 
apocryphal books. In 4 Ezra (vii. 102 ff.) mediation of any kind is explicitly denied. It is only 
when we turn to the Pseudepigrapha that we find a highly developed doctrine of angels. Among 
the passages which explicitly teach angelic mediation are Eth. En. ix. 3 ff, xv. 2, xl. 6, xlvii. 2, 
xcix. 2,16, civ. 1; T. Levi iii. 5; Test. Abraham xiv. The subject is treated at. length in Oesterley, 
Sewish Doctrines of Mediation, pp. 37-44. See, too, notes below on chs. i, ii, xi, xii 

According to A. xxxiii. 8 the Sadducees denied the existence of angels. It is difficult to know 
how this is to be interpreted, since they received the written Scriptures. It may be, as Davidson 
suggests, that ‘they interpreted the angelophanies of the written Scriptures received by them in 
a rational way as personified natural forces.’ The Essenes held exaggerated doctrines on the 
subject. The Pharisees appear to have held a middle position, but it must be remembered that 
Pharisaism is a wide term, and that in all probability Eth. En. (in part), and the Zests. of the Twelve 
Patriarchs emanated from Pharisaic circles. 

The N.T. reflects the current angelology, but its whole tendency is opposed to the conception 
of the mediation of angels. This idea occurs, however, in Rev. viii. 3. Swete is of opinion that the 
reference is the same in Heb. i. 14. ; 

The only advance in our Apocalypse is in the introduction of the three classes of ere who 

93 m 


Il BARUCH 


intercede for three classes of men. In other respects its doctrine does not differ from that of 
1 Enoch, Tobit, and Test. Levi, and it cannot therefore be said that it marks an advance in the 
direction of Gnosticism. It is true that underlying 3 Baruch there is an advanced conception of the 
divine transcendence. At no point in the narrative is the veil that hides God lifted, and we are not 
permitted to behold even Michael’s communion with Him. In 1 Macc. God is even more remote, 
for His transcendence is modified by no angelic mediation. Doctrines of the mediation of angels 
owed their origin in part to a feeling that such teaching was one-sided, and closed the door to 
communion with God. Gnosticism was an elaborate attempt to bring a transcendent God into some 
sort of touch with the world, through a hierarchy of mediators. But such teaching as appears in 
3 Baruch does not go beyond beliefs that were current in some Jewish circles. 

3. The Fall. The forbidden tree was the vine, which the angel Sammael planted (see notes 
below on ch. iv). As in Wisd. (ii. 24) and 2 En. (xxxi. 3) Adam’s disobedience is due to the 
Devil, who is prompted by envy. Too much must not be deduced from a writer’s silence, but it 
may be noted that 3 Baruch does not enumerate inherited depravity and death among the consequences 
of the Fall, Adam ‘obtained condemnation, and was divested of the glory of God’. His 
descendants suffer in so far as they are participators in the same sin, and those which spring from it, 
‘the men who now drink insatiably ... transgress worse than Adam, and are far from the glory of 
God, and are surrendering themselves to the eternal fire.’ This is not unlike the teaching of 2 Baruch, 
‘Adam is therefore not the cause save only of his own soul, but each one of us has been the Adam 
of his own soul’ (liv. 19). 


§ 11. BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


The Greek text is edited (with an introduction) by Dr. M. R. James in Cambridge Zexts an? Studies, vol. v, No.1, 
Apocrypha Anecdota, iii, 1897. A German translation, with introduction and notes by Ryssel, is included in Kautzsch, 
Die Apok. und Pseudep. des A. T. ii. 446-57, 1900. The Slavonic version was published in the Szarine, vol. xviii, 
pp- 205-9, 1886, and a German translation (with introduction) by Prof. Bonwetsch appeared in 1896 in the Wachrichten 
der K, Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Gottingen, Heft i. An English translation of this version, by Mr. Morfill, 
appears in Cambridge Zexts and Studies, v. 1. 

The article of Ginzberg on this Apocalypse in the Jewish Encyclopaedia, and that of Zenos in Hastings’ D. C. 
and G. (i. 86f.), should be read. 


532 


BaP Tok BE APOGALYPSE OF BARUCH 
ORD BARUCH 


Prologue. 


xr <A narrative and revelation of Baruch, concerning those ineffable things which he saw by com- 
mand of God. Bless Thou, O Lord. 


2 A revelation of Baruch, who stood upon the river + Gel + weeping over the captivity of 
3 Jerusalem, when also Abimelech was preserved by the hand of God, at the farm of Agrippa. And 
he was sitting thus at the beautiful gates, where the Holy of holies lay. 
1 Verily I Baruch was weeping in my mind and sorrowing on account of the people, and that 
2 Nebuchadnezzar the king was permitted by God to destroy His city, saying: Lord, why didst Thou 
set on fire Thy vineyard, and lay it waste? Why didst Thou do this? And why, Lord, didst Thou 
not requite us with another chastisement, but didst deliver us to nations such as these, so that they 
3 reproach us and say, Where is their God? And behold as I was weeping and saying such things, 
I saw an angel of the Lord coming and saying to me: Understand, O man, greatly beloved, and’ 
trouble not thyself so greatly concerning the salvation of Jerusalem, for thus saith the Lord God, 
4the Almighty. For He sent me before thee, to make known and to show to thee all (the things) 
5, 6 of God. For thy prayer was heard before Him, and entered into the ears of the Lord God. And 
when he had said these things to me, I was silent. And the angel said to me: Cease to provoke 
7 God, and I will show thee other mysteries, greater than these. And I Baruch said, As the Lord 
God liveth, if thou wilt show me, and I hear a word of thine, I will not continue to speak any longer. 
8 God shall add to my judgement in the day of judgement, if I speak hereafter. And the angel of 
the powers said to me, Come, and I will show thee the mysteries of God. 


PROLOGUE. 2. Gel. James suggests that Kedron is meant. ‘Part of the word has gone and KEA- has passed 
Into WAS Gt. 2 Barav. 5 > Xxi. 1 3 sad. 2. 

Abimelech was preserved. See 4 Bar. ili. 9-v. 30, where it is recorded that Abimelech fell asleep in the garden 
of Agrippa at the time of the destruction of Jerusalem, and did not awake for sixty-six years. 

the farm of Agrippa. Rendel Harris (Rest of the Words of Baruch, p. 12) identifies this with the fertile valley 
below Solomon’s Pools, known as Solomon’s Gardens. See Josephus, Av. viii. 7. 3, ‘There was a certain place about 
fifty furlongs distant from Jerusalem, which is called Etham, very pleasant it is in fine gardens, and abounding in 
rivulets of water; thither did he (Solomon) use to go out in the morning.’ Cf. Eccles. ii. 5 f. 

3. the beautiful gates. Cf. 2 Bar.x.5; also Josephus, B. /. v. 5. 3, ‘There was one gate that was without [the 
inward court of] the holy house, which was of Corinthian brass, and greatly excelled those that were only covered 
with silver and gold.’ Cf. Acts iii. 2. 

where the Holy of holies lay. James holds that the words érov ékero ra tév ayioy aya allude to the hiding 
of the sacred vessels (2 Macc. ii. 1-8; 2 Bar. vi. 7-10; 4 Bar. iii. 7 f.). It is better, however, to translate it as above. 
Cf. 2 Bar. xxxiv ‘I will . . . go unto the Holy of Holies to enquire of the Mighty One concerning you, and concerning 
Zion, if in some respect I should receive more illumination.’ 


I. 1. sorrowing. Ryssel (in Kautzsch) reads revOav for éxov. Cf. 2 Bar. vi. 25 x. 55 XXXv. I. 
2. Thy vineyard. Cf. Isa. v.13; 4 Ezra v. 23. a 
For similar laments cf. 1 Bar. iii. 1-8; Pss. Sol. vii. 1-3; 2 Bar. iii. 5 f.; v.13 xiv. 5 f.; 4 Ezra iii. 28f.; v. 28f. 

3. O man, greatly beloved, dvep émiOupséy. The phrase occurs in Dan. x. 11 f. (Theodot.), } 

6. other mysteries. Either some previous revelations have dropped out, or, as James suggests, the phrase is an 
assimilation to the words of the angel in chapters ii and v. : 

7. I will not continue to speak. The Slavonic forbids Baruch to add a word to the revelation, but the context 
makes it clear that rpoc@jow is here to be translated as above. ; ee : ee 

the day of judgement. 4 jé<pa rijs xpicews is not necessarily a Christian phrase. It occurs in T. Levi ili. 3; 

Pss. Sol. xv. 13; 1 Enoch (Giz. Gk.) x. 6; xxii. 11. See too Jub. iv. 19; 2 Enoch xxxix.1; 4 Ezra vii. 102, 113; 
xii. 34 (dées iudici/). Ginzberg (/£) says that j'79 DY is an expression which occurs more frequently in Rabbinic 
literature than in the N.T. ; : i 

8. angel of the powers. This phrase occurs in 1 En. (G8!) xx. 15 cf. I En. Ixi. To. Michael is called 
apxiorparnyos trav tivo dvvdyeov in Test. Abraham xiv. In 2 Thess. i. 7 we find dyyéov duvdpews, which is taken by 
some to refer to the angels set over the cosmic forces. There is a striking passage in Philo which seems to throw 
light on the subject. ‘There is only one God, but this one God has about Him innumerable powers as helpers and 
saviours of all created existences. Among them are punitive powers. . . . By these powers the incorporeal intelligible 
world was built. . . . There is, moreover, in the air a high and holy choir of incorporeal souls in attendance upon the 
heavenly powers—angels as the prophetic Scriptures are accustomed to call them. . . . The King communes with 
His powers, and uses them as His servants, for the performance of such duties as are not appropriate to God Himself 
(De Confus. ling. xxxiv). The six highest powers are Divine Logos, Creative Power, Sovereign Power, Mercy, 
Legislation, and Punitive Power (De profugis, xviii. See Pfleiderer, Prim. Christianity, iii. 41 f.). As Philo identifies 


533 


III BARUCH 2. 1—3. 5 


The First Heaven. 


2:1 And he took me and led me where the firmament has been set fast, and where there was a river 

2 which no one can cross, nor any strange breeze of all those which God created. And he took me 

and led me to the first heaven, and showed me a door of great size. And he said to me, Let us enter 

3 through it, and we entered as though dorne on wings, a distance of about thirty days’ journey. And 

he showed me within the heaven a plain; and there were men dwelling thereon, with the faces of 

4 oxen, and the horns of stags, and the feet of goats, and the haunches of lambs. And I Baruch asked 

the angel, Make known to me, I pray thee, what is the thickness of the heaven in which we journeyed, 

5 or what is its extent, or what is the plain, in order that I may also tell the sons of men? And the 

angel whose name is {Phamael} said to me: This door which thou seest is the door of heaven, and 

as great as is the distance from earth to heaven, so great also is its thickness : and again as great as 

is the distance (from North to South, so great) is the length of the plain which thou didst see. 

And again the angel of the powers said to me, Come, and I will show thee greater mysteries. But 

6, 7 I said, I pray thee show me what are these men. And he said to me, These are they who built 
the tower of strife against God, and the Lord banished them. 


The Second Heaven. 


31 And the angel of the Lord took me and led me to a second heaven. And he showed me there 
2 also a door like the first and said, Let us enter through it. And we entered, being borne on wings 
3 a distance of about sixty days’ journey. And he showed me there also a plain, and it was full of 
4 men, whose appearance was like that of dogs, and whose feet were like those of stags. And I asked 
5 the angel: I pray thee, Lord, say to me who are these. And he said, These are they who gave 


Michael and the Logos (Quzs rer. div. haeres, xlii), it is probable that the Philonic powers correspond with the 
archangels. ( ; 

Pfleiderer (of. c¢., p. 43) thinks that the six Philonic powers are ultimately derived from ‘the six Amesha Spentas 
which surround the throne of Ahura Mazda, among whom the three chief are Vohu Mano, the Divine Logos; Asha 
Vahista, the Highest Righteousness; and Kshathra Vairya, the kingdom of Good-will—representatives, that is, of 
creative intelligence, power, and goodness, just as the highest Powers of Philo are.’ 


II. 1. where the firmament has been set fast. Cf. 1 En. xviii. 5 3 XXXL 2. 2, M 
a river. According to James this river is the Ocean (Apoc. Pauli xxi; xxxi; Test. Abr. B viii; 1 En. xvii. 5 tf.) 


But Ginzberg (/Z) holds that it is Dshoyn Dy) (the upper waters), and quotes in support Gen. R. iv. 3 and 


Chag. He oe pA > o rad 2) 9: ~ > ‘ , CLy: A 7 / , ‘ 

no one can cross. Cf. Zos. ii ov dvvacar SiehOeiv dV epod" od yap Sivara 6 dvOpwmos ra Bard pou OvaxkdWar .. . Kat 
> la ’ ~ / a ‘ > / > ‘ sas /| > NERS 
civev 7 vepérn’ Zaooe . . . Ov ewod od drépxerae merewov ex Tod Kégpov TovTOV, ovdE TON Gvéuov Ovde adros 6 HALOS, OVE 6 


metpatov ev TO Kdo Ho ToUT@ Sivarat SiedOciv Ov epod. -k 
breeze. The above passage from Zos. makes it likely that mvof is to be translated ‘ breeze’ here, and not ‘ living 
creature’ as in ch, viii, and in Ps. cl. 6 (LXX). 
2. the first heaven. See Introd. $ 10 (1). 
adoor. Cf. Ps. Ixxviii.23; Rev.iv.1. In 2 En. xiii. 8 the gates through which the sun goes forth are mentioned. 
as though borne on wings. Cf. Zos. ii; 1 En. xiv. 8. 
3. a plain. Cf. Zos. iii. 
men... lambs. Ginzberg (/Z) says this means they were transformed into demons (Sanh. Icga). For 
this reason they are not in the place of torment, which is in the third heaven, but at the entrance to heaven 
(Chag. 16a). 

5. Phamael. This is corrupt. The Slavonic preserves the true reading ‘ Phanuel’. According to 1 En. xl, he is one 
of the four angels of the presence who stand on the four sides of the Lord of Spirits, Michael, Raphael, Gabriel, and 
Phanuel. He is ‘set over the repentance and hope of those who inherit eternal life’. But in 1 En. (Giz. Gk.) ix. 1 
Uniel is mentioned in place of Phanuel. James thinks there is the bare possibility that he is to be identified with 
Ramiel, who appears in 1 En. (Giz. Gk.) xx. 7, and in 2 Bar. ly, 3 is described as presiding over true visions, which 
agrees with the description of Baruch’s angel in 3 Bar. xi, as ‘ the interpreter of the revelations, to those who pass 
through life virtuously’. Ramiel is also mentioned in 4 Ezra iv. 36 (Lat. Heremihel); and in Sib. Or. ii. 215-17 
he is said to be one of the five angels who know all the evils that men have wrought, and ‘ shall from dark gloom then 
lead to judgement all the souls of men, before the judgement-seat of the great God immortal’. Ryssel points out that 
the form Eremiel appears in the Apoc. of Sophonias. 

the distance from earth to heaven. Cf. Chag. ‘And is not from the earth to the firmament a journey of five 
hundred years, and so too the interspace of the firmaments ?? 

{from ... great). James supplies dé Boppa €ws vdtov, rowovror. 

length of the plain. Cf. Apoc. Pauli 32. 

7. James points out a parallel to this story in the Book of Jashar (Migne, Dict. des Apocryphes, ii. 1107 f.). There 
were three classes of builders. One said, ‘Let us ascend and fight against heaven’; these were dispersed. The 
second said, ‘ Let us go up and set our gods in heaven’ ; these were changed into monkeys and baboons. The third 
said, ‘ Let us go up and smite heaven with our bows and arrows’ ; these slew each other. 


III. 1. asecond heaven. See Introd. § 10 (1). 
§- gave counsel. Cf. Mark iii. 6, where cupBovAcoy diddvar = ‘to take counsel’. 


534 


III BARUCH 8. 5—4. 8 


counsel to build the tower, for they whom thou seest drove forth multitudes of both men and women 
to make bricks ; among whom, a woman making bricks was not allowed to be released in the hour 
of child-birth, but brought forth while she was making bricks, and carried her child in her apron, and 
6 continued to make bricks. And the Lord appeared to them and confused their speech, when they 
7 had built the tower to che height of four hundred and sixty-three cubits. And they took a gimlet 
and sought to pierce the heaven, saying, Let us see (whether) the heaven is made of clay, or of 
8 brass, or of iron. When God saw this He did not permit them, but smote them with blindness and 
confusion of speech, and rendered them as thou seest. 


The Third Heaven. 


41 And I Baruch said, Behold, Lord, Thou didst show me great and wonderful things; and now 
2 show me all things for the sake of the Lord. And the angel said to me, Come, let us proceed. 
(And I proceeded) with the angel from that place about one hundred and eighty-five days’ 
3 journey. And he showed me a plain and a serpent, which appeared to be two hundred plethra 
4in length. And he showed me Hades, and its appearance was dark and abominable. And I said, 
5 Who is this dragon, and who is this monster around him? And the angel said, The dragon is he 
6 who eats the bodies of those who spend their life wickedly, and he is nourished by them. And 
this is Hades, which itself also closely resembles him, in that it also drinks about a cubit from 
7 the sea, which does not sink at all. Baruch said, And how (does this happen)? And the 
angel said, Hearken, the Lord God made three hundred and sixty rivers, of which the chief of 
gall are Alphias, Abyrus, and the Gericus ; and because of these the sea does not sink. And I said, 
I pray thee show me which is the tree which led Adam astray. And the angel said to me, It 
is the vine, which the angel Sammael planted, whereat the Lord God was angry, and He cursed 
him and his plant, while also on this account He did not permit Adam to touch it, and therefore 


a woman... child-birth. Ginzberg (/Z£) refers to a similar Rabbinic legend about a woman in Egypt 
(Pirke R. El. xlviii). 


IV. 2. let us proceed.. There is no mention here of entry into a third heaven, and when the next heaven is 
entered in ch. x, the scribe has changed its number from fourth to third, as is evident from the fact that in ch. xi the 
fifth heaven is mentioned. At what point in the narrative is the entry made into the third heaven? In ch. vii the 
angel says to Baruch, ‘All that I showed thee is in the first and second heaven, and in the third heaven the sun 
passes through, and gives light to the world.’ It would harmonize with this to place the entry into the third heaven 
at the commencement of ch. vi. But against this is the fact that Hades (ch. iv) is usually located in the third heaven 
(cf. 2 En.). It seems best therefore to follow James in placing the transition here. It should be noted that the 
Slavonic account of the third heaven shows fewer signs of mutilation than the Greek. 

3. aserpent. The relation of the dragon to Hades is not clear. Here they seem to be separate, but in ch. v they 
are united. The closest parallel is to be found in the Pistis Sophia, p. 319, which says ‘ caligo externa magnus dpdkoy 
est, cuius cauda in suo ore est extra xécpoy totum, et circumdat kéopoy totum’, There are said to be within this 
dragon twelve places of chastisement, where souls are tormented (James, p. Ixi). The Slavonic reads ‘So the angel 
took me to the light, a journey of thirty-two days, and showed me a great field; the mind of man could not comprehend 
it; and in that field there was a very great mountain, and on it lay a serpent as from the East to the West, and it bent 
down, drinking from the sea every day'a cubit, and ate the earth like grass. And I Baruch said to the angel: My 
Lord, why does this serpent drink from the sea a cubit during the day, and how is it that the sea does not become 
scanty? And the angel said to me: Listen, Baruch, God made three hundred three and thirty great rivers ... There 
are many other great rivers, and they all go into the sea, and the sea is filled. On account of this God made this 
serpent, and ordered it to drink of the sea a cubit a day, so that the sea should not increase nor diminish’. 

4. this monster around him. tis 6 epi avroy dmnvys; James thinks this may be corrupt and that the dragon 
encircled Hades, and not vice versa. 

5. Cf. Greek goblin Eurynomus. ¢ ; 

6. which does not sink at all. Lit. ‘and nothing is lacking from it’. aut : ays 

7, the Gericus. James suggests that Gericus = yupixds = the Ocean; but this is hardly likely in view of the fact 
that it is mentioned as one of the rivers which supply the sea. The Slavonic speaks of three hundred and thirty-three 
rivers, and mentions Aphia, Avaria, Agorenik, Dunav, Ephrat, Asavat, Zietnust, Ineus, Tigris. ; 

8. the tree which led Adam astray. The transition is sudden, but there may be a hiatus in the narrative. Baruch 
is still in the third heaven where Paradise was placed, and by now the angel may have shown him it. In the Slavonic 
the story of the vine does not break into the description of the dragon, but comes after it. : ars, 

the vine. For the conception of the vine as the forbidden tree cf. Sanh. 70a; Gen. Rabb. xix. 8. (See art. ‘Vine’, 
JE.) it is related of Shamdon (Asmodeus) that at the planting of the first vine by Noah,-he helped with the work 
and said to Noah: ‘I want to join in your labour and share with you; but take heed that I take not of your portion, 
lest I do you harm’ (Gen. R. xxxvi. 3; see art. ‘ Demonology’, /Z). The story does not occur elsewhere in the exact 
form of that of the text. ; d ue ra : , 

the angel Sammael (i.e. bya), Greek Sapound. . Slavonic reads ‘ Satanil’ (cf. 2 En. xvill, 3, xxix. 4f., XXXxi. 4). 
For Sammael cf. Asc. of Isa. i.8 ef Aassim. He was originally one of the chief archangels, but tempted Eve with a view 
to making the earth his kingdom. Thenceforth he is the chief of the Satans, the angel of death, and Israel’s 
special foe (v. Charles’ Asc. of Isa. p.6. Cf. also Deut. Rabb. xi and Pirk. R. El. xiii, quoted in /£). 

whereat. For érim in text read dri. 

535 


bn 


III BARUCH 4. 9—6. 3 


9 the devil being envious deceived him through his vine. {And I Baruch said, Since also the vine 
has been the cause of such great evil, and is under judgement of the curse of God, and was the 
To destruction of the first created, how is it now so useful? And the angel said, Thou askest aright. 
When God caused the deluge upon earth, and destroyed all flesh, and four hundred and nine 
thousand giants, and the water rose fifteen cubits above the highest mountains, then the water 
entered into paradise and destroyed every flower; but it removed wholly without the bounds the shoot 
11 of the vine and cast it outside. And when the earth appeared out of the water, and Noah came out 
12 of the ark, he began to plant of the plants which he found. But he found also the shoot of the 
vine ; and he took it, and was reasoning in himself, What then is it? And I came and spake to 
13 him the things concerning it. And he said, Shall I plant it, or what shall 7 do? Since Adam 
was destroyed because of it, let me not also meet with the anger of God because of it. And saying 
14 these things he prayed that God would reveal to him what he should do concerning it. And when 
he had completed the prayer which lasted forty days, and having besought many things and wept, 
15 he said: Lord, I entreat thee to reveal to me what I shall do concerning this plant. But God 
sent his angel Sarasael, and said to him, Arise, Noah, and plant the shoot of the vine, for thus saith 
the Lord: Its bitterness shall be changed into sweetness, and its curse shall become a blessing, 
and that which is produced from it shall become the blood of God; and as through it the human 
race obtained condemnation, so again through Jesus Christ the Immanuel will they receive in Him the 
16 upward calling, and the entry into paradise]. Know therefore, O Baruch, that as Adam through 
this very tree obtained condemnation, and was divested of the glory of God, so also the men who now 
drink insatiably the wine which is begotten of it, transgress worse than Adam, and are far from the 
17 glory of God, and are surrendering themselves to the eternal fire. For (no) good comes through it. 
For those who drink it to surfeit do these things : neither does a brother pity As brother, nor a 
father 47s son, nor children their parents, but from the drinking of wine come all evils, such as 
murders, adulteries, fornications, perjuries, thefts, and such like. And nothing good is established 
by it. 


5 1,2 And I Baruch said to the angel, Let me ask thee one thing, Lord. Since thou didst say to me 


3 that the dragon drinks one cubit out of the sea, Say to me also, how great is his belly? And the 
angel said, His belly is Hades; and as far as a plummet is thrown (by) three hundred men, so 
great is his belly. Come, then, that I may show thee also greater works than these. 

rt And he took me and led me where the sun goes forth ; and he showed me a chariot and four, 

2 under which burnt a fire, and in the chariot was sitting a man, wearing a crown of fire, (and) the 

chariot (was) drawn by forty angels. And behold a bird circling before the sun, about nine 

cubits away. And I said to the angel, What is this bird? And he said to me, This is the 


w 


the devil being envious. Cf. Wisd. ii. 2Al 2 EN Xxxie 3 
9-15. The passage in brackets is clearly an interpolation by the Christian redactor, who felt it necessary to modify 
the condemnation of wine, on account of its use in the Eucharist. 
15. Sarasael. Perhaps to be identified with Saraqael, ‘one of the holy angels, who is set over the spirits who sin 
in the spirit’ (1 En. xx. 6). 
bitterness . . . sweetness. Cf. 4 Bar. ix. 16 rd yAvkéa USara dhpupa yernoorrat. 
the blood of God. Cf. Acts xx. 28. 
the upward calling. Cf. Phil. iii. 14. 
16. drink. Text reads dpévres. The emendation Xpavres will not do, as xypepevor is required. It is perhaps best 
(with Ryssel) to read rivovres. 
are surrendering themselves. spo£evodou. 
17. (no). ov, which the sense clearly requires, has dropped out of the text. 
drinking. For rraceas in text read méceas (James). 
murders, &c. Cf. Introd. $6. See Matt. xv. 19; Gal. v.21; Apoc. Pauli 6; Did. iii and v. 


V. 3. His belly is Hades. Slavonic reads ‘As great as is the bottom of hell, so great is his belly’. 
{by}. James translates ‘a plummet of 300 men ’, but it seems best, with Ryssel, to insert ing. The meaning is 
then, as far as a plummet can be thrown by the strength of 300 men. 


VI. 1. where the sun goes forth. The courses of the sun and moon are placed in the fourth heaven in 2 En. 

a chariot and four. Slavonic says that the horses were winged angels. : 

a crown of fire. This conception prevailed among the Greeks, as may be seen from the monuments. It occurs 
in Rabbinic lit. Cf. Pirk. R. El. vi; Num. R. xii. 4 (Ginzberg, JZ). 

drawn by forty angels. Cf. 2 En. xi. 4f. 

2. about nine cubits away. Text reads os dpet evvéa. James reads épn for sper, but that leaves the meaning 
obscure. It is possible that the original reading was és épevor, where opevw is to be translated ‘guard’. But there is 
very little support for the use of the word in this sense ; LS only mentions Hesychius. Dr. J. H. Moulton has drawn my 
attention to the fact that in Petrie Papyri i, p. 78 éxaoros rv dpav is taken to be each of the watchers’ by Mahaffy 
on Bury’s suggestion, with the admission that the word exists nowhere else, except in its compounds. Perhaps it is 
best to adopt &s did myév évvéa from the Disputation of the Panagiote, a very late document which is clearly based 
on our text (James, p. Ixv). I am indebted to Dr. Moulton for this suggestion. 


536 


Hf BARUCH 6; 4—7. 3 


4, 5 guardian of the earth. And I said, Lord, how is he the guardian of the earth? Teach me. And 
the angel said to me, This bird flies alongside of the sun, and expanding his wings receives its fiery 
6 rays. For if he were not receiving them, the human race would not be preserved, nor any other 
q living creature. But God appointed this bird ¢herefo. And he expanded his wings, and I saw on 
his right wing very large letters, as Jarge as the space of a threshing-floor, the size of about four 
8 thousand modii; and the letters were of gold. And the angel said to me, Read them. And I read 
9 and they ran thus: Neither earth nor heaven bring me forth, but wings of fire bring me forth. And 
101 said, Lord, what is this bird, and what ishis name? And the angel said to me, His name is called 
11 Phoenix. (And I said), And what does he eat? And he said to me, The manna of heaven and 
12the dew of earth. And I said, Does the bird excrete? And he said to me, He excretes a worm, 
and the excrement of the worm is cinnamon, which kings and princes use. But wait and thou shalt 
13 see the glory of God. And while-he was conversing w2th me, there was as a thunder-clap, and the 
place was shaken on which we were standing. And I asked the angel, My Lord, what is this sound? 
And the angel said to me, Even now the angels are opening the three hundred and sixty-five gates 
14 of heaven, and the light is being separated from the darkness. And a voice came which said, Light- 
15 giver, give to the world radiance. And when I heard the noise of the bird, I said, Lord, what is this 
16 noise? And he said, This is the bird who awakens from slumber the cocks upon earth. For as 
men do through the mouth, so also does the cock signify to those in the world, in his own speech. 

7 For the sun is made ready by the angels, and the cock crows. 

1,2 And I said, And where does the sun begin its labours, after the cock crows? And the angel 
said to me, Listen, Baruch: All things whatsoever I showed thee are in the first and second heaven, 
and in the third heaven the sun passes through and gives light to the world. But wait, and thou 
shalt see the glory of God. And while I was conversing with him, I saw the bird, and he appeared 


w 


4. this bird. Cf. 2 En. xii, xv, which speaks of several phoenixes. According to Jewish authorities, the Phoenix is 
referred to in Job xxix. 18. Charles (2 En. p. 12) mentions the following references to this bird among the Greeks and 
Romans: Herod. ii. 73 ; Tac. Azm. vi. 28; Ovid, Met. xv. 392; Mart. Epzgr. v. 7, 1; Stats Syvn il. A5u3738 elim: 
N. H.x.2. There are also several references in patristic writers. According to Pliny (4. 7. x. 2) there is only one 
phoenix at a time, who, at the close of his long life, builds himself a nest with twigs of cassia and frankincense on 
which he dies. From his corpse is generated a worm, which grows into a young phoenix. Pliny says that the young 
bird buries his father on the altar in the City of the Sun, but Tacitus (4mm. vi. 28) has it that he burns him there. 
There are traces of a similar tradition both in Egyptian and in Indian literature. A writer in the Lzcyc. Brit. 
thinks that the prototype of the phoenix is a bird called bennu, mentioned in the ‘ Book of the Dead’, and other 
Egyptian texts. This bird was one of the sacred symbols of the worship of Heliopolis, and according to Wiedemann 
(Zisch. f. Aeg. Sprache, xvi, p. 89 f.) was a symbol of the rising sun, and is called ‘ self-generating’, “the soul of Ra e 
and ‘the heart of the renewed sun’. Further, this writer points out that it is significant that both ‘bennu’ and doitwé 
mean ‘palm-tree’. James mentions a parallel in Indian literature—the bird Gadura, who carried Aruna on his back, 
and placed him in front of the sun, where he acted as charioteer and screened the world from the sun’s consuming 
rays (Mahabarata Adi Parva xvi-xxxiv, especially xxiv). In none of these references is the phoenix represented as 
the sun’s daily companion. That tradition appears only in 2 En. text A (there is no reference to the phoenix in B), 
in 3 Bar., and in the Disputation of the Panagiote. 

7, modii. A modius = 2co épyuai (spyua = the length of the outstretched arms, usually estimated at about 6 ft.). 

8. wings of fire. Slavonic reads ‘son of the Father’, which is evidently due to Christian influence. 

12. a worm, &c. In other accounts the worm develops into a new phoenix. 

13. the place was shaken. Cf. Acts iv. 31; 4 Ezra vi. 29. : 

the three hundred and sixty-five gates. This is evidently intended to correspond with the number of days in 
the year. 2 En. speaks of twelve gates, six on the east and six on the west (chs. xiii, xiv). 1 En. says that there 
are twelve portals with twelve windows each to the right and left of each of them (ch. Ixxii. 3, Pave Pt. 

14. Light-giver ... radiance. Cf. 2 En. xv. 1 f. ‘Then the elements of the sun called Phoenixes and Chalkidri 
break into song, therefore every bird flutters with its wings, rejoicing at the giver of light, and they broke into song at 
the command of the Lord. The giver of light comes to give brightness to the whole world.’ : 

15. the bird who awakens from slumber the cocks upon earth. It is doubtful whether there is not here a con- 
fusion between the tradition of the phoenix and that of the heavenly cock. Asa sun-bird the Greeks made the cock 
attend on Helios and Apollo. According to an Armenian tradition the heavenly cock first crows, and the angelic 
choirs begin their hymns of praise. These are heard by the cock on earth, who then awakens mankind, and himself 
lauds the Creator (Hastings, Dic. R. & E. iii. 694 ff.). Dr. J. H. Moulton has kindly drawn my attention to a passage 
in the Vendidad, Favg. xviii (S. B. £. iv, p. 193), where Sraosha, the angel who sets the world in motion, 1s likened to 
‘the bird named Parédas [fore-seer] which ill-speaking people call Kahrkatas, the bird that lifts up his voice against 
the holy dawn’, and calls men to worship and firelighting, lest Bashyasta, the long-handed demon of procrastination, 
come upon them. ; 

16. as men do through the mouth. és yap.ra Sicropa is difficult and probably corrupt. James conjectures that 
the meaning is ‘For as articulate-speaking beings do, &c.’, but admits there is no such usage of dicropos elsewhere. 
L have adopted Ryssel’s emendation 7a 614 oréparos, the rd being taken to represent o¢ dvOpwrot or something similar. 

the cock. Cf. Ber. 60 b. ‘Blessed be He Who has given the cock intelligence [to distinguish between day and 
night]. In the Fragments of the Apoc. of Adam (Afoc. Anec. i. 144) it is said that the cock crows when the seraphim 


clap their wings. 
VII. 1. begin its labours. dmocxoheirat. 


Tod 


III BARUCH 7. 4—9. 8 


4 in front, and grew less and less, and at length returned to his full size. And behind him I saw the 
shining sun, and the angels which draw it, and a crown upon its head, the sight of which we were 
5 not able to gaze upon, and behold. And as soon as the sun shone, the Phoenix also stretched out 
his wings. But I, when I beheld such great glory, was brought low with great fear, and I fled and 
6 hid in the wings of the angel. And the angel said to me, Fear not, Baruch, but wait and thou shalt 
also see their setting. 
81 And he took me and led me towards the west ; and when the time of the setting came, I saw 
again the bird coming before zz, and as soon as he came I saw the angels, and they lifted the crown 
2,3 from its head. But the bird stood exhausted and with wings contracted. And beholding these 
things, I said, Lord, wherefore did they lift the crown from the head of the sun, and wherefore is 
4 the bird so exhausted? And the angel said to me, The crown of the sun, when it has run through 
the day—four angels take it, and bear it up to heaven, and renew it, because it and its rays have 
been defiled upon earth ; moreover it is so renewed each day. And I Baruch said, Lord, and where- 
5 fore are its beams defiled upon earth? And the angel said to me, Because it beholds the lawlessness 
and unrighteousness of men, namely fornications, adulteries, thefts, extortions, idolatries, drunkenness, 
murders, strife, jealousies, evil-speakings, murmurings, whisperings, divinations, and such like, which 
are not well-pleasing to God. On account of these things is it defiled, and therefore is it renewed. 
6 But chow askest concerning the bird, how it is exhausted. Because by restraining the rays of the 
7 sun through the fire and burning heat of the whole day, it is exhausted thereby. For, as we said 
before, unless his wings were screening the rays of the sun, no living creature would be preserved. 
1 And they having retired, the night also fell, and at the same time came the chariot of the 
2 moon, along with the stars. And I Baruch said, Lord, show me it also, I beseech of thee, how 
3 it goes forth, where it departs, and in what form it moves along. And the angel said, Wait and 
thou shalt see it also shortly. And on the morrow I also saw it in the form of a woman, and sitting 
on a wheeled chariot. And there were before it oxen and lambs in the chariot, and a multitude of 
4 angels in like manner. And I said, Lord, what are the oxen and the lambs? And he said to me, 
5 They also are angels. And again I asked, Why is it that it at one time increases, but at another 
6 time decreases? And (he said to me), Listen, O Baruch: This which thou seest had been written 
7 by God beautiful as no other. And at the transgression of the first Adam, it was near to Sammael 
when he took the serpent as a garment. And it did not hide itself but increased, and God was 
8 angry with it, and afflicted it, and shortened its days. And I said, And how does it not also shine 
always, but only inthe night? And the angel said, Listen: as in the presence of a king, the courtiers 
cannot speak freely, so the moon and the stars cannot shine in the presence of the sun; for the stars 
are always suspended, but they are screened by the sun, and the moon, although it is uninjured, is 
consumed by the heat of the sun. 


3. grew less and less. The bird Gadura in Mahabharata Adi Parva (xxiv) diminishes its size. 
4. which draw it. Lit. ‘ bearing along with it’. 
6. their setting. i.e. of the sun and the Phoenix. 


VIII. 1. before it. i.e. the sun. 

2. exhausted. This is the meaning which the context demands for TETATELY@LEVOV. 

4. Cf. 2 En. xiv. 2 (B) ‘When it goes out from the Western gates, four angels take the crown and carry it up to the 
Lord, and the sun turns its chariot, and goes out without light. . And they put the crown on it again at the Eastern 
gates.’ See also Eliyahu R, ii (Ginzberg, PE): 

5. because it beholds. T. Levi iii. 1 says that the lowest heaven is dark because it beholds ‘all the unrighteous 
deeds of men’. Cf. Lat. Apoc. Pauli 4 ‘ Multum etenim sol quidem, luminare magnum, interpellauit dominum, dicens : 
Domine deus omnipotens, ego prospicio super impietates et iniusticias hominum’, ; 

fornications, &c. Cf. Introd. § 6. 

7- unless .. . no living creature would be preserved. The language is similar to that of Matt. XXlv. 22 and 
Mark xiii. 20, but that does not necessarily imply dependence. The writer has chosen the most natural form of words 
to express his idea. 


IX. 1. they. The sun and the phoenix. 
along with the stars. Text reads xal dua ravrn Kal pera Tis ceAnuns Kal ue{ra) tov dorépov. I have adopted 
Ryssel’s emendation kai dua ratty, 7d Gppa (or 7 duaka) rhs oeAnvns KTH. 

3. Slavonic reads ‘the moon is like a woman sitting on a chariot, and [like] oxen drawing her chariot are forty 
angels’, The idea of the chariot drawn by oxen and lambs is Greek. 

7. Shortened its days. The Slavonic attributes the fall of the moon to the fact that it laughed at the fall of Adam 
and Eve. R. Simeon b. Pazzi declared that at the time of the creation the moon was of the same size as the sun. The 
moon then objected that it would not be decorous for two kings to use one crown, whereupon God diminished her 
size (Hul. 60b; see art. ‘Moon ’, JE). For other versions of the story see Shebuot ga, and Gen. R. vi. 3 (Ginzberg JE%. 

8. shine .. . only in the night. Cf. Apoc. Mosis xxxvi. 


538 


fit BARUCH 10, 1—I11. 8 


The Fourth Heaven. 


10:1 And when I had learnt all these things from the archangel, he took and led me into a fourth 

23 heaven. And I saw a monotonous plain, and in the middle of it a pool of water. And there were 

in it multitudes of birds of all kinds, but not like those here oz earth. But I saw a crane as great as 

4 great oxen; and all the birds were great beyond those in the world. And I asked the angel What 

5 is the plain, and what the pool, and what the multitudes of birds around it? And the angel said, 

Listen, Baruch: The plain which contains in it the pool and other wonders is ¢he place where the 

6 souls of the righteous come, when they hold converse, living together in choirs. But the water is 

7 that which the clouds receive, and rain upon the earth, and the fruits increase. And I said again to 

the angel of the Lord, But (what) are these birds? And he said to me, They are those which 

8 continually sing praise to the Lord. And I said, Lord, and how do men say that the water which 

9 descends in rain is from the sea? And the angel said, Te water which descends in rain—this also 

is from the sea, and from the waters upon earth; but that which stimulates the fruits is (only) from 

Io are latter source. Know therefore henceforth that from this sowrce is what is called the dew of 
eaven. 


The Fifth Heaven. 


1] 1,2 And the angel took me and led me thence to a fifth heaven. And the gate was closed. And 
I said, Lord, is not this gate-way open that we may enter? And the angel said to me, We cannot 
enter until Michael comes, who holds the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven ; but wait and thou shalt see 
3 the glory of God. And there was a great sound, as thunder. And I said, Lord, what is this sound ? 
4 And he said to me, Even now Michael, the commander of the angels, comes down to receive the 
5 prayers of men. And behold a voice came, Let the gates be opened. And they opened ¢hem, and 
6 there was a roar as of thunder. And Michael came, and the angel who was with me came face to 
7 face with him and said, Hail, my commander, and that of all our order. And the commander Michael 

said, Hail thou also, our brother, and the interpreter of the revelations to those who pass through life 
8 virtuously. And having saluted one another thus, they stood still, And I saw the commander 


X. 1. afourth heaven. Text reads rpirov. See note on ch. iv. 

2. a pool of water. As James indicates, this is probably the ’Ayépovea Nipyn referred to in Apoc. Mosis xxxvii and 
Apoc. Pauli 22. 

3-5. For the idea that the souls of the righteous are transformed into birds, see Sanh. 92 b, ‘And the soul may say : 
The body has sinned ; for since I am separated from it, I fly in the air like a bird,’ 

7. said again to. éyo is used here and in ch, xv with an acc. without a prep., in the sense of the dative of the 
person addressed. 

8. how do men say, &c. Slavonic reads: ‘ How do men say that the clouds go out of the sea and rain on the earth? 
And the angel said to me: The race of man is deceived knowing nothing. All the water of the sea is salt, for if the 
rain came from the sea, no fruit would grow on the earth.’ The meaning of the Greek seems to be that while the rain 
is derived in part from the sea, those elements which are responsible for the dew and for the growth of fruit are derived 
from the other waters upon earth. 


XI. 2. Michael. Michael, one of the archangels, was commonly regarded as Israel’s special protector. See 
Dane x. 19, 21, xi. 1 8 t Ens xxx 5 52° En. xxii. 6, xxxiii. 10. In Ass. Moses x. 2, it is said that he will avenge Israel on 
its enemies at the end of the world. In T. Levi v. 6f., he is the angel ‘ who intercedeth for the nation of Israel, and 
for all the righteous’, and in T. Dan vi. 2 he is ‘a mediator between God and man’, specially concerned for ‘ the peace 
of Israel’. He is mentioned in N.T. in Jude 9, Rev. xii. 7-9, and according to Charles (Hastings D. B. iii. 362 b) he 
is referred to in Acts vii. 38. In Targ. Cazz. vili. 9, he is called ‘Israel’s chief’. In Yalkut Shimeoni, Bereshith 132, 
he is described as the prince over all the angels, and as Israel’s representative and portion in the presence of God. 
In Chag. 12b, he is called ‘the Advocate of the Jews’ (Oesterley, J/ew?sh Doctrines of Mediation, p. 84). In Test. 
Abraham xiv, Michael appears as intercessor on behalf of Abraham, and the combined intercession of Michael and 
Abraham wins a sinner’s entry into paradise. , 

who holds the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. In 4 Bar. ix. 5, Michael is called the archangel of righteous- 


ness who leads the righteous to heaven; and in the Ethiopic version it is added that he holds open the gates of 


righteousness, until the righteous enter in. : dicks A 5 
the Kingdom of Heaven. This phrase is not necessarily a Christian interpolation. Cf. Ps. cili. 19; Dan. lv. 345 

Test. Ben. ix. I () BactAcia kupiov), Ass. Moses x. I (‘And then His kingdom will appear throughout all His creation ) 
Sib. Or. iii. 47 f. (tére 57 Baotdeta peylotn aBavarov BaciAzos er avOporovot aveirat). , : 

4. Michael comes down. According to Chag, 12 the altar upon which Michael offers up sacrifice stands in the 
fourth heaven. 

5. the gates. Slavonic says that the names of those men who may enter the gates are written on them (cf. Apoc. 
Pauli 19). ‘ 

i ee The idea that the gates of heaven are opened at a fixed time to receive the prayers of men is found in 
the fragments of the Apoc. of Adam, where it is stated that at the tenth hour ‘the gate of heaven opens In order to 
let in the prayers of every living thing... . At this hour all that a man asks of God is granted him’ (Apoc. Anecdota, 


i, 143). e! 
539 


ITT BARUCH Tir 310 


Michael, holding an exceedingly great vessel ; its depth was as great as the distance from heaven to 
9 earth, and its breadth as great as the distance from north to south. And I said, Lord, what is that 
which Michael the archangel is holding ?. And he said to me, This is where the merits of the righteous 
enter, and such good works as they do, which are escorted before the heavenly God. 
12: And as I was conversing with them, behold angels came bearing baskets full of flowers. And 
2 they gave them to Michael. And I asked the angel, Lord, who are these, and what are the things 
3 brought hither from beside them? And he said to me, These are angels (who) are over the 
4, 5 righteous. And the archangel took the baskets, and cast them into the vessel. And the angel 
6 said to me, These flowers are the merits of the righteous. And I saw other angels bearing baskets 
which were (neither) empty nor full. And they began to lament, and did not venture to draw near, 
7 because they had not the prizes complete. “And Michael cried and said, Come hither, also, ye 
8 angels, bring what ye have brought. And Michael was exceedingly grieved, and the angel who was 
with me, because they did not fill the vessel. 
13x And then came in like manner other angels weeping and bewailing, and saying with fear, Behold 
how we are overclouded, O Lord, for we were delivered to evil men, and we wish to depart from 
2 them. And Michael said, Ye cannot depart from them, in order that the enemy may not prevail to 
3 the end; but say to me what ye ask. And they said, We pray thee, Michael our commander, 
transfer us from them, for we cannot abide with wicked and foolish men, for there is nothing good 
4 in them, but every kind of unrighteousness and greed. For we do not behold them entering [into 
Church at all, nor among spiritual fathers, nor] into any good work. But where there is murder, 
there also are they in the midst, and where are fornications, adulteries, thefts, slanders, perjuries, 
jealousies, drunkenness, strife, envy, murmurings, whispering, idolatry, divination, and such like, 
5 then are they workers of such works, and of others worse. Wherefore we entreat that we may 
depart from them. And Michael said to the angels, Wait till I learn from the Lord what shall 
come to pass. 
14, And in that very hour Michael departed, and the doors were closed. And there was a sound as 
2 thunder. And I asked the angel, What is the sound? And he said to me, Michael is even now 
presenting the merits of men to God. 
15 1,2 And in that very hour Michael descended, and the gate was opened ; and he brought oil. And 
as for the angels which brought the baskets which were full, he filled them with oil, saying, Take 


8. an exceedingly great vessel. Cf. Rev. v. 8, ‘Golden bowls of incense which are the prayers of the saints’ 
(cf. viii. 3). The cabalistic work Zohar (thirteenth century A.D.) says that the angel Sundelfon forms of the prayers 
a crown for the Almighty. 


XII. 1. angels. The function of presenting the prayers of men to God is not limited to Michael in Jewish literature. 
Tob. xii. 5 reads ‘I am Raphael, one of the seven holy angels, which present the prayers of the saints, and go in 
before the glory of the Holy One’. T. Levi iii. 5 ff. reads ‘In [the heaven next to] it, are the archangels, who minister 
and make propitiation to the Lord, for all the sins of ignorance of the righteous: offering to the Lord a sweet-smelling 
Savour, a reasonable and bloodless offering’. Then follows a reference to the subordinate angels mentioned in our 
text, ‘ And [in the heaven below this] are the angels who bear answers to the angels of the presence.’ Apoc. Pauli in 
the Greek mentions the coming of three classes of angels, two joyful and the third dejected. The first are the guardians 
of the godly, the second of the ascetics, and the third of the worldly. The last class desire to he relieved of their 
charge, but their request is not granted. The first of these classes is omitted in Latin and Syriac. For the significance 
of the three classes of angels in our text, see Introd. § 8. 

baskets, ra kavioxia. This form, which occurs three times in our Apoc., is regular. But 6 xdvuocxos and 7) Kavurkos 
(xv) do not appear to occur elsewhere. 

flowers. The Spanish text of 4 Ezra adds to a list of names in i. 40 ‘et angelos duodecim cum floribus’ 
(Cambridge Texts and Studies, iii, 2, p. 85). 

3. who are over the righteous. Text reads oi él rév é€ovoiav, which hardly harmonizes with the context. As 
oe reads ‘ These are they who wait upon righteous men’, it is perhaps best to follow Ryssel and read dckaiey for 
€SOUCL@Y. 

6. (neither) empty nor full. Text reads xevd ov yéwovra. From the context it is evident that the baskets were 
partly filled. It is therefore necessary to read (ore) Keva ore) yépovra. 

(the prizes. Cf. Phil. iii. W451 Corvixe 24) 


XIII. 4. entering [into Church... nor], cicedOeiv [ev exkdyoia wore, od8é eis TvevpatiKovs marépas ovo] eis d-yabdv ev. 
The clause in brackets is a Christian interpolation. The construction eicedOeiy ev is clumsy, the original sequence 
being evidently e’s. The expression mvevparikol mar€pes is distinctively Christian. It is possible that eis marépas stood 
in the original, as the official title ‘father’ was in use among the Scribes (Matt. xxiii. 8 ff.). If the whole phrase is an 
interpolation it is later than the Christian redactor. At the martyrdom of Polycarp the mob shouted, ‘ This is the 
Christians’ father’ (Mart. Polyc. 12), but there is no evidence that at this time Christians themselves applied the term 
to their bishops. In the West, in Cyprian’s time, the bishop was known as fafa. It is not till the fourth century that 


we find teachers of a past generation described as ‘ fathers’ (Ath. Ef. ad Afros 6). See Swete, Patristic Study, p. 5. 
fornications, &c. See Introd. § 6. 


XV. 2. which were full, wAnpys. Ryssel reads tAnpn, but it is more probable that mAnpns is used indeclinably 
(cf. Moulton, Prolegomena, Pp- 50). F 


filled them. i.e. the baskets. 
540 


B71, 2 


3 restored me to the place where I was at the beginning. And having come to myself, I gave glory 
4 to God, who counted me worthy of such honour. Wherefore do ye also, brethren, who obtained 








III BARUCH 15. 2—17. 4 


it away, reward our friends an hundredfold, and those who have laboriously wrought good works. 
3 For those who sowed virtuously, also reap virtuously. And he said also to those bringing the 
half-empty baskets, Come hither ye also; take away the reward according as ye brought, and 
4 deliver z¢ to the sons of men. [Then he said also to those who brought the full and to those wo 
brought the half-empty baskets: Go and bless our friends, and say to them that thus saith the 


cat are faithful over a few things, I will set you over many things; enter into the joy of your 
Lord. 
And turning he said also to those who brought nothing: Thus saith the Lord, Be not sad of 


2 countenance, and weep not, nor let the sons of men alone. But since they angered me in their 


works, go and make them envious and angry and provoked against a people that is no people, a 


3 people that has no understanding. Further, besides these, send forth the caterpillar and the 


unwinged locust, and the mildew, and the common locust (and) hail with lightnings and anger, and 


4 punish them severely with the sword and with death, and their children with demons. For they 


did not hearken to my voice, nor did they observe my commandments, nor do them, but were 
despisers of my commandments, and insolent towards the priests who proclaimed my words to 
them. 

And while he yet spake, the door was closed, and we withdrew. And the angel took me and 


such a revelation, yourselves also glorify God, so that He also may glorify you, now and ever, and to 
all eternity. Amen. 


3. he said also to. é¢ye is used with the simple accusative of the person addressed. 
half-empty. Text reads dmoxévovs. The context makes it clear that the angels referred to are those bearing the 
baskets which were neither full nor empty. We must therefore read troxévous, somewhat empty. | 
4. The words in brackets are a Christian interpolation, as is evident not only from the quotation from Matt., but 
also from the fact that the re-enumeration of the first two classes of angels destroys the symmetry of the passage. 
half-empty. For dméxeva read imdkeva. 
over afew things. Text reads émi édlyp. It should probably read emi dAiya, Cf. Matt. xxv. 20. 
I will set you. For xataorjoe: in text read xatacrjnow (Ryssel). 


XVI. 1. Slavonic reads ‘ But Michael said: Listen, ye angels of God; it is not ordered that you should depart from 
sinful men, but you are ordered to labour for them till they repent and return. I will judge them, saith the Lord. And 
again there was a voice from the heavens: Attend upon the sinners till they repent ; for if they do not repent, then ye 
shall inflict upon them a cruel disease and sudden death, and locusts and caterpillars, frost and thunder and hail and 
demons and the destruction of cities; and ye shall strangle their children, because God is not feared [among them] 
and they do not gather together in the Church of God for the sake of prayer, and instead of prayer they bring cursings’. 
Cf. Apoc. Pauli io. i 

2. Cf. Deut. xxxii. 21; Rom. x. 19. 


. punish them severely, S:yoropnoare. Cf. Matt. xxiv. 51. ; j 
‘ Fhe Greek text has aorluing to say as to the future destiny of the righteous and of the wicked, but the Slavonic 


reads ‘The angel said to me: Look, servant of God, and see the resting-place of the righteous, and their glory and 
joy and delight : and again see the resting-place of the wicked, their tears and sobs and worms that never sleep. The 
sinners call to heaven: O just judge, have pity upon us. And I Baruch said to the angel: Who are these, my Lord? 
And he said to me: These are the sinners. And I said to the angel: Bid me, my Lord, that I may weep with them 
so that the Lord may hear my voice and pity them. A voice came from heaven saying : Take Baruch to the earth, 
that he may tell to the sons of men all the secrets of God, which he has seen and heard.’ The absence of any parallel 
to this passage is further evidence of the free treatment of the concluding sections of the original by the editor of the 
Greek text in its present form. cas 

the priests who proclaimed my words to them. The term fcpevs does not seem to have been applied to the 


Christian ministry till the end of the second century. 


XVII. 2. restored... beginning. See 2 Bar. vii. 2 (note). 
3. Cf. 2 Bar. liv. 8 f. 


541 


IV EZRA 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


$1. SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE BOOK. 


THE Fourth Book of Ezra (or 2 Esdras) is extant in a number of translations, all of which have 
been made, apparently, from a lost Greek version ; and this, there is reason to believe, was itself 
made in the first instance from a Hebrew original. The extant translations are in the following 
languages: Latin, Syriac, Ethiopic, Arabic (two independent versions), and Armenian. The most 
important of the versions is the Latin ; and it is through this version, incorporated in many impor- 
tant Latin Biblical MSS., that the book has passed first into the Latin Bible (the Vulgate), as an 
appendix ; and thence into our Bibles as one of the Deutero-canonical books, or official Apocrypha. 
The Ezra-Apocalypse proper corresponds to chapters 3-14 of the 2 Esdras of our Apocrypha (or 
the Fourth Book of Ezra of the Vulgate). Chapters 1 and 2 and 15 and 16 belong only to the 
Latin form of the book: the Oriental versions recognize only chapters 3-14. The chief conclusions 
reached by the present Editor regarding the Ezra-Apocalypse are the following: (a) The work is of 
composite character. In its present form it is a compilation made by an Editor or Redactor (R), 
and was published by him about the year A.D. 120, in the early part of the reign of Hadrian. The 
sources utilized by R were— 

(1) a Salathiel- Apocalypse (S) which was originally published in Hebrew in the year A. D. 100, 
and is almost wholly embodied in our book. It is contained in chapters 3-10 mainly (= the first 
four visions), together with a certain amount of interpolated material. 

(2) To this have been appended three independent pieces, extracts from other apocalypses, viz. 
the Eagle-Vision (= ch, 11-12), denominated A (= Adlergesicht), the Son of Man Vision (= ch.19), 
denominated M (= Menschensohn), and the Ezra-legend (= ch. 14 mainly), denominated E?, 

(3) Extracts from another source have also been utilized by R and interpolated in S. These 
are from an old Ezra-Apocalypse (denominated E), and detail the signs which precede the End of 
the world (iv. 52-v. 13a and vi. 11-29). This source may also have been utilized by R in his com- 
pilation of the passages vii. 26-44 and viii. 63-ix. 12. 

The whole has been compiled in its present form by R, the different material being welded 
together by redactional links and adjustments. But the distinctive features of the sources have not 
been seriously affected. The purpose of the compilation appears to have been to commend 
the apocalyptic literature to certain Rabbinical circles which were hostile, and to secure for it 
a permanent place within orthodox Judaism. With this end in view the Redactor invested the whole 
composite work with the name of Ezra—a name specially honoured in the Rabbinical Schools—and 
took care to select material in which the cruder elements of the older apocalyptic had been largely 
refined away. The compilation thus represents a fusion, to some extent, of the Rabbinical and 
Apocalyptic types of thought of a novel kind. Its importance for the history of Rabbinical doctrine 
and for the elucidation of the earlier (pre-Talmudic) phases of Judaism is very great. Together 
with the twin- Apocalypse 2 Baruch, which may have been edited in its final form somewhat later, it 
may be regarded as the product of a school of writers; in the one case—4 Ezra—we have a writing 
which reflects the influence of the School of Shammai ; in the other—2 Baruch—one that reflects the 
work of a school of writers under the influence of Aqiba. 


§ 2. TITLE OF THE Book. 


In most of the\Latin MSS, the additional chapters (1-2 and 15-16) are distinguished from the 
Apocalypse proper bya separate enumeration, and are marked off as separate books. A common 
arrangement is the following : 

1 Esdras = Ezra-Nehemiah of the Canon. 

2 Esdras = 4 Ezra, chapters 1-2 (2 Esdras i-ii of our Apocrypha). 

3 Esdras = 1 Esdras of our Apocrypha (3 Esdras of the Vulgate). 

4 Esdras = 4 Ezra, chapters 3-14 (our Apocalypse). 


542 


IVeEEZRA 


5 Esdras = 4 Ezra, chapters 15-16 (2 Esdras xv—xvi of our Apocrypha). 

According to this enumeration : 

2, Esdras = chapters 1-2. 

4 Esdras = »» 3-14 (our Apocalypse). 
and 5 Esdras = 5 15-16. 

This is adopted by James (BF, p. xxvii).? 

The prevailing usage of the Latin MSS. (including the important codices SA) is to designate 
chapters 3-14 (= our Apocalypse) as the Fourth Book of Ezra (4 Ezra). (See also Vol. I, pp. 2-3 
of this work on this question.— Gen. Edit.) 

The Oriental versions are also inconsistent in the titles they employ. In Ar.! and Ethiop. 
the Apocalypse (= chapters 3-14) is called The First Book of Ezra. The Syr. and Ar.’ attach no 
number to the title. It seems probable that the title prefixed to the lost Greek version was "Eodpas 
6 mpopytns, as Clement of Alexandra quotes from our Apocalypse as from "Esdpas 6 mpodirns 
_ (cf. Clem. Alex., Stromateis, iii. 16), while St. Ambrose also uses the name propheta Ezra (cf. also 

the opening words of 4 Ezra i liber Ezrae prophetae secundus). Another possible form (suggested 
by Westcott) is "Amoxadvis "Eodpa. 


§ 3. THE ANCIENT VERSIONS. 


(a) THE LATIN. The text of the Old Latin version reproduced in the Vulgate rests upon late MS. 
authority, and is full of corruptions and inaccuracies. The first serious contribution towards the forma- 
tion of a critical text was made by Sabatier in the eighteenth century, who noted the variants of the 
Codex Sangermanensis (Codex S) in his great corpus of the Latin texts of the Bible.* A further advance 
was made by Volkmar in 1863, who published a Latin text, adding the variants of a Ziirich MS. 
(Codex Turicensis, thirteenth century), in his edition of our Apocalypse.? A few years later Hilgen- 
feld in his Messtas Inudaeorum (Leipzig, 1869), and Fritzsche (Libri Vet. Test. pseudepigraphi 
selecti, Leipzig, 1871) published critical editions of the Latin text embodying readings from other 
MSS. But all previous work in this direction was dwarfed into insignificance when Bensly in 
1875 published his epoch-making contribution to the critical study of 4 Ezra—The missing fragment 
of the Latin translation of the Fourth Book of Ezra (Cambridge). Up to this time all known MSS. 
of the Latin text yielded a defective text of chapter 7: a long passage (some 70 verses) was missing 
between verses 35 and 36 of this chapter, as was shown clearly by the Oriental versions which attest 
the missing verses. In 1875 Bensly had the good fortune to discover the Latin text of the missing 
fragment in a ninth-century MS. which was then in the possession of the communal library of 
Amiens. The discovery was without delay communicated to the world in a splendid edition of 
the text of the fragment, enriched with a valuable introduction and commentary. Bensly’s Missing 
Fragment (MF) is valuable not only for the text of the fragment itself, but for the textual study 
of the whole book. It abounds with notes, remarks, and accurate information which make it indis- 
pensable for the serious student of the Latin Bible. The curious lacuna in chapter 7 which 
characterizes all known Latin MSS. (except the few enumerated below) is due to the mutilation of 
the great Codex S (preserved in the Bibliotheque Nationale of Paris).* In 1856 Prof. Gildermeister, 
in collating this MS., discovered that a leaf (which had originally contained the missing fragment) 
had been (no doubt purposely) cut out in early times. ‘From this and other indications he drew 
the indisputable and highly important conclusion that a// MSS. of 4 Esdras which do not contain 
that passage were ultimately derived from the Codex Sangermanensis.... Codex Ss is the oldest 
known manuscript of 4 Esdras and is the parent of the vast majority of extant copies.’ ® 


Besides (1) Codex S the following are among the most important MSS. for text-critical purposes: 

(2) Codex A (i.e. Codex Ambianensis). This is the MS. in which Prof. Bensly discovered the missing 
fragment. It was apparently written in the ninth century, and, though closely related to S, has an independent 
value by the side of it. 

(3) Codex C (Codex Complutensts, formerly at Complutum) known as the Bible of Alcala. It is now in 
the Library of the Central University at Madrid. The text is independent of S and A; date ninth to tenth 
century. This MS. contains the missing fragment, and curiously enough the text of the latter had been 
transcribed by Prof. Palmer in 1826, but never published by him. After the publication of ZF in 1875 
this transcript was found among Prof. Palmer’s papers, and was printed in the Journal of Philology in 1877 
(vii. 264). 


1 The Latin MSS. vary considerably in the enumeration: see for further details the present writer’s Ezra- 
lypse, p. iv; Bensly, 177, pp. 85-86; and BY, pp. xxvi foll. 
aes Lo A pense latinae versiones antiquae, tom. iii (Rheims, 1749). The date of Codex S is 822. 
8 Das vierte Buch Esra (Tiibingen, 1863), pp. 3-213. 2 bat 
4 Fonds latins, 11505. B/, p. xi. 
543 


INTRODUCTION 


(4) Codex M (Codex Mazarinaeus) : in the Bibliothtque Mazarine at Paris. The existence of this MS. 
was made known by M. Berger in 1885. Its text (which includes the missing fragment) is of the same type 
as that of C (eleventh century). 

To these—the principal MS. authorities—must now be added : ‘ 

(5) Codex V (= Codex Abudensis) now in the Biblioteca Nacional at Madrid. It is known as the Bible 
of Avila. Its text is unmutilated, and appears to be a copy of Codex C (early thirteenth century). It was 
discovered by M. Berger. : , 

(6) Codex L (Codex Legionensis) in the Library of San Isidro de Leon at Leon. This Codex (in 3 vols.) 
contains a remarkable text of 4 Ezra, which diverges from that of all other authorities. According to Violet 
these peculiarities are largely due to deliberate revision by a late transcriber. Its date, according to the same 
scholar, is probably about 1300. See further Violet, pp. xxii—xxiv. 

(7) The latest discovered unmutilated text is a MS. which is denoted N (Codex N) by Violet. It is 
preserved at Brussels, and its existence was first made known in October, 1906 (by D. Donatien de Bryne, 
O.S.B.). It is part of a Bible in 4 vols.; the writing is of the twelfth century. According to Violet its text is 
closely related to that of M (hence the choice of the symbol N). 

For the special MS. evidence that exists for chap. viii. 20-36 (the so-called Conjfessio Esdrae) see the 
introductory section to that passage in the present writer’s edition of the book (ZA, p. 176); and cf. further 
the introductions of B7 and Violet for this point, and for the MS. evidence generally : also Bensly AZZ. 


The critical edition of the text of the whole book, which Bensly was prevented from completing 
by death, was finally edited and published, with a valuable introduction, by Dr. M. R. James, in 
1895." A splendid critical edition of the Latin text, with a full apparatus criticus, and with German 
translations of the Oriental versions (also provided with an apparatus criticus) in parallel columns 
has been edited by Dr. Bruno Violet for the Royal Prussian Academy of Science, and recently 
published.? 

Both Bensly (with James) and Violet agree in the conclusion that broadly the MSS. yield two types 
of text: the one, represented by the group SA, may be styled the French recension (= Violet’s #) ; 
the other, the Spanish recension, represented by the group CMNVL (= Violet’s wy). On the whole 
the former group ($) yields a decidedly superior text to that of the latter (). 


See further on this point Violet, § 12. Violet also (p. xxvi) calls attention to the existence of a number 
of Latin MSS. containing the unmutilated text of our book, which are in existence at various libraries, but 
have not as yet been utilized for the criticism of the text. 


The Latin translation of the book, which, like the Oriental versions, was made from the lost 
Greek version, is undoubtedly very early. It was well known to Ambrose of Milan, who cites freely 
from it (see BY, pp. xxxii-xxxiv). Possible but doubtful citations are made by Tertullian (4 Ezra 
Vili. 20) and Cyprian (4 Ezra v. 54, 55). It has also been supposed that Commodian the Christian 
poet of the third century, cites 4 Ezra xiii. 4of. It is interesting to note in this connexion that it 
seems fairly probable that in the time of Ambrose the Latin text of the additional chapters 15-16 
was already current ‘in the version in which we possess them and... that they were also attached 
to chapters 3-14’.2 The Latin version as a whole is singularly faithful and literal, and it is not 
difficult to arrive at the Greek text underlying it. It has itself suffered a certain amount of internal 
corruption in transmission ; but this, with the aid partly of new MS. evidence, and partly of the 
other versions, can often be corrected successfully. From every point of view it is the most 
valuable of the versions that have come down to us. 


Of the Oriental versions the most valuable is (6) THE Syriac. This is far more faithful 
and less paraphrastic than the other Oriental versions. “The Syriac text of the book is unfortunately 
only known to us in a single MS. authority—the great Ambrosian (sixth century) Bible-Codex 
at Milan, which has been made available for scholars by the Italian scholar A. Ceriani. In this Codex 
4 Ezra follows the Baruch-A pocalypse, and precedes the canonical books of Ezra and Nehemiah (here 
reckoned as one book: viz. the second Book of £zra): 4 Ezra has no number attached to it. A 
printed edition of the Syriac text has been published by Ceriani in his Monumenta sacra et profana 
(vol. v, fasc. i, 1868) ; and it is also included in the photo-lithographic reproduction of the Ambrosian 
Codex. Ceriani’s Latin translation of the Syriac text of 4 Ezra is reprinted, with some improve- 


* The Fourth Book of Ezrain Texts and Studies (vol. iii, no. 2): Cambridge. 


i 2 ae Esra-Apocalypse (4 Esra): Erster Teil: Dée Ueberlieferung. Leipzig, 1910.. (A second volume is to 
ollow. 

* BJ, p. xliii. For the whole subject of the ancient quot ti fj i i i 
eee oe Hey ee j quotations of 4 Ezra cf. the full discussion (with the passages 


544 


TV (EZRA 


ments, in Hilgenfeld’s Messias Indaecorwm, pp. 212 ff. Like all the Oriental versions the Apocalypse 
in the Syriac text consists of chapters 3-14 of the Latin only. A translation (in German) with 
critical notes is printed in Violet, vol. i. 

__(c) THE Erutopic. This version was first published in 1820 by the famous Orientalist 
Richard Laurence (afterwards Archbishop of Cashel; editor of z Enoch and of The Ascension of 
_fsaiah). Laurence’s Latin translation of the Ethiopic text, revised by Praetorius, is printed in 
Hilgenfeld’s Messias Iudaeorum (pp. 262 ff.). A critical text of this version, based upon the collation 
of several MSS., was prepared by Dillmann and published after his death A French translation, 
based upon Dillmann’s critical text, was published by Basset in 1899. The Ethiopic version is not 
so valuable as the Syriac. It is much more paraphrastic and free in its handling of the text, but 
it sometimes attests interesting and important readings, and is important for the criticism of the 
Greek text underlying it. A German translation, based upon Dillmann, is printed in Violet, 
vol. i (with critical notes). 

_ (@) THE ARABIC VERSIONS. Two independent Arabic versions of the book are in existence 
which (following Gunkel) we may designate Ar.1 and Ar.”. Of the first Arabic version (Ar.') 
two MSS. are known to be in existence—the original MS. in the Bodleian Library at Oxford 
(part of the Laudian collection), and a transcript of this preserved at the Vatican. An English 
translation was made by Simon Ockley from the Oxford MS., and appeared in William Whiston’s 
Primitive Christianity reviv'd (vol. iv, 1711), and a Latin version, made from Ockley’s English, 
and corrected by Steiner from the Arabic text, is given in Hilgenfeld (o@. ciz. pp. 323 ff.). The 
Arabic text was first published by Ewald in Abhandlungen d. Konigl. Gesellsch. d. Wissenschaften 
su Gottingen.” 

In this MS. our book appears as 1 Ezra; then follows Ezra-Nehemiah as 2 Ezra, succeeded 
by the Book of Tobit. A curious fact concerning the Oxford MS. is that there is a lacuna in 
the text of one page, which is supplied by the Vatican transcript, There are two other lacunae 
common to both MSS. In 1898 Violet, however, found in the Oxford MS. itself (but displaced) 
the missing page, which is given in the Vatican transcript in its right place (see further Violet, 
pp. xxxi-xxxvi). This version, which is exceedingly free, was also made from a Greek text ; 
whether it—or the Greek text underlying it—has been revised is uncertain. A German trans- 
lation, with critical notes, is given in Violet. 

The Second Arabic Version (Ar.*) is an independent version made directly from the Greek. 
It exists in a complete form in a Vatican MS. (Arab. 462) which has been edited and published, 
with a Latin translation, by Gildemeister (Esdrae liber quartus arabice e cod. Vat., Bonn 1877). 
Extracts from this version are contained in an Oxford (Bodleian) MS. 260; and a fragment contain- 
ing ch. vii. 75-91 has been found in a Paris MS. by Violet. 

This version contains some interesting and valuable readings which have led Gunkel to postulate 
the existence of a second Greek version, made from the Hebrew original, which he supposes to have 
been the basis of this version. 


Gunkel supports this view by citing chap. viii. 23 where Ar.’, alone among the versions, renders ceasedess 


(eternal) = Heb. syd. the other versions imply for a witness (= “yd). Evidently there were two Greek 
readings, representing two renderings of a single Hebrew text. One has been followed by Ar.’; the other by 
the other versions. Again, in xiv. 3 Ar.? has Simaz (= 13D) where the other versions have dusk (= 12D)— 
phenomena which point to different readings in the Greek, due to a difference of reading the Hebrew. But 
it is not necessary to infer from such instances (which, in any case, are few) that two different recensions of 
the Greek existed. The readings more probably represent marginal variants or corrections in the Greek 
exemplar used. In any case, as Violet has shown, both Ar.’ and Ar.’ go back to one recension of the Greek, 
which is characterized by a lacuna in the text, viii. 50-ix. 1 being omitted. It is probable that different MSS. 
of this Greek recension (if it may be so called) were used by the translators of Ar.’ and Ar.”. 


Thus Ar.?, though it is very free and paraphrastic on the whole, is often an important textual 
witness, and must never be neglected. 


It is interesting to notice that Ar.” agrees with the Syr. in omitting the first half of xi. 30 (= et vidi 
guomodo complexa est), and again with the Syr. in attesting (in xi. 43) a clause which has fallen out in all the 
other versions (= ¢hat thou shouldst forsake us also). 


Two further fragments of an Arabic version independent of Ar.’ and Ar. are also known ; 
but these seem-to be of secondary importance, depending, as they not improbably do, on the Latin 


1 Veteris Testamenti Aethiopici tomus v (Berlin, 1894, pp. 152-93). 
2 1863, vol. xi (also reprinted separately). 


1105.2 545 Nn 


INTRODUCTION 


version. [See further Violet, xxxi-xxxix: Violet gives a German translation of both Ar.) and 
Ar with critical notes. ] ; 

(e) THE ARMENIAN. This version was first printed in the Armenian Bible of 1805 (Venice), 
and again in the Armenian edition of the Apocrypha of the Old Testament (Venice, 1896). A Latin 
translation (by J. H. Petermann) is given in Hilgenfeld (of. ciz. pp. 378 ff.), and a German one by 
Violet. The version is exceedingly free, and possesses little or no value for the criticism of the text. 
It may have been made from the Syriac. ; 

(f) FRAGMENTS AND TRACES OF OTHER VERSIONS. An important discovery of some frag- 
ments of a Sahidic version of our book was made known in 1904.1 The fragment in question 
covers chap. xiii. 29-46; but the leaf containing it is unfortunately much damaged. The recovery 
of other parts of this version, which is not impossible, would probably afford valuable help in 
reconstructing the underlying Greek text, if, as is likely, the Sahidic was made directly from 
the Greek. The Sahidic translation would certainly embody many of the original Greek words 
as loan-words. 


Traces also exist of an old Georgian version of our book. [See further Violet, pp. xl ff.] 


§4. THE LOST GREEK VERSION. 


The dependence of all the versions (with the possible exception of the Armenian) upon a lost 
Greek version hardly needs any detailed proof. The differences between the versions can con- 
stantly be explained by corruptions of a Greek text underlying them. 


To select a few instances out of many: in v. 28 the Latin has pracparasti (= ytosacas) unam radicem 
super alas ; but the Oriental versions rightly render ‘thou hast dishonoured (= yntacas) the one root’, &c. 
Again in vii. 26 the Latin has ef apparebit sponsa [e¢] apparescens ctvitas = ‘and the bride shall appear even 
the city appearing’ (so Syr. substantially) ; but the true text, represented by the Ethiopic and Armenian runs: 
then shall the city that now is invisible appear = kor havncetar y vv pn pawopevy modts which was misread by 
the Latin kau gavycerar n vuupy pawouevn rods. In x. 28, again, the true text represented by the Latin and 
the Oriental versions, with the exception of the Ethiopic, runs: for he tt 1s who has caused me to fall into this 
sreat bewilderment (exoracw) ; but the Ethiopic has search for bewilderment, misreading exoracw as e€eracw. 


Further, the internal evidence of the versions singly often clearly demonstrates dependence upon 
a Greek underlying text. Thus the Latin sometimes reproduces Greek constructions (e. g. the genitive 
absolute, v. 55), and Greek genders unknown to Latin (e.g. x. 23 signaculum Sion... resignata 
est: ‘seal’ being treated as fem. as in Greek=7 oppayts). See further on these points IZF, 
pp. 17 f.; £A, pp. xi, xviii (see also Index V of the latter work under Greek constructions and 
Greek words). 

Positive evidence of the existence of such a Greek version as is desiderated by the evidence of 
the secondary versions is afforded by actual citations in the early patristic literature, as well as 
by the existence of Greek works which have been based upon, or imitated from, the lost Greek 
version. The most certain of the citations are the citation of v. 35 in Clement of Alexandria, 
Stromatets, iii. 16 ; and of viii. 23 in Consz. Apost. viii. 7; while Const. Apost. ii. 14 contains a passage, 
the language of which is strongly reminiscent of vii. 10 3 (fathers for sons, sons for parents, brothers 
ae brothers, kinsfolk for their nearest, friends for their dearest). The passage in question runs as 
follows :— 

Ei 0& marépes dmep réxvwv ob Tyswpodvrar, ore viol Imep matépwv, dhov Gs ore yuvaikes bmep avoporv, 
ovTe olkéran Umep SeamroTSy, obre ovyyevels Umep ovyyevdr, obte hidror dmép hidov, obre dlkaror (v. 2. dixaros) 
vmep adikwr, GAN Exacros brtp Tod oixelov epyov Tov Adyov amairnOjoerar. 

A knowledge of the Greek 4 Ezra appears to be presupposed, also in the Hippolytean fragment 
mept 708 mavrds.2 The alleged citations in our book of the £ pistle of Barnabas are, however, more 
than doubtful (see the notes on v. g below). For a full discussion of these points reference must 
be made to BF, pp. xxvii-xxx; cf. also EA, p. xii. For later Greek works which have imitated 
the Greek 4 Ezra (viz. the Apocalypses of Esdras and Sedrach), see Violet, pp. I-lix. 

The reconstruction of the lost Greek text from the Latin version of our book has been carried out 
with a considerable amount of success by Hilgenfeld (with the assistance of Lagarde and Hermann 
Roénsch). It is printed in Messias Iudacorum (pp. 36-113), and is a most valuable piece of work. 
Volkmar, also, in his edition of our book (Das vierte Buch Esra, 1863) has constantly suggested 
Greek renderings which are often important for this purpose; while in Gunkel’s commentary some 


* In the Zeitschrift fiir dgyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde (Band 41, Heft 2, pp. 1 38-40). 
* Also cited sometimes as Hippolytus Against Plato’. 


546 ‘ 


IV EZRA 


useful notes of a similar character b Wilamowitz ar i i 
Saabs : "Ys re occasionally cited. ] f ruc- 
tion is promised by Violet. y An elaborate reconstruc 


A specimen of the Greek translation of part of the additional chapters, which do not strictly belong to 

the Ezra-Apocalypse, viz. 4 Ezra xv. 57-59, has been discovered (1909) among the Oxyrhynchus papyri, and 

_been published with other papyri in the collection of Grenfell and Hunt. This important find encourages the 
hope that parts, or even the whole, of the lost Greek version of the Apocalypse proper may yet come to light. 


Gunkel (ap. Kautzsch) has propounded a theory that two independent Greek translations of a 
Hebrew original were made; while the Lat., Syr., Ethiop., Ar. (and possibly the Armenian) rest 
upon one of these, Ar.’, he thinks, rests upon a mixed Greek text, made up of the edition used by 
the other versions, and a second made independently and later. The evidence adduced for this 
view is, however, very slight, and has already been dealt with above in § 3d (in connexion with 
Ar.’). The textual phenomena are susceptible of an alternative and simpler explanation, viz. that 
Ar.” has embodied marginal variants occasionally ; while, in other respects, it has handled its Greek 


text rather freely, omitting considerable portions. [For Volkmar’s theory of a second Greek recen- 
sion see EA, p. xiii.] 


§ 5. THE ORIGINAL HEBREW TEXT. 


The most recent investigators of the textual problems of our book are agreed in postulating a 
Hebrew text as the original form in which 4 Ezra was composed. These scholars include Well- 
hausen, Charles, Gunkel, and Violet.1_ The opposite view (of a Greek original) has been championed 
by Liicke, Volkmar, and Hilgenfeld. 

The fullest discussion of the grounds for assuming a Hebrew original is that of Wellhausen.? 
It may be said, without qualification, that judged by any of the properly applicable tests, the 
phenomena point to a Semitic original. THE SYNTAX REFLECTS CHARACTERISTICALLY HEBREW 
FEATURES. Thus the sentences are co-ordinated with rather than subordinated to each other, and 


in consequence it is sometimes difficult to determine exactly where the protasis of a hypothetical 
sentence ends, and the apodosis begins. 


Cp. e.g. ill. r2 (et factum est cum coepissent multiplicari . . . et multiplicaverunt filios . . . et coeperunt 

. . Umptetatem facere, &c.); ili. 17 f. (e¢ factum est cum educeres semen eius ex Aegypto et adduxisti cos... Et 

transut gloria tua, &c.); il. 29f.; v. 4 ff.; v. 31; vi. 18f. In some of these cases the punctuation of the 
editors is not certainly correct—the sentences should, perhaps, be run on. 


Note also turns of expression as e¢ factum est et and et erit et, which are essentially Hebrew 
modes of expression, as also are e¢ ecce (very frequent in chapters Io and 11), and et vidi et ecce 
(iv. 48, xi. If.) or e¢ audivi et ecce (vi. 18). All these, as Wellhausen points out, are characteristically 
Hebrew, and not Greek. 

THE FOLLOWING ARE EXAMPLES OF STRONGLY MARKED HEBRAISMS: the complement of 
the relative by a demonstrative pronoun, e. g. de guibus si mihi renunciaveris ex his (iv. 4), de quo 
me interrogas de co (iv. 28), in quo stas super eum (vi. 14), super quem stabam super eum (vi. 29), que per 
semet ipsum liberabit creaturam suam (xiii. 26). 


The last instance cited is an excellent example of the ambiguity which may arise from the misunder- 
standing of the Hebrew relative and its complement (the Heb. relative particle "Wx does not distinctly express 
either number or case). Similar instances of misunderstanding also occur in ix. 20 ( propter cogttationes quae 
in eo advenerunt should be p. ¢. eorum gui in eo, &c.); and in xill. 40 (guem captivoum duxit Salmanassar 
should be guas or guos captivos duxit, &c.). 


The construction of the Hebrew infinitive absolute with the finite verb is of extraordinarily 
frequent occurrence. It is usually rendered by a particle or by an abstract substantive. 


The following are illustrative of numerous examples: excedens excessit cor tuum (iv. 2); festinans festinat 
saeculum pertransire (iv. 26); mensura mensuravit tempora et numero numeravit tempora (iv. 37); odiens odiste 
populum tuum (vy. 30). The number of these examples might be somewhat increased if the instances could be 
added where the Syr. attests the same construction without the support of the Latin. 


One of the characteristic features of Hebrew, which it shares with other old Semitic languages, 
is the paucity of its adverbs. The language, consequently, is forced to adopt other modes of speech 
in order to express the adverbial idea. The infinitive absolute often does duty in this way (express- 
ing intensity or iteration: = surely, much, often, &c.). But sometimes cther methods are resorted 
to. Thus repeated action (= agaiz) is expressed in Hebrew by such phrases as Zo add to do (DIN + 
another verb). This usage is reflected in our text by such un-Greek expressions as adiciam (dicere) 


1 Among earlier scholars Ewald (His¢. of Zsrae/, vol. 7) held this view ; earlier still Jo. Morinus. 
2 Skizzen, vi, pp. 234-9 (1899). 
547 Nn2 


INTRODUCTION 


coram te (v. 32); superdixerunt (vii. 23); noli ergo adicere inquirendo (viii. 55); adiciam dolorem 
(ix. 41); adposui adhuc logui (x. 19). : 4 

The usage of prepositions is often Hebrew rather than Greek (see the examples cited in A, 
p- xvf.). The characteristic features of Hebrew style are marked throughout all sections of the book. 
Thus in the dialogue between the seer and the angel the expression he answered (I answered) and 


said constantly recurs; cf. also ask... and say, v. 46, 50. Before the oratio recta saying (= sx) 
is constantly prefixed, dzxit dicens even occurring (xi. 37, xii. 40). Such diffuseness is a well-known 
feature in Hebrew composition. Another characteristic feature in the dialogue is the self-designation 
of the human speaker as ¢hy servant, while the angel is addressed as domine (cf. Vv. 45-56, Vi. 12, 
Vil. 75, 102, viii. 6, 24, x. 37, xii. 8, xiii. 14); in the case of a woman ¢hine handmaid (ix. 43, 45). 


The title of address O dominator domine (O Lord that bearest rule, R.V.) which occurs several times is 
properly applicable only to God = Agozora xipié pov (Heb. 1278 47° or mn) *27N). 


Characteristically Hebrew, again, is the artless simplicity with which sentences (esp. imperative 
forms of speech) are constantly expanded by the use of redundant expressions. 


The following examples are cited by Wellhausen: vade pondera mihi (iv. 5); ventte e¢ eamus (iv. 14); 
ventte ascendentes debellemus (iv. 15); vade et interroga (iv. 40), &c. The materializing of the action is 
detailed by the side of the description of the action itself: e.g. Respext oculis meis et vidi (ix. 38); apertum 
est os meum et tnchoavi dicere (ix. 28). Especially frequent is the somewhat similar use of incipere (= Heb. 
Syn) : cf. vi. 8, 19, 32; vii. 75, 88, 97, 122, 126, &c. (cf. the similar use of apxecGar in the Gospels). The 
ollowing are also examples of expanded descriptions of simple actions, which are characteristically Hebrew : 
surge super pedes tuos (Vv. 15; Vi. 13, 17; X. 30; xi. 7); capax est tibi visus oculorum videre (x. 55); corguent 
me renes met (v. 31); cogttationes meae ascenderunt super cor meum (iil. r) ; conturbatus est sensus cordts tut 
(x. 31); we expavescat cor tuum (x. 55); vultus tuus tristis (v. 16); amara animo (ix. 41); figmentum manuum 
tuarum (iil. §; vill. 7); plantavit dextera tua (iii. 6). The bare mention of the person who is the instrument 
or object of an action is not sufficient; the organ through which the action is performed must also be 
mentioned. Thus the writer says zhy right hand has Planted for thou hast planted, thy countenance ts sad for 
thou art sad, &c. 


Further examples of genuine Hebraisms are the following: dixd in corde meo (iii. 28) ; accepisti 
wm corde tuo (vii. 16) ; reddere animam suam (vii. 75); non dwigentur viae corum (edododcba v. T2)% 


dare vocem suam (= rp na v. 5, 7); nomen uni vocasti (vi. 49); nomen tuum invocatum est super 
nos (iv. 25, X. 22); fiebat species coruscus (x. 2 5) 3 factus est in uno casus eorum (iii. 10); factus est 
Lacob in multitudine magna (iii. 16); factus est in vano (iv. 16); concupiscentia gustus multiformis 
(vi. 44). 


A number of words are used also in a sense that can only be explained by Hebrew usage: cf. e. g. 
confractio (vii. 108 and note), cor maris (iv. 7), fumen (= the River sc. Euphrates, xiii. 40), dgnum = tree 
(iv. 13; v. 5 = Heb. py = both wood and tree), multus for magnus (Heb. 37, x. 38, &c.), nationes (== Majer 
ny71N ul. 7 and note), xomina (names = individuals, persons, iii. 36), opus (= Heb. mbps reward vii. Baek 
lil. 33 note 2), proximus =? Heb. 2179p (v. 11 interrogabit regio proximam suam), radix used in a technical 
sense (v. 28, in another technical sense viii. 53 note 2), a saeculo (= ndwn ix. 7, 18), sermo = 735 (vii. ror ut 
videant qui predicti sunt sermones), cf. also x. 5, Spiritus intellectus (v. 22), unicus (=m v. 28), vas dellicosum 
(=nnndn > xiii. 9, 28), via (= Heb. 79 mode or kind; cf. vii. 80, iv. 3 and often: see note y, p. 145); 
among verbs the following, which reflect Hebrew usage, may be noted: wncere and vinci (= Heb. mzt and 
2M, ii. 21, vi. 28, vii. 115, 128), confortare (= pin v. 15, &c.), congregari (= }DNI Vil. 33), cxguirere tustitiam 
ab (= j) W5 vi. 19 and note), spernere used absolutely, like xarapoveiy (= 32 vii. 76, 79, &c.). 


It would, no doubt, be possible to explain isolated examples in the lists given above without 
recourse to the hypothesis of a Hebrew original; but the cumulative effect of the whole evidence 
creates a presumption which amounts to a certainty that the Greek text which underlies the extant 
versions was itself a translation from a Hebrew original. The whole book is coloured by Hebrew 
diction, Hebrew modes of thought and characteristic modes of expression. 


This conclusion is in no way weakened by the fact that Graecisms are of not infrequent occurrence. As 
Wellhausen remarks, Graecisms occur in the LXX. Attention has already been called to the fact of the 
occurrence of Greek usages and constructions in the Latin text These merely reflect the Greek text on 
which the Latin translator worked. Of Graecisms proper in the Greek translation itself a good instance is 
in €0 quod misereatur (vil. 132) = év 76 oixre(pew, several examples of which occur (év 7$+infin.). Occasional 
word-plays in the Greek may also be explained as due to the translator. : 

* For a full and detailed list see Volkmar, pp. 313 ff. 
* A good example of this occurs in xii. 24-5. 


548 


IV EZRA 


One other criterion exists by which the hypothesis of a Hebrew original may be tested: viz. 
whether the hypothesis will explain, or is compatible with, the variations that exist in the versions. 
A certain number of these are due to internal corruptions in the versions themselves.!. But a large 
number of cases remains where divergent readings of the Greek can best be explained by the hypo- 
thesis of corruption in the original Hebrew text (for examples see the notes in the following 
commentary). as 

: Again ex hypothest it ought to be possible throughout to arrive at an approximation to the under- 
lying Hebrew text. This has been constantly borne in mind by the present editor, and it can 
confidently be asserted that, all through, the textual phenomena are compatible with a Hebrew original. 


An apparent exception to this rule occurs in vi. 56 where the LXX of Isa. xl. 15 (Zhe unto spittle) is 
followed against the Masoretic Hebrew text. But this can be explained without violence to the hypothesis of 
a Hebrew original (cf. notes ad /oc.). The word-play in the Greek of xii. 24—25 has already been referred to. 


In the previous discussion it has been assumed throughout that a Hebrew original is postulated. 
The textual phenomena certainly point to this rather than Aramaic. The constant use of such 
expressions as e¢ factum est, et ertt, et ecce, and, above all, the recurring use of the infinitive absolute, 
point to a Hebrew rather than an Aramaic original. 

It remains to add a word on the relation of the Hebrew original to the versions. The extant 
versions are, as has already been pointed out, translations directly from the lost Greek version 
(with the possible exception of the Armenian, which may have been made from the Syriac). 
The original Greek version was itself a translation of the Hebrew text which embraced the 
Apocalypse proper (i.e. chapters iii-xiv of 2 Esdras in the Vulgate form). To this original Greek 
version were appended (in the third century) the additional chapters (i-ii and xv—xvi of the Vulgate 
and our own official Apocrypha). They were composed in Greek and are of Christian origin. In 
the time of Ambrose apparently the Latin version of chapters xv—xvi was already current, and it is 
probable that these chapters were already attached to chapters iii-xiv (see further BF, p. xlili; and 
for the whole subject of this section ZA, pp. xiii-xix). 


§ 6. THE COMPOSITE CHARACTER OF THE TEXT. 


Is the present form of 4 Ezraa compilation, made by an editor from different sources ? Or is it, on 
the whole, a uniform composition which in a real sense goes back to a single author? The latter 
alternative is accepted by (among modern scholars) Gunkel? and F. C. Porter *; the former is upheld 
by Kabisch and Dr. Charles. 

At the outset we are confronted with a datwm that strongly suggests the use by an editor of an 
independent source. In the very first verse we read: J Salathiel who am also Ezra (iii.1). This 
strange identification of Salathiel with Ezra cannot be justified historically, nor can it be explained 
as due to defective historical knowledge on the part of the original writer of this section of the book. 
The only adequate explanation is that an editor or compiler is using an independent writing in which 
the seer who is the recipient of the revelations that follow, spoke in the name of Salathiel, and that 
the compiler who utilized this written source was anxious, for some reason, to connect it with the 
name of Ezra; accordingly he inserted the words who am also Ezra. 


What other explanation is possible? If it be assumed that the author wrote the words, then we must 
suppose that he thought of himself sometimes as Ezra, sometimes as Salathiel. But such an assumption is 
surely far-fetched, and in the highest degree unnatural. If the author had wished to speak throughout in the 
name of Ezra it would have been perfectly easy for him to do so. The importation of Salathiel would in that 
case be perfectly gratuitous, On the other hand, if the identification be due to a compiler who is using 
sources, all is explained. 


We may assume, then, that the present form of our book reveals unmistakably the hand of a 
Compiler or Redactor (R) who has used as a source an originally independent Salathiel-apocalypse 
(S). It remains to determine what are the limits of 5S, so far as it is embodied in our own book, 
and what are its relations to other parts of the book.‘ 


§ 7. THE SOURCES OF THE BOOK. 


No question arises in connexion with regard to chapters 3-10 which, apart from the eschatological 
passages, may be assigned as a whole to S. The Redactor (R) will, of course, be in evidence 


1 A good example of internal corruption in the Latin is vii. 4 (altum for latum). 
2 In Kautzsch. 3 The Messages of the Apocalyptical Writers (1909), p. 336. 
4 See further the discussion of this point in ZA, p. xxif. 


549 


INTRODUCTION 


occasionally ; but there will be little difficulty in assigning limits to his work after the more important 
question as to what other main sources, if any, are embodied in our own book has been discussed. 

This resolves itself into the question whether the author of S can have embodied in his work the 
5th, 6th and 7th visions of the book (chapters xi—xiv), or whether these are to be regarded in the light 
of appendices, drawn from independent sources, and inserted in their present position by R. fe 

The famous Eagle-vision (chapters xi-xii) has all the appearance of an independent writing. 
It has a style and form of its own. But the all-important fact about it is that it reveals eschatological 
conceptions which are radically opposed to those of S. The latter holds strongly to a dualistic and 
transcendental view. There are two ages; one the present corruptible age, and the other the 
glorious incorruptible age that is to succeed the present one, after the Final Judgement. The hopes 
of S are fixed on the latter; he gives up the present as hopeless (see further $10 (1)). On the other 
hand, in the Eagle-vision a strongly political view is held. The writer’s hopes are fixed on the 
annihilation of the Eagle (i.e. the Roman Empire). It is this that will mark the decisive moment ; 
the Day of Judgement will dawn, according to this writer’s conception, when the Roman Empire 
is annihilated by the Messiah, and the Rule of God becomes a reality upon the earth. The two con- 
ceptions are difficult to harmonize. Doubtless the compiler (R) did try to harmonize them by com- 
bining them in thought; he doubtless anticipated that the world, even after the victory of the 
Messiah over Rome, would still come to its predestined end which would usher in the final Day 
of Judgement. But can such a conception be attributed to S? If anything is certain about this 
writer it is that he wrestles with real difficulties, and strives to reach a real solution. He is not 
a mere collector of opposed opinions. The conviction that dominates the whole thought of S is that 
the evil which reigns in the present order is so deep-rooted that nothing less than the dissolution of 
the present world and the ushering in of the future and better world (or age) will suffice to eliminate 
the wrongs and unrighteousness that now exist! Is it conceivable that S can at the same time have 
held the view that the annihilation of the oppressive world-power by the Messiah will usher in a new 
age in the present world, which will bring felicity to those who live on into it, and justify the ways of 
God by making the divine rule a reality upon the earth? No. This older view was doubtless well 
known to S, and had failed to satisfy him. In his agonizing struggle for fresh light he im- 
plicitly repudiates the older eschatology, with its political hopes and somewhat materialistic 
aspirations, and takes refuge in a transcendental view. Consequently we are justified in treating 
the Eagle-vision (A) as an independent source which owes its position in the book to R.2. The 
general theme of the Son of Man vision (ch. xiii)—viz. the annihilation of hostile powers and the 
setting up of the Messianic kingdom—is identical with that of the Eagle-vision. For the reasons 
already advanced it cannot, therefore, belong to S. Its eschatology also is different from that of the 
Eagle-vision, as will be shown later. Consequently it must be regarded as an independent writing. 
Though in tone and in some of its characteristic conceptions the final chapter (xiv) of our Apocalypse 
is much more akin to S than the two independent sources already referred to, it yet cannot be 
regarded as belonging to the Salathiel-apocalypse. The situation presupposed throughout this 
chapter (with the exception of some interpolations due to R) is that of the historical Ezra, living 
in the fifth century B.c.; it cannot, therefore, be brought into accordance with the situation of 
Salathiel (who lived a century earlier) as this is implied in S.3 

Thus, as a result of our discussion, so far, we have reached the conclusion that the Salathiel- 
apocalypse (S) is contained within chapters iii-x of our book ; while outside of and independent 
of this at least three other independent sources have been used, viz. the Eagle-vision (chapters xi-xii 
=A), the Son of Man vision (ch. xiii=M), and an Ezra-piece (ch. xiv= E?), 

The combination of these elements into the present whole of the Ezra-apocalypse will have been 
the work of the compiler (R). In the process of redaction the hand of R will naturally be evident 
especially in fitting together the diverse material, and in the work of harmonization. It becomes 
important, therefore, to determine the extent and limits of R’s work, 

But before this is attempted the question of the possible existence of another source within our 
book remains to be discussed. Within the chapters which contain S there are four eschatological 
passages, marked by special features, the relation of which to S it is important to determine. These 
passages are the following: (1) iv. 52-v. 13a, (2) vi. 11-29, (3) vii. 26-44, and (4) viii. 63-ix. 12. 
In general they contain eschatological descriptions, of a well-known traditional type, which set forth 
the ‘signs’ that are to precede the end of the world, and usher in the Final Judgement. 


Thus (1) describes the ‘signs’ that precede the End as follows: it will be a time of commotions, and the 
general break up of moral and religious forces (v. 1-2); the heathen world-power (= Rome) will be destroyed 


* Cf. especially iv. 26-43 (which should be carefully read). . 
? See further the discussion in EA, pp. 246 ff. 
* Cf. further ZA, pp. 306-7. 


yee 


IV EZRA 


(v. 3); there will be portents in nature, general chaos in society, monstrous and untimely births, the failure of 
the means of subsistence, and internecine strife (v. 4-8, cf. vi. 21-22), and wisdom and understanding will 
have perished from the earth (v. to-12). In (2) the description of the signs that precede the End is taken up 
again and interwoven with another which has for its subject the End of the world itself. It also contains 
a description of the felicity of those who survive the Messianic ‘woes’ (vi. 13-28). In (3) a description is 
given of the sudden revelation of the Messiah, his 400 years’ reign on the earth and death, and finally a vivid 
delineation of the dissolution of the world interwoven with a description of the Judgement itself (vii. 26-44). 
In (4) the signs of the End are again reviewed (viii. 63-ix. 12). 


Are these passages integral parts of S?. Or can S have been responsible for their insertion in 
their present contexts? The traditional character of the passages as a whole is generally conceded ; 
they belong to a type which has many parallels elsewhere. Is it conceivable, then, that S took 
up this widely current traditional material, and embodied it in his own work ? An examination of the 
first of the passages (iv. 56—-v. 12) mentioned discloses unmistakable marks of interpolation. Its 
awkward insertion in its present context cannot be due to S; it was doubtless interpolated by R. The 
second passage is parallel to and depends upon the first. If (1) is an interpolation, it follows that 
(2) must be also. The source from which R excerpted them was, Kabisch thinks, an old Ezra- 
apocalypse, containing eschatological descriptions of the ‘signs’ preceding the End, and of the End 
itself. It may be denominated E (=Ezra-apocalypse; so Kabisch). For similar reasons the third 
and fourth passages (vii. 26-44 and viii. 63-ix. 12) cannot belong to S or have been inserted in their 
present contexts by S. Kabisch believes that both these passages have been drawn from E. The 
present writer, however, thinks that in their extant form both are the work of R, who may have 
drawn upon E, but has also utilized other material. They are in fact a compilation of diverse 
elements (cf. the discussion in EA, pp. 108 ff. and 199 ff.). 

The results thus reached may be stated as follows: the present form of our apocalypse is due 
to a Redactor (R) who used the following sources: 

(1) S, A SALATHIEL-APOCALYPSE which (so far as it has been utilized) is embodied in iii. I-31, 
iv. I-51, v. 13 b—vi. 10, vi. 30-vii. 25, vii. 45-viii. 62, and ix. I15-x. 57; in addition the two sections 
xii. 40-48 and xiv. 28-35 are probably misplaced pieces which belong to S (see the introductory 
sections ad /oc.). 

(2) E, AN EZRA-APOCALYPSE, from which iv. 52-v. 13a and vi. 13-29 are extracts. Their 
present position is due to R, who has also drawn upon this source in vii. 26-44 and viii. 63-i1x. 12. 

(3) A, THE EAGLE-VISION, contained (with revision by R) in chapters xi-xii. 

(4) M, A SON OF MAN VISION, contained (with much revision and insertions by R) in 
chapter xiii. 

(5) E?, AN EZRA-PIECE, contained in xiv. I-17 a, 18-27, 36-47. 

(6) R is responsible for the compilation of the book as a whole. By means of redactional 
links and adjustments he has fitted the different elements of the book together ;_ the following 
passages (redactional links) are due to his hand: iv. 52 (as for the signs concerning which thou 
askesi me, I may tell thee of them in part but) introducing the extract from E_ which follows : 
(v. I-13 a), vi. 11-12 (introducing the second extract from E which follows in vi. 13-28), vi. 29, 
x. 58-9 (transition to the Fifth vision), xii. 49-51 (transition to the Sixth vision), xiv. 49-50 
(conclusion of the book). In the process of adjustment R has also, apparently, misplaced cer- 
tain sections of S. Besides the two sections already mentioned (xii. 40-8 and xiv. 28-35) the 
following also fall under this category: v. 14-15 and xiii. 57-8. The following are the longer 
insertions which were probably compiled in their present form, as well as inserted by R: 
iii. 32-6, vii. 26-44, viii. 63-ix. 12, and xiii. 13 b-24: R is also responsible for a certain amount 
of revision in the fourth and following visions (especially in the interpretation) : x. 45 (72 eo 
altered in the original Heb. to zz ea) and x. 46 (David altered into Solomon), Steet so (on the right 
side), xi. 20 (upon the right side), xii. 8 (completely), xii. 9, xii. 14, Xil. 15 (the twelve), xii. 26 b-28. 
xii. 32 (partly), xii. 34, xii. 39, xiii. 26b, xill. 29-32, XII. 36, xiii. 48, xiii. 52 (or those that 
are with him). For minor adjustments made by R reference must be made to ZA, p. xxvii. 

The above analysis agrees, in the main, with the results of Kabisch's masterly discussion in his 
essay on our book.! The present editor, however, differs from Kabisch in assigning rather more to 
R—in particular the sections vii. 26-44 and viii. 63-ix. 12 which appear to be compilations by him. 

Thus the book as a whole is a compilation from different sources. In the casé of EA 
and M we have only extracts from larger works (see further ZA, p. 244 {,,295 f,). im the case 
of E? we have also a piece which was extracted from a larger source (cf. ZA, pp. 301). Only 


1 Das vierte Buch Esra auf seine Quellen untersucht (1889). 
oo 


INTRODUCTION 


in the case of S, which forms the groundwork of the whole book, have we a source which 
is substantially preserved in its entirety—though even here there are some curtailments. With S the 
compiler interwove extracts from other (Ezra) apocalypses, and then invested the whole with the 
name of Ezra (cf. the case of 1 Enoch, which is a compilation of extracts from a number of Enochic 
apocalypses interwoven with fragments of a N oah-apocalypse).! 


§ 8. THE DATE OF THE SOURCES AND OF THE FINAL REDACTION. 


Fortunately in the opening verse of the book we havea precise statement which points definitely 
to an exact date for the original appearance of the Salathiel-apocalypse (S). Itis stated in iii. 1 that 
it was 2x the thirtieth year of the downfall of the city that Salathiel was in Babylon and underwent the 
experiences detailed in the visions that follow; and this statement is confirmed in iii. 29 (these 
thirty years). This date, which probably is intended to refer to the original publication of S, points 
to the year A. D. 100 (i.e. thirty years after the destruction of Jerusalem in A. D. 70) as the time when S 
originally appeared or was completed as an independent work. For reasons supporting this view 
reference must be made to ZA, p. xxviii f. The place of composition of S was probably Palestine, 
and not Rome as Kabisch supposes (ibid.). : ie 

With regard to the dates of the other sources embodied in our book, Eis marked by traditional 
features which suggest that it was current long before it was utilized by R, who has handled it with 
considerable freedom.?. From the absence of any clear indication that the horrors of the struggle 
which culminated in A.D. 70 have coloured the delineation of the Messianic ‘woes’ in these 
Passages it may be inferred that E had assumed literary form some time before A.D. 70.3 Kabisch 
suggests as a possible date about 30 B.c. ; 

The date of the original composition of the Eagle-vision (A) may be more definitely deter- 
mined. The one usually favoured is some time in the reign of Domitian (A. D, 81-96) ; but a date 
in the reign of Vespasian (A.D. 69-79) is quite possible, and not improbable (see the point fully 
discussed EA, p. 240). : 

In the case of the Son of Man vision (M) the interpretation of the vision presupposes a time for its 
composition before A. D. 70 (cf. ZA, p. 286). As the Christology of M is more advanced than that 
of E it is probable that it was reduced to written form at a later date than the latter, though it must be 
remembered that the actual vision in M (4 Ezra xiii. 1-1 3a) embodies traditional elements that are 
much older. 

On the other hand, E? (ch. xiv) clearly implies a date subsequent to A.D. 70. The emphasis laid 
upon the representation of Ezra as the restorer of the Law that has been burnt (xiv. 21) points 
unmistakably to this. Kabisch regards this source as of contemporaneous origin with S, and this is 
quite possible ; in tone it occasionally resembles S. But all that can be said with certainty is that 
it must have been composed some time between A. D. 70 and the time of the Redactor (? c. A.D. 120); 
it is probable that some considerable time elapsed between the Fall of Jerusalem and the time 
of its composition ; consequently a date at or about A.D. 100 is not improbable. 


The limits within which the final redaction of our book must have taken place may be fixed as 
A.D. 100-135. It is clear that the book cannot have been published in its present form before the 
former date in view of the explicit reference in iii. t to the thirtieth year after the downfall of the city ; 
and on the other hand, it would have been impossible for a Jewish book of this kind to have found 
its way into Christian circles after the Bar-Kokba revolt, when Church and Synagogue had become 
hopelessly alienated. Sufficient time must be allowed before A. D. 132-135 for the Hebrew original 
to have been translated into Greek, and for the Greek version to have won its way into Christian 
circles. The date of the original publication cannot, therefore, be placed much after A.D. 120. Can 
it be placed any earlier ? 

We have already seen reason to believe that the explicit time-determination given in iii. r marks 
the date of the publication of S—not that of the whole book. If that be so, sufficient time must be 
allowed for S to have become well known in the circles to which R belonged, and for the work of 
compilation to have taken place. A number of indications suggest that at the time when the 
Redactor compiled the work feeling towards Rome on the part of Jewish circles in Palestine had 
become embittered. This was the case after the suppression of the Jewish rebellions in A. D. 1 16-117; 


* For later apocalyptic literature circulating under Ezra’s name cf. PP. 470 seq, of this vol.; B/, pp. Ixxxvi ff. 
. 7 We have extracts from E, probably in v. 1-12, vi. 12-28; while it has, apparently, been utilized by R in 
vil. 26-44 and viii. 63-ix. 12. 2 
° The reference to che humiliation of Sion in vi. 19? is probably a later interpolation; see EA, Dp SSO 
* The insertion of the Eagle-vision by R is evidence of this. 


55% 


BNE ZR. 


and though with the accession of Hadrian a better feeling manifested itself, this was of short 
duration, and the old spirit of hostility soon re-asserted itself. These various indications point to 
a date about A. D. 120 as the time when the Redactor wrote and completed his work. It may have 
been somewhat later. 


A similar date (between A. D. 120-130) is suggested by Charles as the time when 2 Baruch was edited in 
its final form (in Hebrew and then translated into Greek). 


§ 9. THE RELATION OF 4 EZRA TO 2 BARUCH. 


It is evident from a comparison of parallel passages! that a relation exists between 4 Ezra and 
2, Baruch of the closest and most intimate description. To determine the exact details of this relation- 
ship is not possible here in view of the complex critical problems involved by the composite character 
of the text of each book. All that can be attempted is to set forth some of the daza that will serve 
to indicate the lines of a solution. 

The composite character of 4 Ezra has already been indicated in the former part of this Intro- 
duction (see above §§ 6 and 7). In the case of 2 Baruch also the editor (Dr. Charles) finds it necessary 
to analyse the book into a number of sources, which are denominated A’, A?, A® (i.e. the three Messianic 
apocalypses, which look for a personal Messiah, being chapters xxvii-xxxi, xxxvi—xl, and liii-Ixxiv) ; 
as in these sections Jerusalem is represented, according to Dr. Charles, as still standing it may be 
concluded that they assumed literary form before A. D. 70: another set of passages, denominated B* 
(= i-ix. 1, xxxii. 2-4, xliii-xliv. 7, xlv—xlvi, lxxvii-Ixxxii, xxxiv, Ixxxvi f), which are optimistic 
as to the future of the present world-order, but do not expect the advent of a personal Messiah, may 
be grouped partly with A1, A?, A®; but the date of composition of B* must be subsequent to A. D. 70 
as the destruction of Jerusalem and the exile are presupposed. Dr. Charles also distinguishes 
two other sources, viz. B? (= x-xxv, Xxx. 2-xxxii. I, xxxii. 5-xxxv, xli-xlii, xliv. 8-15, xlvii-lii, 
Ixxv sq., lxxxiii) and B? (= lxxxv): both B* and B? are pessimistic in their view of the present world- 
order, and do not look for a Messianic kingdom; their hopes are fixed on the advent of the final 
judgement and the spiritual world; they also presuppose the destruction of Jerusalem and the exile, 
and therefore assumed literary form subsequent to A. D. 70. 

The broad results of this critical analysis suggest that 2 Baruch is a compilation from diverse 
elements similar, in many respects, to 4 Ezra. In both cases older documents, containing the 
national eschatology, have been combined with later elements which reveal a fundamentally different 
outlook. The elements B%, B? in 2 Baruch are comparable with S in 4 Ezra, while A’ has 
affinities with the E source of 4 Ezra, and the date of its composition may be much the same. 
As to the date of composition of A? and A* the present writer must confess to some doubts. 
The former of these, A®, i.e. the fountain and cedar vision, is a vision of the fall of the Roman 
power, and may be compared with the Eagle-vision (A) of 4 Ezra, Like the latter it is a dream- 
vision, and may very well be of much the same date (some time in the reign of Vespasian or 
Domitian). May it not have formed one of the collection of dream-visions from which the Eagle- 
vision of 4 Ezra was excerpted? The possibility must of course always be allowed for that the 
actual material of the vision is older than its interpretation. In A? (the cloud and water vision) 
there is apparently a fusion of early and later elements. It has several points of contact with 
E2 of 4 Ezra, and in its present form may well be of much the same date as regards literary com- 
position (some time between A.D. 70 and 100, or even later); its reflective and theological tone 
harmonizes with this view. The material of the vision is probably one of the older elements, 
as also is the eschatological scheme of the Messianic ‘ woes’ in ch. xx. 

The numerous points of contact between B!, B? in 2 Baruch and S in 4 Ezra may be seen from 
the list of parallel passages in Dr. Charles’s edition of 2 Baruch (pp. 170-1; cf. also pp. lxix-Ixx 
in EA). It looks sometimes as if one were actually citing the other. 

In each book we apparently have the work of a school of apocalyptists. _The schools are, 
it would seem, rival schools. One is answering the other. The present writer believes that 4 Ezra 
represents the work of a somewhat earlier school of apocalyptists who were under the influence of 
Shammaite teachers (such as Eliezer b. Hyrqanos) ; while 2 Baruch embodies the work of a rather 
younger school, who were under the influence of Aqiba. The latter work answers the former ; and, 
on the whole, it gives answers decidedly more in accordance with what later became orthodox 
Judaism. Thus whereas in 4 Ezra vii. 119 (O thou Adam, what hast thou done! For though it was 
thou that sinned, the fall was not thine alone, but ours also who are thy descendants ! a passage belong- 
ing to S) Adam is charged with being the cause of the perdition of the whole race, this teaching 


1 See the list printed in Charles’s edition of 2 Baruch, pp. 170-1. 


By) 


INTRODUCTION 


is expressly refuted in 2 Baruch (cf. liv. 19: Adam is therefore not the cause, save only of his own soul, 
but each one of us has been the Adam of his own soul, a passage which belongs to A® according to 
Dr. Charles’s analysis). 

It seems probable that 2 Baruch in its final form was edited and put forth soon after the appearance 
of 4 Ezra in its present form; i.e. some time between A. D. 120 and 135, perhaps very soon after 
A.D. 120. Like 4 Ezra it was originally written in Hebrew, and soon after its appearance in this 


language was translated into Greek. 
§ 10, THE THEOLOGY AND ESCHATOLOGY OF THE BOOK.! 


The book as a whole presents, as Gunkel has pointed out, two kinds of material: ‘(1) properly 
apocalyptical and especially eschatological mysteries ; this material is to be compared with Dan. vii. ff. 
or Revelation ivff.; (2) religious problems and speculations which relate to eschatology and find 
in it either their answer or their occasion; this material is comparable with the speculations of 
the Pauline letters. The author put these problems in general before the mysteries, as being 
of greater importance, an order which can be compared with that of Revelation”? In the light 
of the critical analysis given in §§6 and 7 above by ‘author’ here we must understand, for the 
purposes of our discussion, Redactor. The latter, in compiling our book, must have placed the 
discussion of the religious problems, which is embodied in S, first, because this discussion was 
felt to be concerned with one of the burning subjects of the day—the religious significance of 
the Fall of Jerusalem. The appendices to S (chapters xi-xiv) were intended to supplement the 
Salathiel-apocalypse by setting forth some classical expressions of the older eschatology. As 
will be seen, the eschatology of S, both explicit and implicit, is in many respects of a fundamentally 
different character. 

(1) The theology and eschatology of S. The author of S appears to-have been in close touch 
with the circles of the Teachers of the Law, and may have actually been a member of the scribal 
class (cf. viii, 29). Like many Pharisees of the time he valued and practised an ascetic mode of life - 
(cf. vi. 32, and the frequent references to fasting in the first four visions). As a Jew he postulates 
the fundamental beliefs of Judaism. He insists on God’s unity and uniqueness ; God and God alone, 
without the intervention of any mediatorial agency, is responsible for creation, and God alone will 
exercise the functions of Judge at the final judgement (vi. 1-6). Israel is God’s elect people (v. 27; 
cf. the whole passage v. 23-30; vi. 58; viii. 16, &c.), with whom God entered into a special 
covenant-relation (iii. 14 f.), and for whose sake the world was made (vi. 55, vii. 11). The Law isa 
special divine gift to Israel (iii. 19 f., ix. 31 f.). It had indeed been offered to the other nations of the 
world but deliberately rejected by them (cf. vii. 23, 24, vii. 72); Israel, on the other hand, had 
accepted it, and had thereby acknowledged the divine sovereignty. In consequence Israel is the true 
representative of humanity before God—the other nations are ‘nothing’; by rejecting the divine 
gift they have put themselves outside the pale (vi. 56, vii. 23 f.). The apocalyptist glorifies the Law 
(cf. esp. ix. 29-37), but is perplexed by the problems presented by it in its relation to Israel. 
These problems are debated in the first part of the book. Why is the chosen people given up as 
a prey to the heathen? Because of its sins? But the sins of the godless heathen far outweigh those 
of Israel ; why, then, should the former be allowed to lord it over and oppress the latter? (cf. v. 29, 
lii, 28). To these questions no satisfactory answer can be found in the Law alone. The Law 
is impotent to redeem and save the sinner (ix. 36; cf. Rom. iii. 20). To a race doomed to sin the 
promises of the Law are a mockery (vii. 116-31). The utmost that the seer can hope from the 
Law is that while the many are born to perish, but few shall be saved. The answers to the 
problem of the nation to which the apocalyptist struggles in the debate are the following: 

(a) God’s ways are inscrutable. Man cannot understand or fathom the most ordinary elements 

of the material world: how, then, can he hope to comprehend the things of the incorruptible world ? 
(iv J=11s chi v. 96 f.), 
! b) Human intelligence is finite and limited. The angel enforces the point that the human 
intelligence must keep within its own prescribed bounds by a parable taken from the sea and the 
forest (iv. 12-21). The seer protests that he has no desire to explore heavenly secrets, but that his 
perplexities are occasioned by the daily experiences of earth, and is told that the New Age which 
is about to dawn will solve all difficulties (iv. 22-32). 

(c) The course and duration of the present world has been pre-determined. Evil must run its 
course ; the harvest of evil must first be gathered before the good can take its place (iv. 28-31) ; but 
everything has been pre-determined—the number of the righteous elect, and the duration of the present 


* For a fuller discussion cf. ZA, Pp. xxxiv-—lvii. 
* Cited by F. C. Porter, of. cit, psec 


554 


IV EZRA 


age—and things as they are will not be moved nor stirred “2/1 the measure appointed be fulfilled. 
But when the predestined moment shall have come nothing will be able to delay its consummation 
(iv. 33-43). That moment, it is hinted, will soon arrive (iv. 44-50). 

_ (d) Lx spite of all appearances to the contrary God loves Israel now and always. The apocalyp- 
tist never wavers in his conviction that God’s love for Israel exceeds all other, and finds in this 
thought a source of supreme consolation (v. 31-40; cf. viii. 47). 


The one positive result reached in the discussion so far is an eschatological one. The future 
age will solve all difficulties. This is a fundamental conviction of our apocalyptist. The present 
age, in his view, is hopelessly involved in evil: it is full of impotence and sorrow. The contrast 
between the two ages—the present and the future—is emphasized in the strongest possible manner 
throughout. The corruptible world, and all that is mortal, will dissolve and be succeeded by the 
incorruptible world and immortality. It will thus be seen that the apocalyptist’s view of the present 
world-order is extremely pessimistic. He gives up the old hope of a renovation and purification of 
the present world, and fixes his gaze and his hopes on the future world or age—the age of true life 
and immortality wherein 

corruption ts passed away, 

weakness ts abolished, 

infidelity is cut off, 

while righteousness is grow, 

and faithfulness is sprung up (vii. 114). 
But having won his way to this position the apocalyptist still finds himself baffled and perplexed 
with sore difficulties. 

In answer to the difficulty that the coming age shall bring delight to few, but torment unto many 
(vii. 47) the angel can only say that the few are precious and the many worthless (vii. 49-61). 
This naturally fails to satisfy the seer, who protests that man had better not have been created 
at all (cf. vii. 62-9) or at least been restrained from sinning (vii. 116-26). Against the logical 
result of pure legalism the seer confidently appeals to the divine compassion (vii. 132-40). Moreover, 
he is answered by the angel that his love for creation comes far short of the divine love. 

It will have become apparent from the previous discussion that the author of S realizes the inherent 
weakness of the Law as a redemptive power. He thus approaches to the attitude of mind of St. Paul 
(cf. Rom. viii. 3 f.); and it is clear that this attitude of mind was by no means so rare and isolated 
a phenomenon in contemporary Judaism as is sometimes supposed. This becomes even more 
apparent when we examine the doctrine of sin as it emerges in our Apocalypse together with the 
related doctrine of salvation by faith and works. 

It is important to remember that in the theology of S it is the acceptance of the Law that is the 
standard by which men must be judged at the last, not the observance of it. True, the Law, once 
given, ought to have been observed. But so far is this from being the case that very few, ifany, even 
in Israel have lived up to the divine requirements as set forth in the Law: 


For in truth 
There is none of the earth-born that has not dealt wickedly, 
And among those that exist who has not sinned (viii. 35). 


So conscious is the apocalyptist of this that he reckons himself among the sinners (cf. vii. 48, 
vii. 64, vii. 118, 126, viii. 17, viii. 31). Thus, according to S, sin is conceived as consisting essen- 
tially in unfaithfulness to the Law (cf. ix. 36: we who have received the Law and sinned must 
perish). The result has been alienation and estrangement from God (vii. 48); and this result is due, 
in some way, to the sin of Adam which has involved the fall of the entire human race (cf. vii. 118). 
Man’s infirmity is to be traced to the evil heart (cor malignum) which was developed in Adam and 
transmitted to his descendants (cf. iii. 20-2 and iii. 25-6). The effect of the Law was nullified 
because of the evil germ (root iii. 22) or grain of evil seed (granum seminis mali) which was sown 
in the heart of Adam from the beginning (iv. 30). This evil root or grain of evil seed doubtless 
corresponds to the evil impulse (yeser ha-ra‘) of Rabbinic theology. Adam clothed himself with the 
cor malignum by yielding to the suggestions of the eval tmpulse. The evil heart, thus developed, 
inevitably led to sin and death. The evil seed sown in the heart of Adam was transmitted to 
his descendants (iv. 30) with the result that zie infirmity became inveterate (iii. 22). All men have 
fallen into sin (viii. 35), and, as a consequence, this age [the present world-order] zs full of sorrow 
and impotence (iv. 27); the ways of this world have become narrow and sorrowful and painful 
(vii. 12). The evil heart has estranged from God and brought into destruction . . . nota few only, 
but wellnigh all that have been created (vii. 48); for all the earth-born are defiled with imiguities, 


555 


INTRODUCTION 


Sull of sins, laden with offences. At the most, judged by the standard of the Law, only a few 
can hope to be saved (vii. 45). ; 

Exactly how the fall of Adam and the universal state of sin are connected is nowhere 
explicitly stated. That the two things are connected is certainly implied in vii. 118. It is true 
Adam’s descendants share his responsibility for what has happened in that they have deliberately 
followed his example in clothing themselves with the evz/ heart (iii. 26); the moral responsibility 
of each individual member of the race is not denied. Probably at the back of the apocalyptist’s 
thought lies the idea that Adam by his transgression lost much of his power of resisting the evé/ 
wmpulse or thought, and transmitted this weakness to his descendants. It is noteworthy that the fall 
of man is nowhere in our apocalypse attributed to external agency (demonic incitement). 

The corruption of the human race is regarded as due to a development of something inherent 
in man’s nature (yeser 4a@-ra’ of Rabbinic theology) ; but by representing the Law as powerless to 
prevent the evil element in man’s nature from gaining the entire mastery (iii. 22), our apocalyptist 
directly contradicts the orthodox Rabbinic view, according to which the evil yeser could be—and as 
a matter of fact has been by the pious in Israel generally—successfully resisted by the study of the 
Law and the practice of good works. In S also the entry of physical death into the world is directly 
connected with the Fall. Thus, according to this teaching, both physical and spiritual death are 
a legacy from Adam. For a comparison of these positions with that of St. Paul see LA, Dp. Sil, 

In fact the doctrine of our apocalyptist ultimately resolves itself into a pure and lofty 
individualism. His view of sin as universal, owing to its root in the evil heart which is also universal, 
leads him to manifest a certain compassion for and sympathy with the perishing masses of mankind : 


But what ts man that thou shouldst be wroth with him ? 

Or what is a corruptible race that thou canst be so bitter towards it? 
For in truth 

There is none of the earth-born who has not dealt wickedly, 

And among those that exist who has not sinned (viii. 34, 35). 


Where all are involved in a state of unrighteousness before God there is little room for self- 
gratulation. One of the most striking features in S is the absence of the note of self-confidence, 
based upon Israel’s possession of the Law, which is so prominent in 2 Baruch! The Law in S 
rather brings terror by its condemnation than hope of salvation. The universal need is mercy 
rather than the award of the Law; and so the apocalyptist is driven to appeal, against the 
Law, to the divine attributes of compassion and forgiveness (cf. vii. 132-viii. 3, viii. 36). 

Nowhere is the individual note more clearly sounded than in what may be described as 
our apocalyptist’s eschatology of the individual. This is set forth, with great wealth of detail, 
in vii. 75-101, which gives a long description of the state of the soul after death and before the 
judgement. It is further stated (vii. 102-15) that no intercession will be allowed on the Day 
of Judgement : 


The Day of Fudgement is decisive, and displays unto all the seal of truth... none shall 
pray for another on that Day, neither shall one lay a burden on another ; for then every one shall bear 
his own righteousness or unrighteousness (vii. 104-5). 


While the theology of S recognizes the Day of Judgement and an intermediate state for 
the soul between death and judgement, it knows of no resurrection of the body. In the description 
of the state of the soul after death it is made clear that the soul enters at once into a state 
of blessedness or the reverse, according as it is righteous or wicked. The souls of the righteous 
are guarded in chambers, and there, in great tranquillity and happiness, await the final judge- 
ment; the souls of the wicked, on the other hand, move about restlessly in torment. These 
conditions—though they will be intensified—are not to be essentially altered on the Day of 
Judgement itself. This practically means that judgement sets in immediately after death, and 
that a man’s fate is virtually determined by the present life—which is the doctrine of the Book 
of Wisdom and of Hellenistic Judaism.? 

It has already been pointed out that the writer of S discards, implicitly, the older eschatology 
of the nation. He does not look forward to a restoration of the Jewish State, or a rebuilding of 
Jerusalem ; nor to a renewed and purified earth under the conditions of the present world-order. 
His hopes are fixed on the advent of the new and better world which is to follow the collapse of the 


| : ; 5 k : 
In this book (especially in the section written after A.D. 70) ‘the Law is everything; it protects the righteous 


(xxxll. 1), justifies them (li. is their h li. Shy Hes. Ger ee ’ 
(Charles's note on A/. Be ehenae ope (li. 7), and so long as it is with Israel, Israel cannot fall (xlviii. 22, Bi) 


* For a fuller discussion of the position of S regarding the resurrection-belief see EA, p. xlviii f. 


556 


IN EZRA 


present world. Consequently he atiticipates merely the catastrophic end of the present world-order 
—his theology does not allow of any intermediate Messianic Age. The new Jerusalem which is to 
come will be the Heavenly City, which is shown to Salathiel in his final vision (x. 25 f.), and 
which belongs to the future incorruptible age. As to the precise time when the end of the present 
order is to come the apocalyptist has no definite knowledge ; but he is made to understand that the 
decisive moment is not far distant (cf. iv. 41, iv. 44-50); the appointed time has been pre-determined 
by God (iv. 36 f.), as well as the number of the righteous elect, and till this number shall have 
been completed the promised salvation cannot come (iv. 36). God’s purpose is fixed, but it is 
beyond the power of the human mind to fathom it (cf. v. 34-40, vi. 6, vii. 11, vii. 20). There is thus 
a strong element of determinism in S; but the freedom of the human will is also emphatically 
asserted—the two truths are set side by side. 

The theology of S is essentially other-worldly. The writer’s dualism is emphatic and pronounced. 
The present age and the future, above and below, are in fundamental opposition. The same violent 
contrast characterizes the material and the spiritual (cf. iv. 11). The body, regarded as the prison-house 
of the soul, is described as this corruptible vessel (vii. 88). It is significant that in S there is no 
resurrection of the body ; what is anticipated is practically a pure immortality of the soul. According 
to S the human heart, which has received the Law, is essentially a corruptible vessel, which belongs 
to the present order and will perish (ix. 36). In contrast to the present world-order, which zs full 
of sorrow and impotence (iv. 27), and the ways of which, owing to man’s sin, have become arrow 
ana sorrowful and painful (vii. 12), the ways of the future world are broad and safe, and yield the 
fruit of immortality (vii. 13). In the future age, which is already prepared: 


The (evil) root ts sealed up from you, 
Infirmity from your path extinguished ; 
And Death ts hidden, 
Hades fled away ; 
Corruption forgotten, 
Sorrows passed away ; 
And in the end the treasures of immortality are made manifest (viii. 53, 54): 


The pessimistic view of the present world-order which is characteristic of S naturally harmonizes 
with the ascetic tendencies to which reference has already been made. Taken together all these 
various tendencies—which are also marked in other apocalyptic literature—suggest, perhaps, the 
influence of Alexandrine rather than specifically Palestinian thought. But it must not be forgotten 
that Palestine was saturated with Hellenistic influence at this period, and that Palestinian Judaism 
was profoundly affected by it. The partial elimination of Greek elements, and the hardening and 
crystallization of the Rabbinic type of thought, was only effected later. The religious significance 
of S has been well set forth by Dr. Maldwyn Hughes in a sentence. Our apocalyptist, he says, 
‘despairs of a life of absolute obedience to the Law, even by Israel, not to speak of the world. The 
unconscious and unexpressed cry of the book is for a moral dynamic, which legalism could not 
supply.’ ? 

(2) The theology and eschatology of the other original sources. Of the remaining original sources 
of our Apocalypse apparently the oldest is E. The contents of this source, so far as it is embodied 
in our book, are purely eschatological in character. The themes with which it deals are (t) the 
Messianic ‘woes’, i.e. the signs and portents that are to usher in the End of the world (iv. 56-v. 13 a, 
vi. 21-2); (2) the End of the world (this is announced by the Voice of God, but not actually 
described: vi. 13-20, 23-4); (3) the felicity of those who survive the Messianic ‘woes’ and 
live on into the Messianic Age (vi. 25-8). It seems probable that E in its original form regarded 
the age of felicity, that was to follow the judgement, as a Messianic kingdom, of indefinite duration, set 
up on a purified earth ; but, apparently, there was no Messiah, though certain heralds of the Messianic 


Age were to appear—the men who have not tasted death from their birth—whose task it was to | 


convert the surviving members of the human race to @ different spirit (vi. 26-8). This eschato- — 


logical scheme is of the older type, common in the prophetic books of the Old Testament and in the 
older apocalypses (e.g. 1 Enoch i-xxxvi). As has been pointed out in a former chapter, E has 
probably been utilized by R in vii. 26-44 and viii. 63-ix. 12, and, in any case, only appears in our 
book in fragments. This fact makes it difficult to determine its theological positions precisely. 
It is possible that one of the missing portions contained an account of the resurrection, the 
place of which has been taken in R’s compilation by vii. 31. The description of the Messianic 
‘woes’ has many traditional features which find close parallels in similar descriptions elsewhere 


(cf. BA, p. 41). 
1 The Ethics of Jewish Apocryphal Literature, p. 240. 
557 


INTRODUCTION 


In the case of the Eagle-vision (ch. xi-xii) the dominating eschatological conception is 
a political one. Wickedness is concentrated in godless imperial Rome? and the judgement will 
be effected when Rome is destroyed by the Lion of Judah, i.e. the Messiah . .. who shall 
spring from the seed of David (xii. 32). The overthrow of the Roman Empire is to be followed 
by the setting up on earth of the theocratic kingdom under the direct rule of God. The author 
was apparently a zealot (see these points fully discussed in ZA, pp. 246 f.). The Messiah appears 
in a very active rdle here as the instrument for overthrowing the Roman Empire. : 

Very different eschatological conceptions emerge in the Son of Man vision (M=ch. xiii). 
These have been fully discussed in 2A (pp. 282-6), to which the reader must be referred. 
One feature, however, that comes out in the interpretation of the vision calls for special mention 
here. This is the emphasis that is laid on the Law. The heavenly Messiah destroys his 
enemies wzthout labour by the Law (xiii. 38). Further, in the legend of the Ten Tribes, which 
is given in the same context, their deliverance and ultimate return are represented as due to a 
return on their part to the observance of the Law. In order to do this they leave their 
heathen surroundings and migrate to a land Jurther distant, where the human race had never awelt, 
there at least to keep the statutes which they had not kept in their own land (xiii. 41 f.). In other 
words, to the author of this apocalyptic piece the Law is the standard of piety, and he can only 
conceive of the restoration of the lost Tribes as due to a whole-hearted acceptance of the ‘ yoke of 
the Law’. 

In the last of the original sources embodied in our book, viz. E? (i.e. the Ezra-legend given in 
ch. xiv) the most outstanding doctrinal feature is the conception of the Messiah (God’s Son) as pre- 
existing in heaven, surrounded by a community of elect ones. This agrees with the representation 
of the heavenly Son of Man of the Parables of 1 Enoch (xxxvii-Ixxi). Just as in the Parables Enoch 
is removed to heaven to dwell with the Son of Man (1 Enoch Ixx. 1 f.), so here Ezra’s assumption 
to remain henceforth with God’s Son, in company. with other elect ones, wxtil the times be ended, is 
described (cf. 4 Ezra xiv.9). So too, as in the Parables, the heavenly Messiah is not to appear 
until the End and the coming of the Judgement (cf. xiv. 9,10 and notes). “The world history is divided 
into twelve parts, nine and a half of which have already passed in the time of the historical Ene 
(i.e. the middle of the fifth century B.C.) This suggests that the apocalyptist conceives the world 
to have already entered upon the last period of tribulation (the last three and a half years of woe of 
Dan. ix. 27), and regards the approach of the final consummation as imminent (cf. xiv. 11,12 and notes). 
Another feature of E? is its pessimistic outlook on the present world-order. It also assigns a high place 
to the Law and the other Scriptures, but by the side of the apocalyptic books (cf. ZA, pp. 304-7). 

(3) The theology and eschatology of the Redactor (R). The Redactor who is responsible for the 
present form of our Apocalypse has impressed a certain unity on the book, which, though it involves 
the combination of conceptions essentially disparate, yet serves to reveal a whole which he contrived 
to combine (by the insertion of connecting links and supplementary matter at different points) into 
one system in his own thought. 

The groundwork of his compilation is the Salathiel-apocalypse. But evidently he felt it 
necessary to supplement this with extracts from other apocalypses which represent very different 
points of view. From the position and bulk of S in R’s compilation it may be inferred that he was 
specially interested in its main theme—a discussion of the religious problems involved in the fall and 
destruction of Jerusalem. The element in S which is concerned with the eschatology of the 
individual, involving, as it does, the discussion of the problem of the origin and prevalence of sin, 
to which the misery of the world is due, would doubtless have appealed to R with special force. 
On the other hand, R was not prepared to discard the older hope of the coming of Messianic redemp- 
tion for the nation, and so found it necessary to append the Eagle and Son of Man visions (ch. xi-xiit). 
The combination of these elements results in the following eschatological scheme, which was 
adopted by R: : 

(1) The period of § woes’ preceding the advent of the Messiah (iv. 56-v. 13a, vi. 11-28) will 
first occur. 

(2) The Messiah and his immortal companions (Enoch, Elijah, &c.) will then suddenly be 
‘revealed ’, the new Jerusalem will appear and a temporary Messianic kingdom, lasting 400 years, set 
up In which those who have survived the Messianic ‘ woes’ are destined to enjoy a period of felicity 
(vii. 26-8 R). In ch. xii, (M) the active work of the Messiah is described more fully. There 
a principal part of his mission is to destroy the assembled enemies of the divine rule (= ‘the 
Gog and Magog’), and gather together the lost Ten Tribes who are to be brought back to the Holy 
Land. Apparently the destruction of the hostile forces is conceived as closing the period of ‘ woes if 


* Cf, the ‘ Beast’ of the Johannine Apocalypse, 
558 


IV EZRA 


After the annihilation of the last enemies has been effected, the ‘ survivors’, who are defined as ¢hose 
that are found within my holy border (xiii. 48) shall be defended by the Messiah (xiii. 49, cf. xiii. 26 b), 
and see very many wonders. Presumably the rule of the Messiah here indicated was conceived 
by R to synchronize with the 400 years’ reign referred to in vii. 28, though this was not its 
significance in the original vision. 

(3) The temporary Messianic kingdom and the rule of the Messiah will terminate in his 
death and that of all human beings, and creation will revert to primaeval silence for seven 
days (vii. 29-30). 

(4) This will be followed by the Resurrection and the Final Judgement (vii. 31-44). 


It should be noted that the Eagle-vision (ch. xi—xii), which depicts the destruction of the Roman Empire 
by the Lion of Judah (i.e. the Messiah), has no logical place in this scheme. The eschatological drama, as 
outlined above, was inherited by R from tradition, which was too firmly rooted to be ignored. But in the 
Eagle-vision we ought probably to see an expression of the real hopes which animated our compiler. Living 
at a time when Israel had suffered—and was still suffering—so much at the hands of Rome his hopes for the 
Messianic deliverance were naturally concentrated on the prospect of the annihilation of the oppressive 
world-power, and the incarnation of all wickedness. 


Such is the scheme of the national eschatology as it was combined in the mind of R. 
How essentially incompatible the diverse elements of which it is composed really are needs no 
further demonstration. 

In combination with and supplementing this our compiler accepted the eschatology of the 
individual as set forth in S. In contrast with S, R has much greater confidence in the Law as such 
as a protective power to the Jew (cf. iii. 26-36, and see further ZA, pp. lv—Ivii). 


§ 11. RELATION OF THE APOCALYPSE WITH THE NEW TESTAMENT.! 


A number of resemblances in thought, and (occasionally) of diction, with the New Testament 
occur in 4 Ezra; but nothing which suggests direct dependence. 


Gunkel, it is true, thinks that 4 Ezra xii. 42 (For of all the prophets thou alone art left tous ... asa lamp 
in a dark place) is cited in 2 Pet. i. 19 (And we have the word of prophecy more sure; whereunto ye do well 
that ye take heed, as unto a lamp shining in a dark place). But the common use of such a figure may be 
explained as due to its currency, possibly in apocalyptic circles, before the writing of 4 Ezra and 2 Peter. 


In 4 Ezra iv. 28 the idea of sowing, reaping, and harvest is applied metaphorically to evil, and 
it is stated that the harvest of evil must first be reaped before the good can take its place; the 
thought here is parallel with that of the parable of the Sower (Matt. xiii); cf. in particular Matt. 
xiii. 39: the enemy that sowed . . . ts the devil, and the harvest is the end of the world, and the 
reapers are the angels. 

In 4 Ezra iv. 36 the seer is reminded by the angel that he cannot know the duration of the 
time that must elapse before the End (though elsewhere it has been revealed to him that the 
End is imminent); in other words the exact moment cannot be fixed—it is known to God alone. 
The passage runs: 

Number me the days that are not yet come (the implication being—you cannot); cf, Mark xiii. 32 
and parallels: Butof that day or that hour knoweth no one, not even the angels in heaven, neither the 
Son, but the Father. 

There is a certain amount of literary contact between the Johannine Apocalypse and 4 Ezra, 
which, however, does not amount to direct literary dependence, but, probably, points to a common 
source or sources ; thus 4 Ezra ix. 35 and Rev. vi. g-11 seem to be related in this way”; so in 
4 Ezra iv. 41 the underworld (infernum= Sheol) is used as in Rev. i. 18, &c., as the place where 
the wicked dead remain in the intermediate state. 

An abundance of resemblances in thought or diction has been pointed out in the notes on the 
text One or two examples may be given here: in 4 Ezra vii. 88 the body is called ¢his corruptible 
vessel; cf. 1 Cor. xv. 53 this corruptible; in 4 Ezra ix. 37 the Law, it is said, perishes not but 
abides in its glory (i.e. the Law is heavenly and divine); cf. Rom. vii. 14 (the Law ts spiritual), 
9 Con mi7f., &c., Ke. 

The close parallels in thought as to the origin and prevalence of sin between S and 
St. Paul have already been pointed out in § 10 (1). 


1 For the affinities of the Book with other early literature cf. EA, pp. Ixx-Ixxiv. 
2 Cf. Bousset, Ofenbarung Johannis, pp. 272 f. 


8 The passages cited in this connexion in the writer’s larger work are registered in Index IV of ZA, pp. 37 5-8. 


599 


INTRODUCTION 


§ 12, BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


Besides the works already referred to in this Introduction, the following are also important for the study of 
4 Bzta 


(az) EDITIONS OF TEXT. 
Syr. (Cer.) = The Syriac Text of 4 Ezra, printed in Ceriani’s onumenta sacra et profana, Tom. v (pp. 4I-I11). 


(2) TRANSLATIONS WITH NOTES, ETC. 


Gunkel = Das vierte Buch Esra; edited by Prof. Gunkel in Kautzsch’s Die Apokryphen und Pseudepigraphen 
des Alien Testaments, vol. ii (Tiibingen, 1900), (contains a valuable introduction, critical translation, and notes). 
Ball = critical notes on 2 Esdras in The Variorum Apocrypha, by C. J. Ball. 


(c) Essays, DISCUSSIONS, ETC. 


Rosenthal = Vier Apokryphische Biicher, aus der Zeit und Schule R. Akibas, von Dr. F. Rosenthal (Leipzig, 1885). 
Kabisch = Das vierte Buch Esra auf seine Quellen untersucht, von Richard Kabisch (Gottingen, 1889). 
Vaganay = Le Prodléme eschatologique dans le IV livre d Esdras, par Léon Vaganay (Paris, 1906). 
Wellhausen = Skizzen und Vorarbeiten, von J. Wellhausen ; sechstes Heft (Berlin, 1899). 
F.C. Porter = The Messages of the Afpocalyptical Writers, by F. C. Porter ( London, 1909). 

[Cf. also Charles’s discussion in the introduction to his edition of Zhe (Syriac) Apocalypse of Baruch; also 
articles in the Bible Dictionaries (DB and EB) and in If2e\ 


(¢) OTHER WORKS REFERRED TO. 


Bousset, 2/* = Die Religion des Judentums im neutestamentlichen Zettalter (2nd ed.), von D. Wilhelm Bousset 
(Berlin, 1906). 

Charles, Eschatology = A Critical History of the Doctrine of a future Life, by R. H. Charles (London, 1899). 

Derenbourg = Essai sur Phistoire et la géographie de la Palestine, par J. Derenbourg (Paris, 1867). 

Drummond, JZ = The Jewish Messiah, by James Drummond (London, 1877). 

Kohler = Grundriss einer systematischen T: heologie des Judentums auf geschichtlicher Grundlage (Leipzig, 1910). 

Koberle = Siinde und Gnade im religidsen Leben des Volkes Israel bis auf Christum (Miinchen, 1905). 

RWS = The Religion and Worship of the Synagogue, hy W. O. E. Oesterley and G. H. Box (2nd ed., 1911). 

Schechter, Aspects = Some Aspects of Rabbinic T: heology, by S. Schechter (London, 1909). 

Volz = Jiidische Eschatologie von Daniel bis Akiba, von Paul Volz (Tiibingen und Leipzig, 1903). 

Weber = Jiidische Theologie, von F. Weber; 2nd ed. (Leipzig, 1897). 


Also the following editions of ancient works :— 

Ps. Sol.= The Psalms of the Pharisees (or Psaims of Solomon), edited and translated by Ryle and James 
(Cambridge, 1891). 

Mekilta = the early Jewish Midrash so called (on Exodus) ; Hebrew text edited by Friedmann. 

Sifra, Sifre = the early Jewish Midrashim so called (on Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy). 


ABBREVIATIONS EMPLOYED. 

EB = Encyclopaedia Biblica (4 vols.). 

DB = Dictionary of the Bible, 

DCG = Dictionary of Christ and the Gospels (ed. Hastings, 2 vols.). 

JE = Jewish Encyclopaedia (12 vols.). 

SQR = Jewish Quarterly Review (vols. 1x04) 

7B = Talmud of Babylon. 

TJ = Talmud of Jerusalem. i 

OL = Old Latin. 

P&H = Post Biblical Hebrew. 

Bensly, MF = The Missing Fragment of the Latin Translation of the Fourth Book of Ezra, discovered and Edited 
with an Introduction and Notes, by Robert L. Bensly, M.A. (Cambridge, 1875). 

B] (= Bensly and James) = The fourth Book of Ezra: the Latin version edited from the MSS. by the late Robert L. 
Bensly, M.A., with an introduction by Montague Rhodes James, Litt.D. (Leats and Studies, vol. iii, no. 2 
Cambridge, 1895). ‘ 5‘ 

flilg. = Messtas Iudaeorum (containing the Latin text and Latin translations of the Syriac, Ethiopic, Arabic, and 
Armenian texts, and a reconstruction of the lost Greek text underlying them, with critical notes), Leipzig, 1869. 

Violet = Die Esra-Apokalypse (IV. Esra), Erster Teil: Dte Uberleferung, herausg. von Lic. Dr. Bruno Violet 
(contains a critical edition of the Latin text, and carefully edited German translations of the Oriental Versions 
and valuable critical notes), Leipzig, 1910. ! 

Volkmar = Das vierte Buch Esra (being Part II of the Handbuch der Linlettung in die Apokry phen), herausg. von 
Dr. Gustav Volkmar (contains Latin text, commentary, German translation and elaborate Introduction; the 
critical notes are often useful), Tiibingen, 1863. 

te re Das oes Buch Esra in Kautzsch’s Dze Apokryphen und Pseudepigraphen des Alten T. estaments, vol. ii 

ubingen, 1900). 

Kabisch = Das vierte Buch Esra auf setne Quellen untersucht (Gottingen, 1889). : 

eA is ae Lzra-Apocalypse (critical translation with Commentary and Introduction), edited by G. H. Box (London, 
1912). 


560 


s 31 


LEZ IN 


THE FIRST VISION. 
(iii. I-v. 19.) 
(I. iii, 1-3) INTRODUCTION (S). 
In the thirtieth year after the downfall of the City I, Salathiel—[who am also Ezra |]—was in Babylon, 


THE FIRST VISION (iii. I-v. 19). 

(1) CONTENTS. In the person of Salathiel (Ezra) the writer, bewailing, some thirty years after the event, the 
desolation of Sion and the continued prosperity of Babylon, gives vent to his grief and despair on account of the ruin 
which has befallen Jerusalem at the hands of her Roman conquerors in A.D. 70. He finds it difficult to understand 
the meaning of this appalling catastrophe. How can it be reconciled with God’s providence and justice? It is true 
the human race is corrupt and steeped in sin; but the reason why all men have sinned is that sin goes back to Adam, 
and Adam sinned because the root of sin was inherent in his nature (cf. iii. 20 f.). God had chosen Israel and given 
them His Law, but so long as the evil germ remained in man’s nature, the Law was powerless to produce righteousness 
(cf. iii. 19, 20). Hence perfect righteousness could not justly be expected even from Israel. On the other hand, 
nations far more godless and faithless than Israel are allowed to remain in prosperity, and trample underfoot the 
chosen people. 

The seer’s protests are answered by the angel Uriel. The most serious part of the charge levelled by the seer 
against the justice of God’s providence had been the implication that God, as Creator, was ultimately responsible for 
the inherent evil of man’s nature, and hence cannot justly punish men for sin. To this indictment the angel replies 
(cf. Job xxviii) that the seer cannot understand the simplest things that are bound up with his daily life; how, then, 
can he hope to understand the ways of the Most High? God’s ways are inscrutable (iv. 1-11). The seer rejoins 
despairingly : ‘It would have been better that we had never been created, than having come [into the world] to live 
in sins and suffer, and not know why we suffer.’ The angel replies that it is foolish and senseless to seek to know 
what is beyond nature. Man belongs to the earth; his vision is bounded by the finite ; therefore it is vain for him to 
seek to comprehend what is heavenly and infinite (iv. 12-21). The seer, disclaiming any desire to be curious about 
the ways above, protests that what perplexes him most of all is a fact of daily experience, viz. that Israel, God’s chosen 
people, should be given up as a prey to the godless heathen. This is answered as follows: the present age is 
hastening fast to its close; the new age that is about to dawn will solve all difficulties. God’s remedy for the present 
state of things will not be consummated within the present order, but will be realized in the future world. The present 
state of things must go on for a time. The harvest of evil must first be reaped before something better can take its 
place (iv. 22-32). If the solution lies in the future the question naturally arises at this point, how soon will it come? 
This question is asked impatiently by the seer. The answer is : till the predestined number of the righteous has been 
completed the judgement cannot come ; but when the moment has arrived nothing (not even men’s sins) can delay 
its consummation (iv. 33-43). The seer again inquires more particularly as to the time of the End. Is the present 
age more than half gone? He is shown, by a vision, that by far the greater part of the present age has run its course 
(iv. 44-50). In reply to a further question the angel states that he cannot tell whether the End will come within the 
seer’s own lifetime (iv. 51-52). An interpolated passage (from E) narrates the signs of the near approach of the End 
(v. I-13). The first vision thus falls into the following divisions : 

i. Introduction (iii. 1-3) (S). 3 7 ; 
ii. Dhe first questions (the seer’s difficulties stated) (iii. 4-36) (mainly S). 
iii. Zhe divine reply (iv. 1-v. 13): ; 2 
(a) iv. 1-113 (4) iv. 12-21; (¢) iv. 22-32; (d) iv. 33-433 (@) iv. 44-5035 (f) iv. 51-v. 13 (S) (E). 
iv. Conclusion of the Vision (v. 14-19) (S)- i : Pes 

(2) THE MISSING INTRODUCTION TO THE VISION. As Kabisch has pointed out, a number of indications suggest 
that in the original form of S the present vision was preceded by an introductory piece, explaining the preparation of 
the seer for what follows. It is probable that a command to fast seven days preceded the first vision in its original 
form (cf. vi. 35, where the ‘three weeks’ of fasting mentioned implies this). It may, therefore, be concluded that 
before the prayer of Salathiel (iii. 4 £.) there stood originally an introductory section detailing the appearance of the 
angel Uriel, the command to the seer to fast seven days, and the fulfilment of this command. Then followed a dream- 
vision the conclusion of which has been misplaced by R, and now stands in v. 14-15. This again was probably 
followed by some such statement as: ‘So I fasted seven days, mourning and weeping as the angel commanded 
me. And it came to pass after seven days’ (cf. v.20). Here followed the words ‘my mind was preoccupied with my 
thoughts ’, &c. (iii. 1 ff.). The whole of this introductory section has been cut out by R, apparently, as unimportant 

r EA, pp- 4-6). | ane 
ae in the De ee The thirtieth year after the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar is primarily 
meant, i.e. 556 B.C. But typically this was designed, doubtless, to suggest the thirtieth year after the destruction of 
Jerusalem by Titus in A.D. 70, i.e. A.D. 100; this probably fixes the date of the publication of S (see Introduction, § 8). 


th ine of the book in this way cf. Ezek. 1. 1. fy ; 
te Salathiel.” "The Hebrew form of the name is Sh alt’el. Shealtiel is mentioned as the father of Zerubbabel in 
iil. .2; Neh. xii. 1; butin 1 Chron. iii. 17 as his uncle. , \ 
ratio: an also Ezra]. The identification of Ezra and Salathiel is, of course, impossible chronologically. Ezra 
appears first in history a century later (4 59-458 B.C.) than the date here presupposed (556 B.C.). The words are 
doubtless a gloss due to R (see Introduction, §§ 6 and 7). . 
1105.2 561 ry 


IV EZRA 38. 1-18 


Sand as I lay upon my bed I was disquieted. ®. ( 2.0.) 0) 2) ue 
REPEAT eae tic ee Se . ®and my mind was preoccupied with my thoughts; 
because I saw Sion’s desolation on the one hand (matched) with the abundant wealth of Babylon’s 

3 inhabitants on the other. And my spirit was stirred profoundly, and in my agitation I began to 
address the Most High. 


Il. iti. 4-36. THE FIRST QUESTIONS: WHENCE ARISE THE SIN AND MISERY OF THE WORLD? 
How cAN ISRAEL'S CONTINUED AFFLICTION BE RECONCILED WITH THE DIVINE 
JUSTICE ? 

4 And I said: »O Lord my Lord,” was it not thou who in the beginning, when ° thou didst form the 
5 earth—and that thyself alone—didst speak and commandedst the dust, so that it gave thee Adam °¢, 
a lifeless body? But yet it was both itself the formation of thy hands and thou breathedst into 

6 him the breath of life, so that he was made living before thee. And thou leddest him into Paradise, 
7 which thy right hand did plant before ever the earth came forward; and to him thou commandedst 
“one only observance of thine‘, but he transgressed it. Forthwith thou appointedst death for him 
*and for his generations °, and from him were born nations and tribes, peoples and clans innumerable. 

8 And every nation walked after their own will, and behaved wickedly before thee, and were ungodly 
9 —but thou didst not hinder them, Nevertheless again in (due) time thou broughtest the Flood 
tof upon the earth and‘ upon the inhabitants of the world, and destroyedst them. And their fate & 
Iz was one and the same; as death (overtook) Adam, so the Flood (overwhelmed) these. Nevertheless 
one of them thou didst spare—Noah with his household (and with him) all the righteous his 
12 descendants. And it came to pass that when the inhabitants upon the earth began to multiply, 
and * there were born® children also and peoples and nations many, that they began to practise 
13 ungodliness more than former (generations). And it came to pass that when they practised 
14 ungodliness before thee, thou didst choose thee one from among them whose name was Abraham: him 
15 thou didst love, and unto him only didst thou reveal ithe end of the times i secretly by night ; and 
with him thou didst make an everlasting covenant, and didst promise him that thou wouldst never 
16 forsake his seed. And thou gavest him Isaac, and to Isaac thou gavest Jacoband Esau. And thou 
17 didst set apart Jacob for thyself, but Esau thou didst hate; and Jacob became a great host. And 
it came to pass that when thou leddest forth his seed out of Egypt, and didst bring them to the 

Mount Sinai, 


18 Thou didst bow down the heavens, 
didst make the earth quake 


a8 For the lacuna here see the discussion on the previous page. b-b #: O dominator Domine (2.V. 
O Lord that bearest rule) = Aeomora xupie (Hilg.): = ®H ANT IN °° reading plasmasti terram . . . et imperasti 
pulveri et dedit tibi Adam wth BJ and Violet: so $ (f. Ethiop. Art): Lat. MSS. plantasti terram .. . et imperasti 
populo (so SA: orbi CM) tuo et dedisti Adam (so SA: Cf the rendering of A.V.) 44 ¥& diligentiam unam tuam: Zhe 
Oriental Versions render commandment (for this sense of diligentia cf. Bensly, ‘ Missing Fragment’, p. 56) CSese) 
& (ff. other Oriental Versions): & et in nationibus eius ff s0 Sand Ethiop.; &@ Ar > ss % casus eorum: 
® their destruction (cf. Ethiop.) hh so Ethiop.: & multiplicaverunt (so 3) 11 yeading temporum finem with C 


4. in the beginning. Cf. Gen. ii. 7 f. In accordance with the wide philosophic outlook of the apocalyptists the 
writer begins his survey with Creation. On the other hand, the prophets characteristically begin with the Exodus 
from Egypt, which marked the birthday of Israel as a nation. -Cf. Jet. it.:2; Hos, xi. 1. 

6. before ever the earth came forward. According to one view current in later Jewish circles Paradise (= the 
Garden of Eden) was one of seven things created before the world (viz. Torah, Repentance, the Garden of Eden, 
Gehenna, the Throne of Glory, the Temple, and the Messiah; cf. Pesak 54a, Nedar. 396, Ber. rab. xx). For this 
view, as regards Paradise, our text here is the earliest literary evidence. It was deduced from Gen. ii, 8 (where the 
Hebr. word mzggedem, understood as = ‘from the beginning’ [not ‘ eastward ’] was interpreted to mean ‘ before’ the 
creation of the world +). According to the earlier view the Garden of Eden was one of the things created on the third 
day: cf. Book of Jubilees, ii. 7, and Charles’s note on the passage. Paradise has varying meanings in apocalyptic 
literature. The conception of an earthly and heavenly paradise is also to be noted. Here Eden as man’s primitive 
home of blessedness is meant. See further the discussion in EA, pp. 195 ff. 

10. And their fate was one and the same. A like fate overtook both Adam and the generation of the deluge. 
Note that the survey begins with Adam; contrast 2 Pet. ii. Zs - 

13. thou didst choose thee one, &c. Cf. Gen. xii. 1. 

14. unto him only didst thou reveal the end of the times secretly by night. The vision described in Gen. xv. of. 
was later invested with an extended significance; it was Supposed to give an intimation of Israel’s later captivity and 
subjection to the four oppressive world-powers of the Book of Daniel, which are interpreted to be Babylon, Media 
Greece, and Rome (cf. Targums ad loc.). ; : 

16. Jacob became a great host. Cf. Gen. xxxii. TOs 

18. Thou didst bow down the heavens, &c. The whole description is of a theophany, and may be compared 
with Ps. Ixviii. 7 ff. The particular theophany referred to is described in Exod. xix. 16 f. 





* So the Targums (cf. also the Syriac and Latin versions, and Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion). According 
another view, however, the expression means ‘ before the creation of man”: cf. Gen. rad. 2a 


562 


27> 


, 


IV EZRA 38. 18~34 


and convulsedst the world— 
Thou didst cause the deeps to tremble 
and didst alarm the spheres. 
19 And thy glory went through the four gates of fire, earthquake, wind, and cold, 
To give Law to Jacob’s seed 
and Commandment to the generation of Israel. 
20 And yet thou didst not take away from them the evil heart, that thy Law might bring forth fruit 
21in them. For the first Adam, clothing himself with the evil heart, transgressed and was overcome ; 
22 and likewise also all who were born of him. Thus the infirmity became inveterate; the Law indeed 
was in the heart of the people, but (in conjunction) with the evil germ ; so what was good departed, 
23 and the evil remained. So the times passed away and the years came to an end; and (then) thou 
24 didst raise up for thyself a servant whose name was David ; and thou commandedst him to build the 
25 City (which is called) after thy name/, and to offer thee * oblations therein of thine own*. And after 
26 this had been done many years, the inhabitants of the City committed sin, in all things doing even 
as Adam and all his generations had done: for they also !had clothed themselves with! the evil 
28 heart : and so thou gavest thy city over into the hands of thine enemies. Then I said in my heart: 
29 Are their deeds any better™ that inhabit Babylon? Has he for this "rejected" Sion? It came to 
pass when I came hither and saw ungodly deeds innumerable, and myself saw many sinners ° these 
30 thirty years °, that my heart ? was perturbed”: for I have seen 
how thou dost suffer the sinners 
and dost spare the ungodly, 
how thou hast destroyed thy people 
and preserved thine enemies ; 


R (vii. 31 and hast not made known at all unto any how this course of thine shall be abandoned. Have the 


32-6) 32 deeds of Babylon been better than those of Sion? [Has any other nation known thee beside Israel ? 


33 Or what tribes have so believed thy covenants as those of Jacob ?—whose reward (nevertheless) hath 
not appeared nor their labour borne fruit! For I have gone hither and thither through the nations 
34 and seen them in prosperity, although unmindful of thy commandments. Now, therefore, weigh 
thou our iniquities, and those of the inhabitants of the world, in the balance and so shall be found 


(SA >): cf S Ethiop. j $+and a house k-k yeading in ea de tuis oblationes so CM = &: cf. Ar.1? (thus 
et oblationes, of A.V. and Vulg., ts a corruption) El 50 3 Ethiop.: & utebantur (emend fo induebantur wth 
Hilg.) m Ethiop.+than ours (ff. Az.) nn s9 SAr+: L corrupt: dominabit SA (? read damnavit with Violet, 
or abominavit with Gunkel) 9-9 sg Ar! (Ethiop.) : & hoc tricesimo anno (a misrendering of original Hebrew) 
p-p 4 excessit (= e€eorn) 





19. thy glory went through the four gates of fire, earthquake, wind, and cold. The writer, in accordance 
with the developed Jewish conceptions of Jahveh’s majesty and transcendence, pictures God as appearing in 
theophany on earth (at Sinai) in a gradual descent from His throne in the highest of the heavens through the lower 
heavens by their successive ‘gates’. The idea of a plurality of heavens is implied. In the earlier form of this 
doctrine there were three, in the later form (which was already current in the first century A.D.; cf. 2 Enoch) there 
were seven heavens. The ‘gates’ alluded to in our text are apparently those of the four lowest heavens. See 
further ZA, p. 14. , 

20. the evil heart, Lat. cor malignum. In this and the following verses (21-22, 25-26) the subject of Adam’s 
transgression and the hereditary tendency to sin (created by his lapse) in all his descendants is introduced. It is 
pursued in iv. 30-31, and in vil. 118 Adam is charged with being the cause of the perdition of the human race 
(*O thou Adam, what hast thou done? For though it was thou that sinned the fall was not thine alone but ours. also 
who are thy descendants’). The inherent infirmity of human nature is a dominating idea in the apocalyptic writer’s 
mind, and a characteristic note of his pessimism. In the stress he lays on Adam’s sin he reminds us of St. Paul 
(cf. Rom. v. 12f.). The cor malignum is regarded as the result of Adam’s yielding to the evil impulse (the yeser 
ha-ra of Rabbinic theology, called the ‘ grain of evil seed’ [gvanum seminis mali] in iv. 30. In vii. 92 it is called 
‘the evil thought (cogétamentum malum) which was fashioned with them’). 

that thy Law might bring forth fruit in them. Cf. Rom. vii. 5; v. 20. : hocelt 

21. clothing himself with the evil heart. Adam ‘clothed himself’ with the cor malignum by yielding to the 
suggestions of ‘the evil impulse’, The ‘evil heart’ thus developed inevitably led to sin and death. : 

22. the Law indeed was in the heart of the people. Cf. the conflict described in Rom. vii. 7 f., and especially 
s a was good departed. i.e. the good tendency (the yeser ha-tob) was entirely overcome. The Law was 
powerless to prevent the evil element in man’s nature from gaining the entire mastery. This is clean contrary to 
Rabbinic theology, which emphasizes the power of the Law to keep the evil tendency in check and overcome it: 
cf, the dictum: ‘ The Law wears away the evil yeser as water wears away stone’ (7. B. Suk. 52 0). 

24. thou commandedst him to build. David is regarded as the founder of the Holy City; cf. x. Oem |: 

oblations therein of thine own. The supreme glory and unique distinction of the divine city consists in its 
being the place where sacrifice and oblation were properly and regularly offered to God. ‘ae 

31. how this course of thine i this way) shall be abandoned. God’s course of action is meant. % renders: 
“how thy way may be comprehended.’ 

Bae Wor the eee for assigning these verses to R see ZA, p. 6f. 


563 002 


IV EZRA 3. 35—4. 7 


R. 35 4 which way the turn of the scale inclines4. Or when was it that the inhabitants of the earth did 
36 not sin before thee? Or what nation hath so kept thy precepts? ¥* Individual men of note® indeed 
thou mayst find to have kept thy precepts; but nations thou shalt not find. | 


III. THE DIVINE REPLY; Gop’s WAYS ARE INSCRUTABLE. 
(iv. I-v. 19.) 
(a) iv. 1-11. The human spirit can only hope to understand dimly and in part (S). 


S41,2 Thereupon the angel answered me who had been sent to me, [and whose name was Uriel]; and 
he said to me: Thy heart hath utterly failed thee regarding this world; and thinkest thou to 
comprehend the way of the Most High ? 

3 Then said I: Yes, my Lord. 
And he answered me, and said: Three ways have I been sent to show thee, and three similitudes 
4 to set before thee: if thou canst declare me one of these I also will show thee the way thou desirest 
to see, and teach thee * whence comes ® the evil heart. 
5 And I said: Speak on, my Lord. 
Then he said unto me: 
Come, weigh me the weight of the fire ; 
Or measure me * the measure t of the wind, 
Or recall me the day that is past. 
6 Then answered I and said: Who of the *earth-born" could ¥do so” that thou shouldst ask me 
about such matters ? 
7 And he said to me: Had I asked thee 
How many dwellings are in the heart of the sea? 
Or “ how many springs in the source of the deep ? 
Or how many * ways * above the firmament ? 
¥ Or where are the portals of Hades ? 
Or where the paths of Paradise ? 


aa # momentum (cxzfertor MSS. nomen tuum) puncti ubi declinet vr % homines per nomina 8-8 yead- 
img unde sit (with one Codex); quare sit SACM=S8 Ethiop. Ar? ‘t veading satum = $ (cf. Lthiop. 
Ar) for flatum SC M u-u # natorum VY reading hoc facere (A* *); cf Ethiop. Ar Arm.: 
other Latin MSS. > hoc wow so Ar} Ethiop. & quantae venae *-* emending venae of & Zo viae (cf. S 
Ethiop, Arm.) YY so 3 and other Oriental VSS. & > (6y homototeleuton ; cf. next clause) 2-2 so Oriental 





36. Individual men of note. Such as Job, regarded as a non-Israelite of conspicuous piety: cf. St. Paul’s treat- 
ment of the theme of the law-abiding Gentile in Rom. ii. 26f,. 


(a) iv. 1-11. The angel (or rather archangel ; cf. iv. 36) Uriel is sent to the seer, and propounds three problems to 
him which he is unable to answer. If these are beyond his capacity, how can he presume to challenge the inscrutable 
ways of God? The general character of the passage is similar to parts of Job (cf. especially Job xxvill). For the 
dialogue between the angel and Salathiel cf. e. g. Zech. i-vi, Dan. x, &c. 

I. Uriel. Uriel (= ? ‘the fire of God ’, Heb. ’ér-’é) is mentioned again in verse 36, Vv. 20, and x. 38 (not again in the 
Bible). He was one of the four chief angels (Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, and Uriel), of whom Michael was the highest 
(cf. Lueken, A/ichael, p. 32 f.). According to 1 En, xx. 2 Uriel was ‘the angel over the world and over Tartarus’.! 
In 1 En, x, 1 (Greek) he is the divine messenger who is sent to warn the son of Lamech. So here. The problems he 
propounds to Ezra accord with the character assigned to him and his name, The first (‘weigh me the weight of the 
fire’) is suggested by the meaning of the name Uriel— Fire of God’. The others are concerned with the waters of 
the deep (¢éhém), and with the underworld. Uriel is thus designated, therefore, as being ‘the archangel of fire and 
of Gehenna, where flame is the chief element’ (cf. JE, xii. 383). Later he became (mistakenly) associated with light 
(Heb. ’é7), and was regarded as the enlightener (‘he who brings light to Israel *, Num. rabb. ii. 10). In 1 En. xl 
Fanuel, one of the four ‘ presences’ (Michael, Rufael, Gabriel, Fanuel), is, apparently, Uriel under another aspect. F or 
Uriel as propounder and answerer of questions as here, cf. 1 En. xxi. 5, 9; xxvii. 2; XXxili. 3, 4. 

2. Thy heart hath utterly failed thee, &c. For the sentiment cf. John iii. 12. 

5. fire... wind. For the conjunction of ‘fire’ and ‘wind’ cf. iii. 19, Vili. 22, Wisd. xiii. 2. 
regarded as having their dwelling-places in the four corners of the earth. Here they were detained in ‘ treasuries’ and 
issued forth from time to time through ‘portals’ (cf. 1 En. xxxv f., where the portals which open into heaven from the 
ends of the earth are spoken of; cf. also 4 Ezra vi.1). According to Rev. vii. t the four storehouses of the winds are 
guarded by four angels. As their dwelling-place was fixed at the extremities of the earth the winds would be under 
the supreme rule of Uriel, ‘the angel over the world and over Tartarus’. To the ancients the wind was a supremely 
mysterious agent (cf. Eccles. xi. 5, ‘as thou knowest not the way of the wind’, and John iii. 8). 

measure me the measure of the wind. Cf. Job xxviii. 22 for the similar idea of ‘ weighing’ the wind: and for 
the whole verse, 2 Bar, lix. 5 (cf. also 1 En. xli. 4, 2 En. xl. II). { 

7. How many dwellings are in the heart of the sea. Cf. Job xxviii. 16-17. 

paths of Paradise, i.e. leading to Paradise ; the heavenly Paradise is meant. 


The four winds were 





? “Over thunder and earthquake ’, accordin 


to the Eth. text; the Greek gj bove. 5 
ee ee oe g ; gives as above. [Probably the clause ‘and 


564 


16, 


IV EZRA ‘4, 8-22 


8 Perchance thou wouldst have said to me: 
Into the deep I have not descended, 
nor as yet *gone down” into Hades; 
Neither to heaven have I ever ascended, 
* nor entered Paradise *. 
But now I have only asked thee of the fire, the wind, and the day » that is past ,—things without 
which thou canst not be; and yet thou hast vouchsafed me no answer about them! 
He said moreover unto me: * What belongs to thee °—the things that have intermingled with thy 
11 growth—thou art incapable of understanding ; how then should thy vessel be able to comprehend the 
way of the Most High? ‘4 For the way of the Most High has been formed without measure‘, ° how, 


then, should it be possible for a mortal in a corruptible world to understand the ways of the 
Incorruptible ° ? 


Io 


(6) iv. 12-21. The dialogue continued: it is foolish and senseless to demand 
what ts against nature (S). 


12 '[And when I heard these things I fell upon my face] and said unto him: It would have been 
better & that we had never been created £ than having come [into the world] to live in sins and suffer, 
and not "to know ® why we suffer. 

13. And heanswered me and said: } Once upon a time the woods of the trees of the field went forth, 

14 and took counsel, and said: Come, let us go and make war against the sea, that it may retire before 

15 us, and we will make us Jmore woods/. In like manner also the waves of the sea took counsel, and 
said: Come, let us go up and wage war against the wood of the field, that there also we may win us 

17 more territory. The counsel of the wood was in vain, for the fire came and consumed it ; likewise, 

18 also, the counsel of the waves of the sea, for the sand * stood up* and stopped them. _ If thou, now, 

19 hadst been judge between them whom wouldst thou have justified or whom condemned? I answered 
and said: Both have taken a foolish counsel; for to the wood the land has been assigned, and ' to the 
sea a place! to bear its waves. 

20 Then he answered me and said: Thou hast judged aright ; but why hast thou not given judgement 

21 in thine own case? For just as the earth has been assigned tothe wood, and ™ the place of the sea 
to bear its waves™; even so the dwellers upon earth can understand only what is upon the earth, 
= and they who are above the heavens® that which is above the heavenly height. 


(c) iv. 22-32. The dialogue continued: The seer protests that his perplexities are occasioned by the 
daily experiences of earth. He is told that the new age which is about to dawn will solve all 
difficulties (S). 


22 Then answered I and said: I beseech thee, O Lord, wherefore have I been endowed with an 


VSS. £ > a-a so Ethiop. Arm. (cf. Ar’); LA> b-b so Ethiop. (cf Ar): & per quae (= $; v. 2. quem) 
transisti e-c % quae tua sunt: % Ethiop. (one reading) Arm. > d-d 59 % Ethiop. (of. Ar. Arm.): & > (by 
homototeleuton) ®-8 so % substantially (nor is it possible, &c.): of Ethiop. Ar: & et iam exteritus corrupto 
saeculo intellegere incorruptionem ? ff so Oriental Versions: & corrupt s-& so Ethiop.: & nos non adesse 
b-h reading intellegere (= S Ar.) Arm.) : for intellexi (S A C) -i 50 3 (cf. Ethiop.): & is corrupt J-i & alias 
silvas: % Evthiop. a new wood k-k"s9 & stetit (=eorn) =% Ar.'; but Ethiop. and Arm. stayed (= eoTnce) 
1-1 yeading mari locus (C, &c.) ; du¢ S.A maris locus = 3 m-m sg $; &% et mare fluctibus suis nn ¥ qui super 
coelos: Ar Arm. interpret as plural (they who are above the heavens): % as sing. (he who is above, &c.) 





g. things without which thou canst not be. Man cannot live apart from wind, warmth, and the passing day ; 
cf. for the thought Wisd. ix. 16. ; 

to. What belongs to thee—the things . . . thy growth. The ‘things’ referred to include fire and wind, two of 
the four primal elements (fire, wind, earth, and water) ; for these cf. Wisd. vii. 17, xiii. 1, xix. 18 (ra orotxeia). There 
may be an allusion, as Gunkel suggests, to man’s living organism (the microcosm) being compounded of the elements 
(cf. viii. 8). This view is of Oriental origin. A 

thy vessel. The body is the ‘ vessel’ of the soul or understanding. : 

(0) iv, 12-21. In answer to Salathiel’s despairing interjection the archangel further enforces the point of the preceding 
paragraph by a parable, taken from the sea and the forest.’ The idea of the sea being held in check and kept within 
prescribed bounds by the divine power is an ancient one, and forms the motive of some early mythological Creation 
myths (cf. Job. vii. 12, xxxvill. 8f.). The application of the idea to the wood seems to be original to the apocalyptist 

o Gunkel). pee 
: Be It eg have been better that we had never been created, &c. The seer here takes the pessimistic view 
of the school of Shammai on the question whether it would have been better for man never to have been created. 
According to 7..B. Erud. 13 6 the controversy lasted two and a half years. 

17. the sand stood up and stopped them. G@fi Jer. v. 22. ier 

(c) iv. 22-32. Disclaiming any desire ‘to be curious about the ways above’, the seer protests that his difficulties are 
very real and rooted in daily experience. He is above measure perplexed because the chosen race—the people that 
bear God’s sacred name of Israel—should be given up as a prey to the godless heathen (vv. 22-25). He is assured in 


565 


-_ 


IV EZRA 4. 23-34 


23 understanding to discern? For I meant not to ask ° about the ways above °® but of those things we 
daily experience ; 
Why is Israel to the heathen given over for reproach, 
thy beloved people to godless tribes given up ? 
The Law of our fathers ? has been brought to destruction ?, 
the written covenants exist no more ; 
24 We vanish from the world as locusts, 2 
our life is 4as a breath 9, 
25 We indeed are not worthy to obtain mercy ; but what will he do for his own name whereby we are 
called? It is about these things that I have asked. 


The Answer. 


26 Then he answered me and said: "If thou survive' thou shalt see, and if thou livest long thou shalt 
marvel ; for the age is hastening fast to its end. : : 

27 _ Because it is unable to bear the things promised * in their season ® to the righteous ; for this age is" 
full of sorrow and impotence. , 

28 For the evil concerning which * thou askest me is sown, but “the ingathering of it" is not yet 

29 come. Unless, therefore, that which is sown be reaped, and unless the place where the evil is sown 

30 Shall have passed away, the field where the good is sown cannot come. For a grain of evil seed was 
sown in the heart of Adam from the beginning, and how much fruit of ungodliness has it produced 
unto this time, and shall yet produce until the threshing-floor come! 

31 Reckon up, now, in thine own mind: Vif’ a grain of evil seed has produced so much fruit of 

32 ungodliness, when once the ears of the good seed shall have been sown without number, how 
great a floor shall they be destined to fill ? 


(4) iv. 33-43. The dialogue continued. In reply to his question, When shall these things be ? 
the seer receives the answer— When the number of the righteous is complete (S). 


33. Then I answered and said: x How long and when * shall these things (be coming to pass)? YFory 
our years are few and evil. 

34 And he answered me and said: Thy haste may not exceed that of the Most High; for thou art 
hastening 4 for thine own self 2, but the Exalted One on behalf of many. 


°° reading de superioribus viis (C) = $ Ethiop. Ar”: de superioribus tuis S A PP reading in interitum (S A); 
C M in inritum (so B/) 14 veading ut vapor = $ Ethiop.: ut pavorSAM °  ¥-* so Ethiop. (= cay pevys): & si 
fueris (= eav pev ns) ss # in temporibus: 3 Ethiop. > ‘t reading de quo... deeo (cf & Ethiop.) : de 


quibusSA = *" yeading destrictio ipsius (SA*): uv. 2 destructio Y-Y so Ethiop.: LS > woW so & Ethiop. : 
xL> “* reading usquequo et quando (= S$ Ezhiop, Arm.): quo (for usquequo) SA IY so & Ethiop.: 
a quare ** reading propter temetipsum = $ Ethiop. & corrupt. °8 so B Ethiop.:. %& usquequo spero sic 
XN 





reply that the present age is hastening to its close, and that the new age which is about to dawn will solve all difficulties 
(v. 26). It is further explained to him why the present state of things must go on fora time. The harvest of evil must 
first be reaped before something better can take its place (vv. 27-32). Cf. the reference in a similar connexion to the 
harvest of good and bad seed in 2 Baruch Ixx. 2. 

23. the written covenants. The expression is a synonym for the Law (Scriptures). In 7: B. Berak 48 6 the Law 
(Zorah) is said to have been given ‘ by three covenants’, viz. those with Israel at Sinai, at Gerizim, and in the plains 
of Moab; cf. Rom. ix. 4, and Sir. xliv, 11, Wisd. xviii. 22. For the destruction of the Law cf. SVeo nets 

25. what will he do for his own name. Cf. Isa, lxiii. 19; 2 Baruch v. 1; also 4 Ezra x. 22. 

whereby we are called. lit. ‘ which is called upon us’, The expression implies ownership. Cf. Isa. xliii, na 
2 Chron. vii. 14; James ii. 7. Israel’s election is appealed to. 

27. this age is full of sorrow and impotence. It is characteristic of the apocalyptic writer’s pessimism that he 
gives up the present age entirely. It must be destroyed absolutely, and an entirely new order take its place. The 
older view that the present world should be renewed in a purified form is abandoned. - 

28. the ingathering of it. For the idea of sowing, reaping, and harvest applied metaphorically to évil, cf. the 
parable of the Sower (Matt. xiii), and in particular Matt. xiii. 39. 

32. be destined to fill. The harvest of good, when once it has been sown (immediately after the end of the present 
evil age), will in the golden future far surpass the previous harvest of evil. The argument @ minori ad maius is 
characteristically Jewish. 

(¢) iv. 33-43. The seer’s impatient question—‘ How long? when shall these good things come to pass ?’—is rebuked, 
Everything has been predetermined. Till the predestined number of the righteous has been completed the judgement 
cannot come. But when the moment has arrived nothing can delay its consummation. The point is further enforced 
by a similitude. On the whole passage cf. Charles, Eschatology, p. 293 f. 

34. Thy haste may not exceed that of the Most High. ‘The seer is rebuked for selfish impatience. The 
Most High is no less ready to ‘ haste’ than himself, but determines His action in accordance with the interests of all 
(many) ; cf. Vv. 33. As Gunkel remarks, such admonitions to be patient are a standing feature of apocalyptic writings. 
Acquiescence in the divine will was the highest virtue in a time when even the most pious sighed for the end of the 
present world. 

566 


35 


36 


Sy 


38, 39 


40 


41 


EV ZAIN AR 25 Ay 


Were not these questions of thine asked by the souls of the righteous in their chambers ? 


Pee are we (to remain) here?* When cometh the fruit upon the threshing-floor of our 
reward ; 


And to them the archangel Jeremiel made reply, and said: Even when the number of those like 
yourself” is fulfilled ! 


For he has weighed the age in the balance, 
And with measure has measured the ¢ times °, 
And by number has numbered the © seasons °: 
Neither will he move nor stir things, 
till the measure ‘appointed? be fulfilled. 
Then I answered and said: O Lord my Lord, ® but behold ® we are all full of ungodliness. ‘ Is it, 


perchance, on our account that § the threshing-floor of the righteous is kept back ®—on account of 
the sins of the dwellers upon earth ? 


So he answered me and said: Go and ask the woman who is pregnant, when she has completed 
her nine months, if her womb can keep the birth any longer within her ? 
Then said I: No, Lord, it cannot. And he said to me: ® The underworld and the chambers of 


»"» reading similium vobis = $ Ethiop. Ar.?: seminum SA C M (corrupt) ee (0-e) # tempora .. .. tesipora; 
= times ... hours (changing expression, prob. rightly) d-d & praedicta &@ so Ethiop. (and & by an easy 
emendation): & sed et (? read ecce for et) Pf so Ethiop.: & et ne forte (? ead num forte) 8-8 reading 
prohibeatur iustorum area (C M) = Ethiop. (g. 3): v. Z. impleatur (S.A), non impleantur (iustorum areae) _ »- so 
& Ethiop. (hence Violet emends & infernum et promptuaria animarum): % (MSS.) in inferno promptuaria animarum 


35. by ... the righteous. i.e. the righteous dead. 

in their chambers. Lat. i promptuariis suis = év rois tapeiois a’tav. The word promptuaria recurs in iv. 41, 
vii. 32, 95 (cf. v. 9, 27, vi. 22); also in Ps. cxliv. 13, and apparently not again in the Vulgate. These ‘chambers’ 
are the ‘treasuries of souls’ referred to sometimes in apocalyptic books (cf. 2 Bar. xxi. 23, ‘And let the treasuries of 
souls restore those which are enclosed in them’; 1 En. xxii. 3 f.). These ‘treasuries’ or ‘ habitations’ (hLabitacula, 
4 Ezra vii. 80) were reserved for the righteous only (vii. 80), who entered them at death, and there enjoying ‘ great 
quietness’ and ‘guarded by angels’, they awaited the final judgement (vii. 95). Then the ‘ chambers’ were to restore 
the souls committed to them (vii. 32, cf. iv. 42 ; 2 Bar. xxi. 3,xxx.2). According to the Talmud (7. B. Shabbath 1526) 
the souls of the righteous dead are beneath the throne of God (cf. Rev. vi. 9 f., where the souls of the righteous who 
have suffered martyrdom are represented as being ‘ beneath the [heavenly] altar’). Ina few passages in the Rabbinical 
literature the word ¢reasury (Heb. ’dsar) is used in this connexion: cf. e. g. Mzdr. rab. on Qoheleth (iii. 21), where the 
souls of the righteous are said to be ‘placed in the treasury’, which is located in the heavenly ‘height’. According to 
4 Ezra vii. 41, however, these ‘ treasuries’ or ‘chambers’ are placed in Sheol (the lower world). But the alternative 
reading is better (see ad /oc.). 

36. Jeremiel. Gk. ‘Tepepijd (= Heb. Seon). This archangel may confidently be identified with “Peper (note 
that the Syr. of our verse actually reads Ramze/), who appears in the Greek (Gizeh) text of 1 En. xx. as the seventh of 
the seven archangels (1, Uriel; 2, Raphael; 3, Raguel; 4, Michael; 5, Sariel [= Eth. Saraqdél]; 6, Gabriel ; 
7, Remiel [= Jeremiel]). In the Ethiop. text the first six only are mentioned ; but, doubtless, the Greek is right 
in enumerating seven. The last (= Jeremiel) is described as ‘ one of the holy angels whom God appointed to be over 
those who rise [from the dead]’ (émi rév duotapévav). This agrees admirably with the réle assigned to him here as 
the archangel who has charge of the souls of the righteous who are guarded in the ‘ treasuries’, and await the final 
judgement and resurrection. [Only two of the seven archangels are mentioned in 4 Ezra, viz. Uriel and Jeremiel.] 

those like yourself is fulfilled. The end of the age and the ‘ regeneration’ can only take place when the 
number of the saints has been completed. This is also the view represented in Rev. vi. 11 (‘until their fellow- 
servants . . . should be fulfilled’) ; Swete, ad /oc., aptly cites from the Anglican Burial Service, ‘that it may please 
thee . . . shortly to accomplish the number of thine elect, and to hasten thy kingdom.’ According to Rev. vii. 4 the 
number of the ‘ sealed’, i.e. the elect, is 144,000. In 2 Bar. xxiii. 5 the number that is to be fulfilled is of mankind as 
a whole (all who should be born)—a view which is referred to in Rabbinical literature (see the references cited by 
Charles on Af. Bar., loc. cét.). This number was a secret known only to God Himself (2 Bar. xxi, 10, xlviii. 46). 

36-37.4 weighed . . . measured . . . numbered. The times and periods of the course of the world’s history have 
been predetermined by God. The numbers of the years have been exactly fixed. This was a fundamental postulate 
of the apocalyptists, who devoted much of their energy to calculations, based upon a close study of prophecy, as to the 
exact period when history should reach its consummation. One scheme especially favoured divided history into 
a world-week of seven millenniums, corresponding to the week of Creation (cf. vii. 30, 43; according to 2 Pet. iii, 8 
[cf. Ps. xc. 4] a day = 1,000 years). Here, however, as in the case of the number of the righteous (elect), no definite 
number is mentioned. The categories of ‘weight’, ‘measure’, and ‘rule’ (or ‘number’) are also applied to Creation 
generally ; cf. Zest. Twelve Patr. Naph. ii. 3 ; Wisd. xi. 20 (‘ by measure, number, and weight thou didst order all things’) 
Philo, Som. ii. 29 (‘God . . . measures, weighs, and numbers all things, and circumscribes them with bo ids and 
limits’). In the O.T. similar expressions are occasionally met with; thus in Job xxviii. 25 the winds are said to be 
‘weighed’ and the waters ‘measured’; in Isa. xl. 12 the mountains and hills; cf. 1 En, xliii. 2 (the stars); also 
4 Ezra iv. 5. The underlying idea is predestinarian (cf. Charles on 1 En, xlvii. 3). # 

41. the underworld and the chambers of souls. For the text cf. crit. note. The treasury of the souls of the 
righteous dead is, no doubt, meant. Gunkel, indeed, and some other scholars take the ‘chambers of souls’ here to refer 
to unborn souls, not to those of the righteous dead. In this case an antithesis is intended between promptuaria 
animarum and infernum ; the latter (= Sheol) is the place where all the dead are received, the abode of all departed 
souls ; the former the abode of souls yet unborn (cf. 2 Bar. xxi. 5 [same antithesis between abode of unborn and 


567 


Se42 


43 


44 
45 
46 
47 
48 


49 


50 


Lan! 


5 
52 


IV EZRA 4, 42-52 


souls" are like the womb: for just as she who is in travail makes haste to escape the anguish of the 
travail; even so do these places hasten to deliver what has been entrusted to them from the 
beginning. Then to thee it shall be showed concerning those things that thou desirest to see. 


(e) iv. 44-50. The dialogue continued. In reply to a further question, the seer is shown 
by a similitude that the End will come soon (S). 


Then I answered and said: If I have found favour in thy sight, and if it be possible, and if I be 
sufficient, show me this also: whether there be more to come than is past, or whether the more part 
is already gone by us? For what is gone by I know, but what is to come I know not. 

And he said to me: Stand to the right, and I will explain the meaning of a similitude unto thee. 

So I stood, and saw, and lo! a blazing furnace passed by before me; and it happened that when 
the flame had gone by I looked and lo! the smoke remained still. ; 

Thereupon there passed by before me a cloud full of water, and sent down much rain with 
a storm ; and when the rain-storm was past the drops remained therein still. 

Then said he unto me: Consider for thyself; for as the rain is more than the drops, and as the 
fire is greater than the smoke, so has the measure of what is past exceeded by far; but there are 
still left over—the drops and the smoke ! 


(f) iv. 51-v. 13. The signs which precede the End (E) (R). 


Then I made supplication, and said: Thinkest thou that I shall live until those days? iWhoi 
shall be (live) in those days ? 
He answered me, and said: [As for the signs concerning which thou askest me, I may tell thee 


(so B/) ii @ vel quis; so S$: but Ethiop. Ar) Ar® What [shall happen in those days] Ji reading in excessu 


departed spirits] ; xlviii. 16, lii. 6, lvi. 6). But in v. 35 the promptuaria are undoubtedly the chambers containing the 
souls of the righteous dead. It would be Strange if a few verses later the same expression were used, without any 
limiting phrase, to denote something else. In this case the enfernum (underworld, Sheol) will be a general term for 
the abode of the souls of the wicked dead, where they await the final judgement. This is the meaning of Sheol (Hades), 
apparently, in the Johannine Apocalypse, where Hades and Death are always combined, and (like the wicked) are 
consigned to the lake of fire (cf. Rev. i. 18; vi. 8; xx. 13, 14; and see Charles, Eschatology, p. 352). 


(2) iv. 44-50. The seer now asks, but in a more subdued and less impatient manner, whether more of the drama 
remains to be enacted than what is already past. He is shown a vision of fire and storm, of which nothing remains, 
after they have gone by, but the smoke and the rain-drops, and is told that in a like manner the greater part of the 
world’s history that precedes the End is already past. 

47. Stand to the right. The Arabic renders: ‘Turn thyself towards the right side and look *; but the expression 
may mean upon the right side of the speaker. The seer is bidden to stand upon the right side of the angel in order 
that both (now facing one way) may watch the spectacle as it passes ; presumably before this they had been standing 
face to face. 


(7) iv. 51-v. 13. In reply to a further question as to whether he shall live to see ‘ those days’ and as to what 
will then happen, the seer is given a description of the signs of the End. These are set forth in detail (v. 1-12). It 
will be a time of commotions and the general break up of moral and religious forces (vv. 1-2); the heathen world- 
power (= Rome) will be destroyed (v. 3); there will be portents in nature, general chaos in society, monstrous and 
untimely births, the failure of the means of subsistence, and internecine strife (vv. 4-9, vi. 21-22) ; wisdom and under- 
standing will have perished from the earth (vv. 10-12). There is a further reference to these ‘ signs’ in ix. 3 f. : 

A close examination of the passage makes it clear that the section detailing the ‘signs’ (v. 1-12) cannot belong 
to S. In iv. 51 the seer asks: ‘Thinkest thou that I shall live in those days? Or who (v. 2. what) shall be in those 
days ?’—the ‘ days’ = the time of the End. The answer that follows (in the present form of the text) is: [‘ As for the 
signs concerning which thou askest me, I may tell thee of them in part, but] concerning thy life I have not been sent 
to speak to thee, nor have I any knowledge thereof.’ Only the latter part of this verse (the words outside the 
brackets) is an answer to Salathiel’s question. He had not said a word about the ‘signs’. The attempt to evade 
this difficulty in some of the versions (Ethiop. and Arab., cf. Vulg.) by substituting ‘ what’ for ‘ who’ (against the 
Latin and Syriac) in the second half of the question only complicates matters by introducing another (and totally 
different) question. It is no answer to Salathiel to tell him some of the signs that shall precede the End. He desires 
to know whether he himself shall live to see the End, Moreover, the description of the ‘ signs ’ that follows (v. 1-12) 
is in tone and style alien to S. It is in any case much older, and bears marks of being traditional. Of course it is 
conceivable that S may have used such older material; but if he had done so he would have invested it with some of 
the marks of his own style. He cannot have been responsible for its awkward introduction here. No doubt the 
passage has been inserted by R from E. The original sequence of S here (the inserted passage being ignored) will 
have been as follows: ‘ Then I made supplication and said: Thinkest thou that I shall live until those days? Or who 
shall be in those days? He answered me, and said: Concerning thy life I have not been sent to speak to thee, nor 
have I any knowledge thereof. If, however, thou wilt pray again, and weep as now, and fast [again] seven days, thou 
shalt hear yet greater things than these’ (iv. 51, 52, v. 13 4). 

_ The passage is really a descriptive list of the Messianic ‘ woes ’, and bears a general likeness to other eschato- 
logical descriptions of the signs that precede the End. See further EA, p. 41, and the literature there cited, 

52. the signs concerning which thou askest me. To the instructed the events which were to precede and 
herald the End were a ‘sign’; cf. ix. 1 f, (Matt. xxiv. 15; Mark xiii. 14). 


568 


F; 


IV EZRA 4. 52-5. 7 


of them in part; but] concerning thy life I have not be tet k d 
knowledge oon § thy en sent to speak to thee, nor have I any 


1 Concerning the signs, however : 
Behold, the days come when the inhabitants of earth shall be seized j with great panic} 
And the way of truth shall be hidden, ¥ 
and the land be barren of faith. 
2 And iniquity shall be increased above that which thou thyself now seest or that thou hast heard of 
3 long ago. And the land that thou seest now to bear rule shall be a pathless waste*; and men 
4 shall see it forsaken: if the Most High grant thee to live, thou shalt see it after 'the third (period) 
in confusion’. 
Then shall the sun suddenly shine forth by night 
and the moon by day: 
5 And blood shall trickle forth from wood, 
and the stone utter its voice: 
The peoples shall be in commotion, 
™the outgoings (?) (of the stars) ™ shall change. 


6 And one whom the dwellers upon earth do not look for shall wield sovereignty, and the birds 
shall take to general flight, 


7 and “the sea®” shall cast forth its fish. 


i one ° whom ° the many do not know will make his voice heard by night; and all shall hear 
is voice. 


multo = 3 (fi. Ethiop.); Lat. MSS. incensu multo k-k yeading erit incomposita [et sine] vestigio with B/ 
(bracketed words not in Lat. MSS.): Violet reads et erit incomposito vestigio, ‘2 unordentlichen Triimmern’: 
% unstable and untrodden ll yeading post tertiam turbatam (C) [tubam A] m-m % gressus (egressos S): 
S = dépes (so Ar.) Ar.’): Ethiop. = aorépes n-n % mare Sodomiticum (corrected text): so Oriental VSS.; but 
Sodomiticum f70é. to be deleted °° yeading quem for quam 





in part. The description here is supplemented in vi. 11-28. 


v. 3. the land, &c. The Roman Empire is, of course, meant. 

shall be a pathless waste. Lit. ‘ shall be disordered and pathless’ (corrected text ; see crit. note). 

4. after the third (period) in confusion. For the text cf. crit. note (probably jépav has fallen out). Some 
noun of time must be supplied (Ethiop., ‘after the third month’; but Arm., ‘after the third vision’). Gunkel 
(Schipfung, pp. 268, 269, notes) has shown how significant a rdle the number 33 plays in the eschatological tradition. 
The mystic number has been applied to periods, years, months, and days (in Daniel the 3% years are variously 
reckoned as 1150, 1290, and 1335 days; cf. Dan. viii. 14, xii. 11, and xii. 12; in Rev. xi. 3, xii. 6 as 1260 days). In 
4 Ezra xiv. 11 f. according to one form of the text 25 world-periods remain (93 of the 12 parts having passed already) ; 
and there, as in our passage, the number (23) denotes part of the period that is to elapse before the final destruction of 
the evil and oppressive world-power, i.e. Rome. So here ‘after the third [day, i.e. period]’ means more exactly 
towards the end of the 33 ‘days’ which remain before Rome’s dominion comes to an end. [Hilg. and others under- 
stand the land after the third (cf. Syr.), i.e. the fourth kingdom of Daniel (cf. 4 Ezra xii. 11, where ‘the fourth 
kingdom that appeared in vision to thy brother Daniel’ is identified with Rome). The Arab. interprets: ‘thou shalt 
afterwards see these three signs,’ i. e. those of the sun and moon, the blood, and the stones that follow.] 

sun ... shine forth by night, &c. Cf. 1 Enoch lxxx. 4, 5 for emended text. 

5. blood shall trickle forth from wood, and the stone utter its voice. Cited in Lp. Barnabas xii, 1 as from 
a prophetic writing (probably not 4 Ezra): see further EA, p. 44. : ; 

the outgoings (?) (of the stars) shall change. For text see crit. note. The textual evidence suggests that 
the Oriental Versions read ‘stars’, or something like it, in their Greek text (ajp, aépes, confused with dotnp, dorépes), 
while the Lat. simply represents some word like é£0d0.. Possibly a combination of these readings may produce an 
approximation to the original text; such as, ‘the outgoings of the stars are changed’ or ‘the stars change their 
outgoings’ [m33137 NID MD]. Cf. Ps. Ixv. 8 (9): ‘Thou makest the “ outgoings” of the morning and evening to 
rejoice.’ These ‘ outgoings’ or ‘ exits’ (cf. exitus, vi. 1) were the portals through which the stars proceeded and the 
winds blew; cf. 1 En. xxxiv-xxxvi. See further Z£'4, p. 45. 

6. one whom .. . shall wield sovereignty. i.e. the Antichrist (the wicked tyrant of the last days). i 

and the birds... flight. Birds, possibly as creatures which soar aloft, were regarded in antiquity as possessing 
supernatural knowledge. They could foresee impending events. ; rx 

7. and the sea shall cast forth its fish. So Wellhausen (S#iézzen, vii. 246) and Charles. The Lat. and all the 
versions have ‘sea of Sodom’. If this be right the portent will consist in the Dead Sea casting out fish, as no fish 
can live there; cf. Ezek. xlvii. 8 f., where the bitter waters af the Dead Sea are pictured as sweetened and made full of 
life by the stream issuing from the Temple. Local features are, however, out of harmony with the context, which 
depicts a convulsion of nature on the largest scale. Hence ‘of Sodom’ is probably to be deleted as an incorrect gloss, 
which was already present in the original Heb. text (suggested by ‘salt waters . . . in the sweet’ in v. 9 ?). [' Sea of 
Sodom’ is one of the names given to the Dead Sea in the Talmud.] For the general conception cf. Isa. 1. 3. 

And one whom the many do not know will make his voice heard by night; and all shall hear his voice: 
et dabit vocem noctu guem [{emended from guam]| non noverunt multi, omnes autem audient vocem elus: SO Well- 
hausen, Charles. The Latin erroneously refers the relative (WN) to vozce, thereby depriving the sentence of a subject. 
With this emendation the clause 02 noverunt multi becomes more intelligible. A mysterious personage 1s indicated 
by a voice which all can hear: cf. Josephus’ account of the mysterious voice heard in the Temple saying ‘ Let us 


569 


IV EZRA 5, 8-19 


8 » And the earth o'er wide regions shall open? 
and fire burst forth for a long period: 
The wild beasts shall desert their haunts, 4and women bear monsters 4. 
vi. 21 (And one-year-old children shall speak with their voices; pregnant women shall bring forth 
22 untimely births at three or four months, and these shall live and ‘dance. And suddenly shall the 
sown places appear unsown, and the full storehouses shall suddenly be found empty.) 
Vv-9 Salt waters shall be found in the sweet; friends shall attack one another * suddenly 8. 
Io Then shall intelligence hide itself, 
and wisdom withdraw to its chamber— 
by many shall be sought and not found. 
tr 4\nd unrighteousness and incontinency shall be multiplied upon the earth. One land shall also 
ask another and say: Is Righteousness—that doeth the right—passed through thee? And it shall 
answer, No. 
12 And it shall be 
In that time men shall hope and not obtain, 
shall labour and not prosper. 
13 Such are the signs I am permitted to tell thee ; but if thou wilt pray again, and weep as now, and 
fast seven days, thou shalt hear again greater things than these. 


IV. v. 14-1y. CONCLUSION OF THE VISION (S). 


14 [Then I awoke, and my body trembled greatly; my soul also was wearied even unto fainting. 

15 But the angel who came and spake with me took hold of me, strengthened me, and set me 
up upon my feet. ] 

16 And in the second night Phaltiel, the captain of the people, came unto me, and said: Where hast 

17 thou been? And why is thy countenance sad? Or knowest thou not that Israel has been entrusted 

18 unto thee in the land of their exile? Rouse thyself, then, and eat a morsel of bread, and do not 
desert us as a shepherd does (who leaves) his flock in the power of noxious wolves! 

19 Then said I unto him: Depart from me, and come not nigh me for seven days; then thou mayst 
come unto me ‘and I will explain matters unto thee*. And when he heard what I said he left me. 


P°P = 3 (xaopa or xacpara for xaos): %& et chaus fiet per loca multa 44 so B (of. Ethiop.): XL et mulieres 
parient menstruatae monstra (menstruatae = a corrupt doublet of monstra) ** reading scirtiabuntur (C) 
SS 50 2 Ethiop.; & omnes St 50 2 (Gf. Ethiop.): LS 





depart hence’, which he relates as a portent (Jewish War, vi. 5. 3 [299]; in the same context he relates other similar 
‘portents’). 

Pe The earth o’er wide regions shall open, lit. ‘a fissure (reading ydopa for ydos: see crit. note) shall arise over 
wide regions’; cf. Zech. xiv. 4. The Armenian also supports this reading. The fissure starts and spreads over 
a widening area (fer loca muita). 

vi. 21-22. And one-year-old children, &c. These verses, which are obviously out of harmony with their present 
context in chapter vi, find an appropriate place here. For the feature referred to cf. Matt. xxiv. 19. 

v. 9. friends shall attack one another suddenly. Cf. vi. 24. 

13. fast seven days. Cf. 2 Bar. xx. 5,6; and Charles’s note on 2 Bar. v.2. In 4 Ezra four fasts of seven days’ 
duration, followed by a revelation, are referred to (v. 20, vi. 35, ix. 26, 27, xii. 51), and probably one preceded the first 
vision (cf. iii. 1 and notes). 

v. 14-19. CONCLUSION OF THE VISION. — In their present position the opening verses of this section (v. 14-15)— 
which clearly form the conclusion of a dream-vision—are misplaced. They have, presumably, been transferred from 
their proper position (at the conclusion of the lacuna in iii. 1) to their present place by R, so as to form the conclusion 
of the first vision. 

The following verses (v. 16-19) in narrative form belong to the original framework of S, and imply an earlier passage 
(in the missing introduction after iii. 1), giving the command to the seer to repair to a certain spot in the neighbourhood 
of Babylon, and there by a seven days’ fast prepare for the reception of further direct revelations. The section should 
be compared with the parallel passage, xil. 30-48 (also from the framework of S). 
14. I awoke, viz. from sleep. Clearly this is the sequel of a dream-vision. 


16. Phaltiel. Lat. Phalthiel, Gk. Partin = Heb. Sxrnde, [This name occurs in 2 Sam. iii. 15 as that of Michal’s 
husband ; in Numb. xxxiv. 26 of a prince of Issachar ; cf. Pzfaz in the list Neh. xii. 17 (a representative of a priestly 
house in the time of Zerubbabel). Violet suggests that the Phaltiel of our text may originally have been the Pe/adiah 


(= mba) who is mentioned as one of the ‘heads of the people’ in the time of Nehemiah, in the list Neh. x. 22 
(= the Pe/atiah of 1 Chron. vi.21). This would suit the time of Ezra but not Salathiel. The historical reference 
must remain uncertain.] The variants in the Lat. Codd. include Salathiel (so Vulg., A. V.), Psalthiel, Spalthiel; the 
Ethiop. has Phelteyal; Syr. Psaltiel ; Arm. Phanuel. 
Rie that Israel has been entrusted unto thee. Salathiel is the last of the prophets left to the exiles in Babylon, 
Gh xd 425 
18. asa shepherd, &c. For the image cf. Matt. x. 15. 


57° 


sy, 


IV EZRA 5. 20-30 


SHE SECOND “VISION: 
(v. 2c-vi. 34.) 
TI. v. 20-22. INTRODUCTION. 


$20,21 Sol fasted seven days, mourning and weeping, even as the angel Uriel commanded me. And 


22 after the seven days the thoughts of my heart began to oppress me again grievously ; then my soul 
recovered the spirit of understanding, and I began once more to address the Most High. 


II. v. 23-40. THE PRAYER AND ITS ANSWER. 
(a) The prayer (v. 23-30.) 


23 And I said: O Lord my Lord, "out of all the woods" of the earth and all the trees thereof thou 

24 hast chosen Ythee’ one “vine”; out of all the lands of the world thou hast chosen thee one 

25 planting-ground ; out of all the flowers of the world thou hast chosen thee one lily; out of all the 
depths of the sea thou hast replenished for thyself one river ; out of all the cities that have been built 

26 thou hast sanctified Sion unto thyself; out of all birds that have been created thou hast called for 
thyself one dove; out of all the cattle that have been formed thou hast provided thee one sheep ; 

27 and out of all the peoples who have become so numerous thou hast gotten thee one people: and the 
law * which thou didst approve out of all (laws)* thou hast bestowed upon the people whom thou 
didst desire. . 

28 And now, O Lord, why hast thou delivered up the one unto the many, and dishonoured the one 
root above the rest, and scattered thine only one among the multitude? 

29 And (why) have ¥ they who denied thy promises been allowed to tread under foot those that have 

30 believed thy covenants’? If thou didst so much hate thy people they ought to have been punished 
with thine own hands. 
u-u so & (of. Ar): Lex omni silva (= Lthiof.) v-V so Oriental VSS.: £> w-w so Oriental.VSS.: # vineam 
(vineyard) x-x s0 Ethiop.: & ab omnibus probatam legem y-Y reading conculcaverunt qui contradicebant 
sponsionibus tuis eos qui tuis testamentis credebant (Lat. MSS. have quique for eos qui): so Oriental VSS. (see B/) 





THE SECOND VISION (v, 20-vi. 34). After a further fast of seven days the seer (Salathiel) again makes complaint 
to God. Why has God’s chosen and beloved people Israel been given up to oppressors? (v. 20-30). “The angel 
answers, as before, by showing that man is unable to comprehend the things nearest to himself; how then can he 
hope to fathom the judgements of God, or compass God’s love? (v. 31-40). The dialogue is continued by the seer 
asking what the lot of those shall be who have died before the End comes, and is told that their lot will not be worse 
or better than that of those who survive. The place of successive generations in the divine plan of the world is set 
forth in a series of striking analogies. The feebleness of age is, the angel declares, manifested in Mother Earth 
(v. 41-55). In the section that follows (v. 56-vi. 6) the prophet is assured that the End of the present age and the 
inauguration of the new order shall come by the agency of God alone. The present age of heathen (Roman) oppressors 
shall be succeeded by the glorious incorruptible age (vi. 7-10). A long passage detailing the signs of the last time 
and the End follows (vi. 11-28) and the vision concludes (vi. 30-34). 

The vision thus falls into the following divisions— 

_ i. Introduction (x. 20-22) (S). 5 

ii. The seer’s prayer and its answer (Vv. 23-40), viz. (a) The prayer (v. 23-30) and (b) ¢he answer (v. 31-40) (S). 
iii. Zhe place of successive generations in the divine plan of the world (v. 41-55). 

iv. The End of the age shall come by God alone (v. 56-vi. 6). 

v. The parting asunder of the times (vi. 7-10) (S). j 

vi. The signs of the last time and the coming of the End (vi. 11-28 (29)) (E). 
vii. Conclusion of the vision (vi. 30-34). : 

v. 23-40. This section falls into two parts, viz. (2) the prayer of Salathiel (Ezra) (v. 23-30); and (8) the answer 
conveyed in a dialogue by the archangel Uriel (v. 31-40). ; ‘ i 

(a) v. 23-30. THE PRAYER OF SALATHIEL (Ezra). Following on a carefully constructed exordium, which 
emphasizes in a variety of well-chosen figures Israel’s unique position as the chosen people of God, Salathiel (Ezra) 
appeals to God once more with the question, Why has the beloved people been given up to heathen oppressors ? 
Why has it been allowed to go into exile and be scattered ? : 

23. out of all the woods, &c. The figures illustrating Israel’s choice that follow have largely been drawn from the 
Old Testament. For the vine cf. Isa. v. 7, Ps. lxxx. 9 (10) ; for the lily cf. Canticles il. 2 (interpreted allegorically of 
Israel), and Hos. xiv. 5 ; for the stream, Isa. viii. 6, Canticles iv. 15 ; for the dove, Ps. Ixxiv. 19, Canticles 11. 14 ; for 
the sheep, Isa. lili. 7, Ps. Ixxix. 13 (‘sheep of thy pasture’), cf. Ps. xxii and Ixxx. 1 (2) ; and for the root, I En. xciil, 8 
(‘race of the elect root ’); cf. also Rom. xi. 17f. It is well known that the allegorical interpretation of Canticles is 
very old ; in fact the book was only admitted into the Canon on this interpretation. Gunkel aptly notes that our 
passage already implies such an interpretation of the book. 

25. thou hast sanctified Sion. Cf. e.g. Ps. cxxxil. 13. : 

26. one dove. The dove is a favourite emblem of Israel, especially of Israel unjustly persecuted (cf. Midrash rabba 


to Canticles i. 15, iv. 1); so here. ; 
; of out of oe aay For the idea of the superiority of the Mosaic Law above the laws of other nations cf. Deut. 


iv. 8 (cf. also Rom. i. 32, ii. 16). 
be es with thine ee eds, i.e. by famine, pestilence, or earthquake (cf. 2 Sam. xxiv. 13), but not by the hand of 


foreign foes. 
oft 


IV EZRA ®y 39-41 


(2) Lhe answer: in spite of all God loves Israel now and always (v. 31-40). 


S31 Now when I had spoken these words| the angel who had before come to me on the previous night, 
32 was sent unto me: and he said to me: \ 
Hear me, and I will instruct thee: 
Attend unto me, and I will speak again before thee. : ; 
33 And I said: Speak on, my lord. And he said: Art thou in sore perplexity of mind touching 
Israel? Lovest thou him better than he that made him ? ; 
34 And I said: No, lord: but of very grief have I spoken; for every hour I suffer agonies of soul in 
striving to comprehend the way of the Most High, and to seek out “the decree of his judgement *. 
35 And he said unto me: Thou canst not. And I said: Wherefore, Lord? Why then was I born? 
Wherefore did not my mother’s womb become my grave 
that I might have been spared the sight of Jacob’s misery, 
and the distressful toil of the stock of Israel ? 
36 =And he said unto me: 
Number me * the days that are not yet come ?, 
gather me the rain-drops that are scattered, 
make me the withered flowers bloom again ; 
a7 Open me the chambers that are closed 
and bring me forth the spirits > shut up in them ; 
[° Show me the image of faces thou hast never seen | 
or show me the image of a voice; 
and then I will display to thee “the 
objective? thou askest to see. 
38 And I said: O Lord my Lord, why who is able to understand such matters save he who has not 
his dwelling among men? ; 
39 “As for me, I am unwise °and powerless®: how then should I essay to speak of these things of 
which thou questionest me? 
40 Then said he unto me: Just as thou art unable to do even one of these things that have been 
mentioned, even so thou art powerless to discover my judgement or the goal of the love that I have 
declared unto my people. 


III. THE PLACE OF SUCCESSIVE GENERATIONS IN THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE WORLD 
(v. 41-55). 


(2) v. 41-49. The succession of generations accords with the Divine plan ; 
God's judgement reaches all alike. 


41 And TI said: But lo, O Lord, ‘thou art ready to meet (with blessing)? those who survive in the 
end; but what shall our predecessors do, or we ourselves or our posterity ? 


Ethiop. Ar.): > f reading praees = rpopOaweis (OPN): % thou hast promised (cf Ethiop.): Violet emends 
24 % partem iudiciieius: cf. viii.18. 2-2 so Ethiop. Ar’: & qui necdum venerunt (¢hose who are not yet come) (cf. 8): 
Brob. ras npepas had fallen out of the text rendered by & PP so Ethiop. Ars: & flatos(=%) e 59% (supported by 
Ethiop. Ars): £> d-d # laborem (= konoy: frob.'a mistake Jor cxonov: cf. Ar2: so Hilg.) ED GOES (Gi 





(4) v. 31-40. THE ANSWER TO THE PRAYER. The archangel Uriel is again sent to reason with him in answer to 
his complaint. As in iv. 1-11, Uriel, by a series of hard questions, demonstrates to the seer his inability to fathom 
God’s judgements or comprehend the ° goal’ of the divine love for the chosen people. The dialogue form is here 
resumed. 

33. Lovest thou him better, &c. The apocalyptist never doubts that God’s love for His people exceeds all other, 
and finds in this thought a source of supreme consolation ; cf. viii. 47. 


35. Wherefore did not my mother’s womb, &c. Cited in Clem. Alex. Stromateis, iii. 16; cf. Job iii.11; x. 18,19; 
jerixive a7 

36. the days that are not yet come. For text see crit. note. The apocalyptist is reminded that he cannot know 
whether the days that remain to the present order shall be few or many. 

37. the spirits shut up in them. Or ‘ winds’ (see crit. note). If winds are meant the reference will be to store- 
houses where the winds are shut up, and only let loose by angelic agency; cf. 1 En. xli. 4, Ixxvil, and Rev. vii. 1. 

v. 41-55. The dialogue is continued. The seer suggests that it would be better to be alive with the final generation 
when the End comes. Or why could not God have made all generations of men to live at once upon the earth, so that 
all might share under equal conditions in the great vindication? In answer he is shown by some striking analogies 
drawn from life that the succession of generations is according to the divine plan: ‘So have I disposed the world 
which I created’ (v. 41-49). The seer proceeds to ask whether our Mother Earth is still young. Are the last-born 


572 


S 


IV EZRA 5, 42-55 

42 And he said untc me: I will liken my judgement to a ring; just as there is no retardation of them 

that are last, even so there is no hastening of those that are first. 

43 Thereupon I answered and said: Couldst thou not have created them all at once—those who 
have been, those who (now) exist, and those who are to be—that thou mightst display thy 
judgement the sooner ? 

44 He answered me and said: The creation may not proceed faster than the Creator ; nor could the 
world hold all at once those created in it. 

45 And Isaid: How then is it that thou hast (just now) said to thy servant that §thou wilt verily quicken’ 
all at once the creation created by thee? *If, then, they (i.e. all of the created) shall indeed be 
alive all at once,? and icreation: shall be able to sustain them, it might even now support them 
(all) present at once. 

46 And he said unto me: Ask the womb of a woman, and say unto it: If thou bringest forth ten 
children, why (dost thou bring them forth) each in its own time? Demand, therefore, that it 
produce ten all at once. 

47 And I said: It cannot possibly, but (only each) in its own time. 

48 Then said he unto me: J Thus have I also made the earth the womb for those/ * who, in their own 

49 time, are conceived by it*. For just as the young child does not bring forth, nor she that is aged 
any more, so have !I also! disposed the world which I have created ™ by defined periods of time™. 


(0) v. 50-55. The Earth has grown old and tts offspring degenerate. 


50 Thereupon I asked ™him® and said: Seeing thou hast now showed me the way, I would fain 
speak (further) before thee. °Is our mother,? of whom thou hast told me, still young? Or does 
she now approach old age? 


51,52 He answered me and said: Ask a woman who has borne (children), and let her tell thee; say to 


her: Why are (the children) whom thou hast lately brought forth not like the first, but inferior ? in 
53 stature? And she also shall answer thee: Those that are born in vigorous youth are of one 
4 fashion, and those born in old age, when the womb fails, are otherwise. Consider, therefore, thou 
55 also that ye are inferior in stature in comparison with your predecessors ; and so, also, (will be) your 
posterity than yourselves: even as creation is already grown old, and is already past the strength 
of youth. 


zo promittis 8-8 reading vivificans vivificabis (so 3 Ethiop. Ar.!): vivificans vivificabit S A hoh yestoring Si 
ergo viventes vivent in unum = 3: >SACM (by homoioteleuton) ii so L: Ethiop. the world — Jndesorols 
%, et ego dedi matricem terrae his k-k ¥ qui seminati sunt super eam per tempus Il so 3 Ethiop. (= kayo) : 


Hego ™™ so Ethiop.(Ar+): LS > %™ so Oriental VSS.: © > °° ~ reading num mater nostra (num for 
nam) = 3 P-P so ©: LExrhiop.in strength: Ar.’ in stature and strength (so v. 54): S=H2 





generations inferior to those who were born in their mother’s youth? In reply he is told that the Earth is now grown 
old—‘ past the strength of youth ’—and that there is a corresponding degeneracy in the latest-born generations 
(v. 49-55). The eagerness of the seer that the End of the present world should be hastened is a striking feature. 

4i. thou art ready to meet, viz. with blessing and salvation. ~ ; on & ; 

those who survive in the end. Cf. Ps. Sol. xvi. 7; Luke ii. 29 f. The old view, which is reflected in the 

older literature of the Bible, that the ‘community’ as a whole was to be the subject of salvation would naturally give 
rise to such questions as this. With the rise of the doctrine of a future life, and the growing recognition of the religious 
claims and position of the individual, this view was modified. Not merely the generation that happened to live on into 
the Messianic (or, as here, the future) Age, but all the pious individuals of previous generations who had died should 
(by means of a resurrection) participate in the blessedness of the final age. A similar problem (viz. how the righteous 
dead could share in the felicity that comes to the final generation of the living) is dealt with in 1 Thess. iv. 13f. It is 
not clear, however, that the writer of S believed in a resurrection of dead bodies. See further A, p. 121, and 
ie ae as there is no retardation, &c., i.e. just as in the case of a ring or circle there is neither beginning nor 
end, so God’s judgement will reach all generations at one and the same time ; ef. 2 Bar. li. 13. | 

45. How then is it that thou hast (just now) said, i.e. how is the statement in the previous verse (44) to be 
reconciled with that made earlier (in v. 42) to the effect that all generations will be quickened simultaneously to 
receive the judgement? Lat. guomodo dixistt = mas eheyes 5 

a i i hini liest st (as a child) brought forth 

49. disposed the world ... by defined periods of time. The earth in its earliest s ase : ; g 
no human inhabitants, neither will it do so in extreme old age ; but only in the vigour and decline of youth. ; 

55. even as creation is already grown old. The thought of the world’s growing old is not caer Wy 
literature ; cf. in this book, iv. 44 f,, xiv. 10, 16; also 2 Bar. lxxxv. 10; Lucretius ii. 1150f. The representation oeek 
latest generation as inferior in ‘stature and strength’ to the ancients (cf. Gen. vi. 4) comes to expression in : ‘ te) 
(cf. de Mund. Opif., § 49). The feeling that they were standing at the end of the age is characteristic of the 


apocalyptists. 


573 


S 


5 


6 


Uf 


iS) 


IV EZRA 4, 56—6. 5 


IV. THE END OF THE AGE SHALL COME BY THE AGENCY OF GOD ALONE. 
(v. 56-vi. 6). 


Then said I: O Lord, I beseech thee, if I have found favour in thy sight, show thy servant “by 
whom ¢ thou wilt visit thy creation. 
And he said unto me: "In the beginning of the terrestrial world* 
before ever *the heavenward portals* * were standing *, or ever the " wind-blasts * blew ; 
before the rumblings of thunderings did sound, 
or ever the lightning-flashes did shine ; 
When 
the foundations of paradise were not yet laid, 
nor ‘ the beauty of its flowers” yet seen ; 
Before ever “ the motive powers (of heaven) ¥ were established, 
or the numberless armies of angels were gathered ; 
Before ever the heights of the air were uplifted, 
ere the spaces of the firmaments were named; 
ere the footstool of Sion * was appointed *. 
Before the years of the present ¥ were reckoned, 
“ere the counsels of present-day sinners were spurned 2, 
or the gatherers of the treasures of faith were sealed— 


14 so % (per quem) = S and Ethiop. (one reading): but Ethiop.(one reading) Art onaccountofwhom %-t & initium 
(v. 2. initio) terreni orbis: Oriental VSS, vary: & the beginning by the Son of Man, but the end by myself alone (for 
as before, &c.); cf. Ethiop. Aro s-s & exitus saeculi “t # (SAC) starent = Oriental VSS.; v. 1: statue- 
rentur (M) uu % conventiones (Gunkel emends to convectiones) ventorum Vv so % Ethiop.: & decores flores 
ww % motus virtutes (so BJ read); or motuum virtutes = % Ethiop. (so Violet) x= & (S A) aestimaretur 
(corrupt): % was established (= firmaretur) : flilg. suggests aedificaretur, Gunkel destinaretur yy & investiga- 
rentur 2-4 @ et antequam abalienarentur eorum qui nunc peccant adinventiones: % before the follies of sinners 





v. 56-vi. 6. In this section God is directly addressed, and God is the speaker. In response to the prophet’s 
question, Through whom shall the End come? the answer is given, Through the God of Israel alone. A polemical 
aim is clearly to be detected in the passage. The apocalyptist will not allow any of the essentially divine attributes 
or functions to be assumed by any intermediate agency, therein agreeing with the view of orthodox Rabbinic Judaism. 
The polemic is directed against views which were held by early Christians, but which were probably not confined to 
Christian circles. At the same time it is possible that what the apocalyptic writer has in mind here is the Christian 
doctrine of the return of Christ in glory to judge the world. The burden of the passage is that just as Creation was 
brought into being at the beginning by God alone (without any intermediate agency), so the End of Creation will be 
brought about by God alone. It may be described as a splendid development of the theme expressed in Ps, xc. 2. 
The description of the works of Creation is one of great power and imaginative force. The conceptions of Creation 
underlying it are traditional and of great antiquity (cf. especially the Babylonian Creation-myths and see Gunkel, 
Schopfung, p. 401 n. and especially p. 419). It should be compared with the parallel passage in Prov. viii. 24-9. 
[Cf. also the description of the Day of Judgement in vii. 39 ff.] 

vi. 1. In the beginning of the terrestrial world. ~ For the alterations introduced into the text of the Oriental 
Versions here under Christian influence see crit. note. 

_ _ the heavenward portals, i.e. the portals open to heaven snCh D me xxxive 
3. the beauty of its flowers. The flowers are those of the heavenly Paradise (originally the stars). 
the motive powers (of heaven). The powers meant are probably the same as ‘ the powers of heaven’ of Matt. 
XxIV. 29, i.e. angelic powers who move the heavens and the stars. Others, however, prefer to adopt the reading 
motuum virtutes (see crit. note) = ‘ powers of movements ’, 1.e. earthquakes. 

4. the spaces of the firmaments, lit. ‘the measures (i.e. measured or defined spaces) of the firmaments’: the 

divisions into which the heavens were separated (cf. 2 En. iii f. for a description of the different heavens). 
were named. The names of the seven heavens are enumerated in 7. 2. flag, 12 6, 

5. or the gatherers of the treasures of faith were sealed. It should be noted that it is the persons of the 
faithful that are here ‘sealed’, exactly as in Rey. vii. 4 (the 144,000 ‘ who were sealed ”);_cf. Rev. ix. 4, xiv. 1, xxii. 4. 
(In Rev. xiii. 16, xiv. 9, xx. 4 a mark of the opposite kind is mentioned.) [Some of the best Lat. codices make the 
‘sealing’ in our text apply to ‘the merits’ of those ‘who have gathered faith for a treasure’; thus C M have consig-= 
narentur eorum merita gud (with partial support from S and A but against the versions). Thus ‘ merits’ here would 
balance ‘ abominations’ (or ‘ machinations’) in the preceding clause.] ‘Faith’ in this passage seems to mean the 
righteousness which comes from fidelity to the Law (or ‘ fidelity to the O. T. religion’), So in v. I, vi. 28. It plays 
a conspicuous réle in eschatological doctrine, and in such passages it is not always easy to be sure of the exact shade 
of meaning intended. Where the Law is valued and emphasized it will mean (as here prob.) the righteousness 
which results from fidelity to the Law (cf. 2 Bar. liv. 21). . In.vii. 34 it = fidelity to the Law, just as its opposite 
incredulitas = disloyalty in vii. 114. In ix. 7, 8, xili. 23 ‘faith’ and ‘ works’ are combined (as complementary). But 
the Law as such is not always necessarily the object of ‘faith’ (cf. 2 Bar. lvii. 2, faith is prophecy of coming judge- 
ment). (Cf. Sanday-Headlam, Romans, pp. 31-4.) i 


574 


IV EZRA 6. 6-13 


8 6 Even then had I these things in mind ; and through me alone and none other were they created ; 
as also the End (shall come) through me alone and none other. 


V. THE PARTING. ASUNDER OF THE TIMES. 


(vi. 7-10) (S). 
7 _ Then answered I and said: What shall mark the parting asunder of the times? When shall the 
End of the first (age) and the beginning of the second be? 
8 And he said unto me: * From Abraham to Abraham.* »For from him sprang Jacob and Esau,” 
9 “but Jacob’s hand held the heel of Esau from the beginning. 4The heel of the first age is Esau; 
ro the hand of the second is Jacob. * The beginning of a man is his hand, and the end of a man is 
his heel. Between heel and hand seek naught else, Ezra! 


VI. THE SIGNS OF THE LAST TIME AND THE END. 
(vi. 11-28) (E) (R). 
(a) vi. 11-12. Redactional Introduction. 
Riz,12__ [I answered and said: O Lord my Lord, if I have found favour in thy sight, ‘(I beseech thee) that 


thou show‘ thy servant the last of thy signs of which thou didst show me a part in the night 
that is past. ] 


(0) Description of the End (vi. 13-20, 23, 24) together with some misplaced verses 
describing the signs that precede the End (vi. 21-22). 


E 13 And he answered and said unto me: Stand up upon thy feet, and thou shalt hear a voice exceeding 


were yet invented a~a reading ab Abraham usque ad Abraham (S A) = $ £¢hiop. (Ar.'): v. 2. usque ad Isaac 
(C M) =Ar.? (also v.l. in Ethiop.) b-b so © = Ethiop. (cf. Ar.2): 3 from Abraham was born Isaac and from 
Isaac was born Jacob and Esau (= Ar.) ee so L=%: but Ethiop. Ari > d-d so S$: WD finis enim huius 
saeculi Esau, et principium sequentis lacob (= Av.) cf. Ethiop.) ee s9 S=Ar,! (Cf Lthiop.): & defective 
f-f # ut demonstres 





6. had I these things in mind. Creation, Gunkel remarks, regarded as predetermined by and the outcome of 
thought, is a loftier conception than that of creation through the Word. The truth of this statement depends upon the 
conceptual content of the Word. 

as also the End... through me alone, &c. This clause is omitted by the Oriental Versions for dogmatic 
reasons. 

vi. 7-I0. In allegorical language, probably derived from current tradition, the apocalyptist indicates that the 
present corrupt age (symbolized by Esau) will be succeeded immediately, without a break, by the glorious future age 
of incorruption (symbolized by Jacob). The connexion in thought with what precedes seems to be: just as there is 
no room in the divine acts of creation and judgement for a mediatorial Messiah, so in the transition from the present 
to the future age, there is no room for a Messianic interim—the temporary Messianic kingdom which precedes the 
dissolution of the present world. This interpretation harmonizes with the thought of S. See further £4, p. 68. 

8. From Abraham to Abraham. For text see crit. note. The meaning is, the interval between the old age 
and the new is no longer than that between Abraham and his immediate descendants: i.e. ‘it will be a case of 
immediate succession’ (Ball). The new age will follow the old without a break. This answers the first question in 
uv. 73; the answer to the second is given in vv. 8 d-Io. 

10. Between heel and hand, &c., i.e. do not look for any interval between the two ages. 

vi. 11-28. The passage as a whole is parallel to iv. 56-v. 13a, and embodies material taken from the same older 
source (E). The theme of the earlier passage is the signs that precede the End. Here, however, the description of 
these signs is interwoven with another which has for its subject the End of the world itself. The text appears to be in 
some confusion. The subject of vv. 13-20 and 23 is the End of the world; in vv. 21, 22 the description of the signs 
that precede the End is continued from iv. 56-v. 13a, and probably belongs to that passage in its original form, while 
vv. 25-28 describe the felicity of those who survive the Messianic woes; vv. 11-12 and 29 appear to be redactional 
additions, designed to adapt the older material here embodied to its present context (so Kabisch). 

The section will thus fall into the following divisions :-— 
(a) Redactional introduction (vv. 11-12) ; : sss : 
(6) Announcement of the End of the world, the speaker being the Divine Voice [of God] (vv. 13-20, 23, 24), 
together with some inserted [misplaced] verses describing the signs preceding the End (vv. 21, 22); 
(c) Description of the felicity of those who survive the Messianic woes (vu. 25-28). 
See further £-A, p. 71. 

a) vi. 11-12. The redactional character of these introductory verses is evident. They show clearly that R intended 
all that follows (vv. 13-29) to be understood as descriptive of the signs preliminary to the End; v. 11 seems to have 
been imitated from v. 56a. 

() vi. 13-20, 23-24 (vv. 20-21 belong to ch. v, between vv. 8 and 9; see ad /oc.)._ In its present form the eschato- 
logical material embodied in this passage is in a fragmentary condition. But it is all probably derived from one 
source (E). é 

13. And he answered. ‘ He’, i.e. the angel. y f 

Stand up upon thy feet. Cf. Ezek. ii. 1; Dan. vii. 4, vill. 18. 


975 


IV EZRA 6. 14-26 


E 14,15 loud; and it shall be if the place whereon thou standest, 8 be greatly shaken 8, » when it (i. e. the voice) 
speaks ‘with thee! be not thou terrified; for the word is of the End, and the foundations of the 
16 earth ‘shall understand‘ that the speech is concerning themselves. They shall tremble and be 
shaken, for they know that their end is to be changed. 
17 And it happened that when I had heard it I stood up upon my feet, and hearkened: and lo! 
a voice spake, and the sound of it was as the sound of mighty waters. 
18 And it said: 
Behold the days come, and it shall be, 
When I am about to draw nigh 
to visit the dwellers upon earth, 
19 And when I require from the doers of iniquity 
(* the penalty of) their iniquity ¥ ; 
[' And when the humiliation of Sion 
shall be complete, 
20 And when the Age which is about to pass away 
shall be sealed 
then [w7l/ I show these signs|: the books shall be opened before the face of the firmament, and all 
see ™ together. 
vv. 21-22 misplaced. 
2x (And one-year-old children shall speak with their voices; pregnant women shall bring forth 
22 untimely births at three or four months, and these shall live and dance. And suddenly shall the 
23 sown places appear unsown, and the full storehouses shall suddenly be found empty;) And the 
(E)R trumpet shall sound aloud, at which all men, when they hear it, shall be struck with sudden fear. 
24 And at that time [ friends shall war against Sriends like enemies], the earth shall be stricken with 
fear [together with the dwellers thereon|, and the springs of the fountains shall stand still so that for 
three " hours” they shall not run. 


(c) vi. 25-28 (29). The felicity of those who survive the Messianic Woes. 


25 And it shall be whosoever shall have survived all these things that I have foretold unto thee, he 

26 shall be saved and shall see my salvation and the end of my world. And the men who have been 
taken up, who have not tasted death from their birth, shall appear. Then shall the heart of the 
inhabitants ° (of the world)° be changed, and be converted to a different spirit. 


8-§ reading commotione commovebitur (C M) hb & in eo cum loquitur (= ev ro Aadew) i-i so Oriental 
MSSst) iS JI so 3 (ff. Ar): B& intellegetur | KK s0 Ethiop. (= tyv adicay avrov): & iniustitia sua 
(= tn adtxa avray) ‘I this clause ts prob. due to R; of. EA, Pp. XXx. m 3+my judgement nD so L &c, 


Ar. years °° $0 B (cf. other Oriental VSS.): & > PP so &, &c.: Ar. the evil heart 74 so  (tantis 





17. the sound of it. . . mighty waters. Cf. Ezek. i. 24; Rev. i. 15, xiv. 2, xix. 6. The divine voice is meant. 

18. Behold the days come. A common O.T. phrase, especially in the prophetic literature; cf. Amos viii. Iti bey 1122-5 
often in Jeremiah. 

19. [And when the humiliation of Sion shall be complete]. The fall of Jerusalem is regarded as marking a definite 
step le the speedy advent of the divine judgement ; cf. 2 Bar. xx. 2. The clause is probably due to R (see LA ‘ 
POO): 

20, [will I show these signs]. These words are probably due to R, who desired to invest the substance of the 
section (which is concerned with the final judgement) with the character of a description of the signs preceding the 
End. 

the books shall be opened, i.e. the celestial books in which are recorded the deeds of the righteous and wicked. 
See 1 En. xlvii. 3 and notes. 

23. the trumpet, i.e. the trumpet, the blowing of which ushers in the last Judgement. See further £4 Debs 

24. [friends shall war against friends like enemies]. This clause, which belongs logically to a description of the 
signs preceding the End (cf. v. 9), has probably been added by R. 

and the springs of the fountains ... notrun. Cf. Ps. Sol. xvii. 21; Ass. Mos. x. 6. 
for three hours. The number ‘three’ in such connexions seems to be a favourite one in apocalyptic tradition. 

(c) vi. 25-28 (29). 

26. the men who have been taken up, who have not tasted death from their birth. Men who were removed 
from the earth without dying are meant. In this connexion figure especially Enoch and Elijah (cf. Wisd. iv. 10 f, 
[? Enoch], Jub. iv. 23, 1 En. xxxix. 3 f., Ixx. 1-3, 2 En, xxxvi. 2, all of Enoch } 1 En, Ixxxix. 52 of Elijah). Such men 
were expected to return with the Messiah in order to inaugurate a period of felicity and salvation (cf. 4 Ezra vii. 28 
xi. 52). Elijah is especially prominent in this connexion in Rabbinic literature (his réle was, as high priest, to anoint 
the Messiah, to promote Israel’s repentance and reunion, and to bring about the resurrection of the dead) (cf. Volz 
p.192f.). Moses and Elijah sometimes appear together in their capacity of forerunners of the Messiah (cf. Midr. Deb. 
rab, x. 1; and in the Gospels the account of the Transfiguration, Mark ix. 2 f., Matt. xvii. 1-8, Luke ix. 28-36). The 
mysterious two witnesses of Rey. xi are also perhaps Elijah and Moses, though in the antichrist tradition they are 
Elijah and Enoch ;, Cf. Bousset, Aztichrést, ch. xiv. In 4 Ezra xiv. 9 (‘thou shalt be taken away from men, and from 


576 


IV SE ZR AMG) 2795 


B) R27 For P evil? shall be blotted out, 
and deceit extinguished ; 





28 Faithfulness shall flourish, 
| and corruption be vanquished ; 
LE ; And truth, which 4 for so long a time 4 has been without fruit, shall be made manifest. 
h 9 [And it came to pass while he spake to me, * behold, by little and little (?) the place whereon 
I stood rocked to and fro*.] 


VII. CONCLUSION OF THE VISION. 


; soe oh (vi. 30-34) (S). 

> 3° 3t And he said unto me: These things came I to show thee %this night’ If therefore thou wilt 

petition yet again, and fast seven days more, I will tell thee yet again greater things than these *. 

32. For thy voice has surely been heard before the Most High; for the Mighty One has seen thy 
rectitude, and marked also thy chastity which thou hast had ever since thy youth. 


33 Therefore has he sent me to show thee all these things, and to say unto thee: Be of good cheer, 
and fear not! 


34 “Be not over-solicitous" in the case of former times to indulge idle thoughts, ‘lest solicitude 
overtake thee’ in the last times. 


tHE HERD vv PSION: 
(vi. 35—ix. 25.) 
I. INTRODUCTION. 
(vi. 35-37) (S). 


35 And it came to pass after this that I wept again, and fasted seven days in like manner, that 


temporibus): % for many years (so Ethiop. [some MSS.]; cf. Ar. Arm.) rt yeading ecce paulatim movebatur 
locus super quem stabam super eum = 3 Léthiop. (cf. Ar. Arm.); Lat. MSS. corrupt s-8 so : H et ventura 
nocte (see further EA, p. 80) t £+per diem: other VSS. (with possible exception of Ar.') > u-u # et noli 
festinare v-v # ut non properes 





henceforth thou shalt remain with my Son’), Ezra is assigned a place among the immortal companions, as also is the 
case with Baruch (cf. 2 Bar. Ixxvi. 2). Jeremiah also appears in this réle in 2 Macc. ii. 1f., xv. 13; cf. Matt. xvi. 14, 
and see further A, p. 78. 
Then shall the heart .. . be changed, viz. by the preaching of the witnesses. This function was particularly 
associated with Elijah; cf. Mal. iv. 6 (= iil. 24 Hebr.). 
29. And it came to pass, &c. On this verse see EA, p. 79. 


vi. 30-34 (5). Here the speaker is again the archangel Uriel, and vi. 30 forms the immediate continuation of vi. Io. 
The usual direction to fast seven days is given, together with a promise of yet greater disclosures. The seer is assured 
that his prayer for fuller revelation has been heard especially because of his ‘ righteous dealing’ and ‘chastity’ practised 

ince youth. 
: Bie scienion things than these. Lat. adds here fer diem. This is not represented in the Oriental Versions with 
the possible exception of the Arab.!, Hilg. emends to pridem and takes with the following verse ( pridem tam auditu 
auadita est vox tua; cf. with this Arab.) xam nunc precatio tua audita est, &c.). In any case per diem probably repre- 
sents something which belongs to the opening words of v. 32. , 

32. thy chastity. Lat. pudicitiam = thy cepvdrnta. Heb. TNIY"I8 (post-Biblical). Notice this ascetic touch. 
Chastity, like fasting (cf. 1 Macc. iii. 47, 2 Macc. xiii. 12), is here apparently regarded as intensifying the power of 
prayer: like fasting also a state of chastity was regarded in certain circles (especially Essene) as a necessary pre- 
liminary for the reception of higher revelation. ; ; at 4 

34. Be not over-solicitous, &c. The general sense is: ‘Do not by your over-curious questioning and speculation 
trifle with your chances of eternal happiness at the last.’ i c: ; 

vi. 35-ix. 25. THE THIRD VISION. The long vision that follows forms the climax of the three visions with which 
the Apocalypse opens, and is preceded by a seven days’ fast (in preparation for the revelation) which completes 
a cycle of three weeks’ fasting. The general sequence of the thought will appear from the headings of the following 
divisions, into which the vision naturally falls. For a more detailed account of the argument reference must be made 
to the introductions to the Parse sections that follow :— 

i. Introduction (vi. 35-37). 
if Tie ace hue in its final form: If the world was created for Israel’s sake, why is Israel deprived 
of its inheritance ? (vi. 38-59) (S). ue 
iii. The debate renewed: The corruption of the present world makes the path to the future world of felicity 
narrow and difficult (vii, 1-25) (S). . 
iv. The temporary Messianic Kingdom and the End of the world (vii. 26-44) (R). .. ; iw 
v. The debate continued (from vii. 25): Israel’s election and the problem of righteousness (vii. 45~ix. 22) (with 
the exception of viii. 63-ix. 12, which belongs to R, all this section is to be assigned to S). 
vi. Conclusion of the vision (ix. 23-25) (S)- 


1108-2 577 . 5 P 


S 


IV EZRA 6. 36-43 


36 I might fulfil the three weeks that had been commanded me. And |in the eighth night ‘my heart 
37 was troubled within me again, and I began to address the Most High. For my spirit was greatly 
inflamed, and my soul was in distress. 


II. THE PROBLEM PROPOUNDED IN ITS FINAL FORM: IF THE WORLD WAS CREATED 
FOR ISRAEL’S SAKE WHY IS ISRAEL DEPRIVED OF ITS INHERITANCE ? 


(vi. 38-59) (S). 


38 And I said: O Lord, of a truth thou didst speak at the beginning of the creation upon the first 

39 day, saying: Let heaven and earth be made! and thy word perfected the work. Then was the 
spirit hovering ; darkness and silence Y were on every side; the sound of man’s voice was not yet 

40 before thee. Then thou didst command *a ray of light * to be brought forth out of thy treasuries, 
that then thy works might become visible. 

41 Upon the second day again thou didst create the spirit of the firmament, and didst command it 
**to make a division between (the waters and) the waters ** that the one part might go up, the 
other remain beneath. 

42 On the third day thou didst command the waters to be gathered together in the seventh part of 
the earth; six parts thou didst dry up and preserve, ¥ in order that (issuing) from them there might 
serve before thee those who both plough and sow’. 

43 But as soon as thy word went forth the work was done. 





wow so ©: S=silentium soni xx @ (dest reading) lumen aliquod luminis: v. Z. lumen luminosum: 

% radiance of light xx"xx so 3: © = ut divideret et divisionem faceret inter aquas y-Y so 

partly 2: see further EA, p. 86 2-4 following : I et concupiscentia gustus multiformis aa so % 
vi. 35-37- 


35. the three weeks that had been commanded me. So far only two fasts of seven days have been mentioned, 
viz, one before the second vision and another here before the third. The author evidently is thinking of another 
before Vision I, which in the present form of the text is not mentioned, but doubtless was there originally. The three 
successive weeks of fasting culminate in the most important and the longest of the three visions. Cf. Dan. x. 2, 
which has served as a model for this passage: ‘In those days I, Daniel, was mourning three weeks’ (then follows 
a peas of the fasting). This long fast preceded the vision which was highest in the scale of importance 
(Dan. x. 4f.). 

vi. 38-59. Salathiel first enumerates the works of Creation in their order, and then proceeds to ask how it is that 
the chosen race, for whose sake the world has been created, are dispossessed of their inheritance. The problem, which 
has already formed the theme of the first and second visions, is here propounded in its final form. In the first vision 
the question assumed the form: How will the Divine Name be vindicated when the only people that bears it (viz. 
Israel) is prostrate before the heathen? In the second vision the seer asks: Why, if the people that has been chosen 
above all others must be punished, has it been handed over to be oppressed and down-trodden by those who scorn 
the divine covenants? Why did not God Himself undertake the task of disciplining His elect? Here, in the 
third vision, the question is: If the present world is in such evil case (cf. iv. 26 f.) why is it not subjected to Israel, for 
whose sake the world has been created? The discussion of the question is taken up at the point reached in the 
previous vision (vi. 8-10). Why is this world Esau’s, and only the future world Israel’s, if it is indeed the case that 
this world was created for Israel’s sake? In the account of Creation which is here given the original writer betrays 
his acquaintance with the haggadic exegesis of the Rabbis. See further £4, p. 83. For the various works of Creation 
that follow on different days cf. Gen. i, Jub. ii, &c. 

38. thy word perfected the work. Cf. 2 Bar. xiv. 17; also Ps. xxxiii. 6, 2 Pet. iii. 5, Heb. xi. 3. 

40. that... thy works might become visible. According to Rabbinic tradition’ (cf. 7. B. Hag. 12 a), though 
the luminaries did not shine till the fourth day (cf. v. 45 of this chapter) light was created on the first day : : the light 
which the Holy One, blessed be he, created on the first day, Adam observed, and saw by its means from one end of the 
world to the other.’ This light was afterwards withdrawn and reserved by God for the righteous in the world to 
come (ibid.). The heavenly light from which the light that shone on the first day emanated was older than Creation 
and belonged to God’s essence. The luminaries receive their light from the spark of this heavenly light, which ic 
es ree) aoe nes vee ee light visible on earth. This is the light which the righteous shall enjoy in the 
uture world (ct. diag. ibid. ; Isa. lx. 19; Rev. xxi.23). In 2 En. xxv. 1-3 there is a mysti 
of the heavenly light above God’s ees . Sie aoa eee 

41. Upon the second day again thou didst create the spirit of the firmament. This assage is Cl 
Ambrose (De Spiritu Sancto, ii. 7): ‘Esdras nos docuit dicens in tertio (vulgo quarto) libro: Et in Wleceeands prea 
creasti spiritum coelorum.’ As Gunkel remarks, ‘ spirit’? here =‘ angel’ (as often in the Book of Enoch). This is 
apparently a midrashic amplification of the Biblical text inGen.i.6. The divine command, ‘ Let there be a firmament,’ 
must, 1t was assumed, have been addressed to an animated being, here = ‘ the spirit of the firmament’ (cf. the agan 
“God of heaven’ = Anu, Baal shamayim, &c.). ' i 
oe yee part of the earth; six parts. This is clearly the reflex of old tradition: see the note ad Joc. in 

» P. 86. : 
in order that... there might serve before thee those who both plough and sow. The i 
Creator produced the land with the essential purpose of seeing its cultivation arora with the uncle nel os 
is a natural one from the agricultural point of view, and is often implied or expressed in Jewish literature. See farther 
EA, p. 86. Gunkel discovers a reference to the creation of Paradise here: see op. cit. ibid. 


578 


1V EZRA 6. 44-59 


44 For immediately there came forth 
Fruits in endless abundance, 
“in pleasure of taste exquisitely varied ”, 
Flowers of inimitable colour 
“(trees infinitely varied in form) ®, 
and odours of scent ” indefinable ». 
. This was done the third day. 
45 But on the fourth day thou didst command that there should come into being the brightness of 
46 the sun, the light of the moon and the order of the stars ; and didst command them that they should 
47 do service unto man, ° who was about to be formed*. Upon the fifth day thou didst bid the seventh 
part, where the water was gathered together, to bring forth living creatures, birds, and fishes; and 
48 so it came to pass. The dumb and lifeless water produced living creatures that for this the nations 
49 might declare thy wondrous works‘. Then didst thou preserve °two living creatures°®; the name of 
50 the one thou didst call *Behemoth* and the name of the other thou didst call Leviathan. And 
thou didst separate the one from the other; for the seventh part2, where the water was gathered 
51 together, was unable to hold them (both). And thou didst give Behemoth one of the parts which 
52 had been dried up on the third day to dwell in, (that namely) where are a thousand hills: but unto 
Leviathan thou gavest the seventh part, namely the moist: and thou hast reserved them to be 
devoured by whom thou wilt and when. 
53 But upon the sixth day thou didst command the earth that it should bring forth before thee cattle 
54 beasts, and creeping things; and over these Adam, whom thou didst ordain lord over all the works 
that "thou didst create before him®: of him we are all sprung, whom thou hast chosen (to be) 
(thy) people. 
55. All this have I spoken before thee, O Lord, because thou hast said that for our sakes thou hast 
56 created ithis worldi. But as for the other nations, which are descended from Adam, thou hast said 
that they are nothing, and that they are like unto spittle; and thou hast likened the abundance of 
57 them to a drop on a bucket. And now, O Lord, behold these nations which are reputed as nothing 
58 Jlord it over usi and *crush* us. But we, thy people whom thou hast called thy first-born, thy 
59 only-begotten, !thy beloved [most dear]!, are given up into their hands. If the world has indeed 
been created for our sakes ™ why do we not enter into possession of our world™? How long shall 
this endure? 





(cf. Ethiop. Ar3): & Arm. > b-b ¥ investigabiles c-c ¥ futuro plasmato 4 {+quod ei iubebatur: dz 
all other VSS. > °-e yeading duo animalia (= 3%, &c.): Lat. MSS. duo animas (S AC M) ff reading 
Behemoth (so $ E¢hzop.): Enoch (S A) & 3+the moist h-h so $ Ethiop.: & fecisti inl 59 Se 
% primogenitum saeculum Ji reading dominantur nostri (S dominari: A quaerunt dominari) E-K so 
Oriental VSS.: & devorant 1-! % aemulatorem carissimum (? a double rendering of tov ayamnrov cov): see 
further EA, p. 96 m-m yeading quare non haereditatem possidemus nostrum saeculum 

46. ...doservice unto man. The apocalyptic writer here especially emphasizes the thought that the stars are 


man’s servants, because by all the rest of the world they were regarded as gods. 

49. two living creatures, i.e. the two primaeval monsters, Behemoth and Leviathan. For the myth see £4, 
pp. 90-92, and cf. 1 En. lxix. 7f., and notes. 

51. where are a thousand hills. The haggadic interpretation of Ps. 1. 10 made Behemoth (there rendered 
‘cattle’? in PBV) identical with the primaeval monster of our text—Behemoth being pictured as lying ‘ upon a thousand 
hills’ and feeding upon them. 

52. to be devoured by whom thou wilt and when. By whom they are to be devoured is only vaguely indicated 
in our text. In the parallel passage in 2 Bar. xxix. 4 it is explicitly stated that the monsters will provide food for all 
who survive into the Messianic time (the Messianic banquet). This is, doubtless, the original form of the haggada, 
which has been purposely modified here by S because the Messianic hope was to him no longer clear. 

55. for our sakes thou hast created this world. For the doctrine that the world was created for the sake of 
Israel cf. vii. 11, Ass. Mos. i. 12, 2 Bar. xv. 7, xxi. 24, xiv. 18 (and notes) ; and see further ZA, p. 94. 

56. the other nations ... are nothing. Cf. Isa. xl. 17. 

like unto spittle. Cf. Isa. xl. 15 (LXX), as aiedos AoyioOnoovra. The Hebrew text has P74, ‘small dust *, which 
LXX misread P7, sputum. Apparently the Greek translator here made a similar mistake (perhaps under the influence 
of the LXX). The Syriac has ‘thou hast likened’ here for ‘they are like’. _ ; a ; 

58. thy first-born, thy only-begotten. The only direct parallel where the epithet ‘ only-begotten "1s applied to 
Israel appears to be Ps. Sol. xviii. 4 (cf. xiii. 8); but, as Volkmar points out, the application of povoyevns to God’s Son 
in Christian writings (cf. John i. 18; Justin Martyr, Déad/. c. Trypho. c, cv) confirms the inference that Jewish exegesis 
had already deduced this epithet as applicable to the people of Israel. See further A, p. 96. For the general idea 


of vv. 57-58, cf. 2 Bar. v. 1, 4 Ezra iv. 23. 


579 Pp 2 


IV -EZRAS Ree t2 


III. THE DEBATE RENEWED: THE CORRUPTION OF THE PRESENT WORLD MAKES THE 
PATH TO THE FUTURE WORLD OF FELICITY NARROW AND DIFFICULT 


(vii. 1-25) (S). 
(2) vv. I-16. 


S 7x And when I had finished speaking these words, there was sent unto me the angel who had been 
2 sent unto me "on the former nights". And he said unto me: Up, era, and hear the words that 
3 I have come to speak unto thee. And I said: Speak on, my lord. And he said unto me: There 
4 is a sea lying in a wide expanse so that it is °broad’° and vast; but the entrance thereto lies? 
5 in a narrow space so as to be like a river. He, then, that really desireth to go upon the sea to 

behold it or to “navigate it 4, if he pass not through the narrow part, how shall he be able to come into 
6the broad? Again, * another (illustration)". There is a builded city which lies on level ground, 
7 and it is full of all good things; but its entrance is narrow and lies *on a steep *, having fire on the 
8 right hand and deep water on the left; and there is one only path lying between them both, that 
is between the fire and the water, (and so small) is this path, that it can contain only one man’s 

9 footstep at once. If, now, this city be given to a man for an inheritance, unless the heir pass 
to through the danger set before him, how shall he receive his inheritance? And I said: It is so, lord! 
1r Then said he unto me: Even so, also, is Israel’s portion; for it was for their sakes I made the 
world; but when Adam transgressed my statutes, *then that which had been made was judged‘, 
12 and then “the ways" of this world became narrow and sorrowful and painful *[ few and evil], 


n-n % primis noctibus = S$: Ethiop. before on the night that was past: Ar.! > °~° reading latum for altum 
PP so 3 (cf. Ethiop.) U& erit . . . positus (= eorae [for core] . . . Ketpevn) a-a # dominari eius = 8: (LZ thiop. to 
attain it): prob., as Gunkel suggests, the original Hebr. n= to go down on, 7.¢. to navigate, was misread np 
rr @ aliud (cf Hebr. phrase WS 1377) s-s & in praecipiti: S in the height tt & iudicatum est quod factum 
est wt so Ethiop. (also in v.13) = a odo: & introitus (so S$) = at escodou v-Y prob. a gloss (see EA, p. 102) 





vii. I-25. The archangel Uriel now intervenes for the third time, and in this and the following sections of the third 
vision, which belong to S, sets forth the definitive solution of the problem, the answer to which had only been given in 
a partial and incomplete form in the earlier part of the Apocalypse (cf. iv. I-21, iv. 26f., v. 31 f.). 

Uriel begins by comparing the present world to the narrow entrance which leads to a wide and Open sea. Only 
through the narrow is it possible to come into the broad. Or, again, toa narrow and dangerous road, flanked by fire 
on one side and deep water on the other, which is the only means of entrance to a splendid city ‘full of good things’ 
and set in a spacious plain. 

The present world is the narrow and difficult way along which the righteous must pass in order to gain the spacious 
freedom of the future world of happiness (cf. v. 14). The present world was originally created for Israel, but through 
Adam's transgression has become the vale of misery and suffering for the righteous which they now endure. It will be 
seen that the following results are implicit in this answer: (1) Israel has no part or lot in the present world; its 
inheritance of light and felicity will only be attained after the thornful path of the present world has been traversed 5 
(2) the heathen enjoy and possess the present fleeting and corruptible world (so far as they actually do so) in accordance 
with God’s will; they at the same time are being used by God as instruments for the discipline of the chosen people 
(cf. v. 30); this will continue till the present world comes to its predestined end, and meanwhile Israel has necessarily 
to endure the present evil with its consequences of mortality and death ; (3) the future world is for Israel alone. The 
promises made to God’s people can only be fulfilled by the extinction of the present evil, i.e. by the destruction of the 
present world. When this has been accomplished the future world will ipso facto have come into view. 

In v. 17f. a new question is propounded by the apocalyptist. Are ‘these things’ (i.e. the felicity of the future 
world) destined for Israel as such, or only for the righteous members of the nation? Salathiel’s question can only 
refer to Israel. And since, even in the case of Israel, the cor malignum militated against any personal claim to 
justifying righteousness, the answer to the question should be that Israel, the people which owes its choice by God 
purely to an act of divine grace, and not to any merit of its own, is destined to participate in the future blessings. 
‘This, in fact, seems to be the significance of the answer given in v. 19f. Here the angel, it would appear, replies to 
Salathiel’s question only indirectly. He ignores the distinction between righteous and transgressors within Israel—all 
Israel, judged by the strict requirements of the divine Law, are transgressors—and proceeds to emphasize the heinous 
sin of the heathen world in openly despising and scorning the divine Law (v. 20f.). Israel, however imperfect in 
obedience and performance, had at least recognized the obligation of accepting the divine Law, and acknowledging the 
supremacy of the Divine giver of the Law; it had not been guilty of open blasphemy. 

There is a well-defined break at v. 16, where the author, having demonstrated the reality and significance of the 
future world, turns to consider the theme: Who will be found worthy of inheriting it? To mark this division the section 
is divided into (a) vv. 1-16 and (6) vv. 17-25. 

5. to navigate it, lit. ‘to go down upon it’ (see crit. note); for the phrase cf. Ps. cvii. 23. ; 

7. having fire, &c. The simile of the city with one entrance occurs in the Shepherd of Hermas, Simil. ix. 12. ee 
cf. also, for the figure of the difficult way, Matt. vil. 13, 14. ; 

1o. Even so... is Israel’s portion. It is clear from this verse that Israel’s portion is identified with the future world, 

11. then that which had been made was judged. The thought of the apocalyptist is that the world, after Adam’s 
sin, was no longer the good world as it had been originally created by the hand of God. 

12. the ways (so also v.13). So the Ethiop. (rightly). The Latin and Syriac have ‘entrances’; but this confuses 
the representation. It is not so much the entrances of this world that are narrow and difficult, as this world itself 
considered as the way that has to be traversed in order to enter the next world. 


580 


IV EZRA 7% 13-25 


13 and full of perils coupled with great toils. But the ways ~ of the future world™ are broad and safe 
14 and yield the fruit of immortality. If, then, the living shall not have surely entered into these 
15 narrow and vain things, they will not be able to receive what has been reserved for them. But now 
Why disquietest thou thyself that thou art corruptible ? . 
Why art thou moved because thou art mortal ? 
16 Why hast thou not considered what is to come, rather than what is now present? 


(d) vv. 17-25. 


17 Then answered I and said: O Lord my Lord, lo, thou hast ordained in thy Law that the righteous 
18 shall inherit these things, but that the ungodly shall perish. The righteous, therefore, can endure 
the narrow things because they hope for the wide; those, however, who have done wickedly endure 
19 the narrow things, but yet *shall not see* the wide. And he said unto me: 
¥ Thou art not’ a judge above God 
Nor wise above the Most High. 
20 Yea, rather, *let the many that now are perish” than that the law of God which is set before them 
21 be despised! For God did surely command them that came (into the world), when they came, what 
22 they should do to live, and what they should observe to avoid punishment. Nevertheless they were 
disobedient, and spake against him ; 
They devised for themselves vain thoughts, 
they proposed to themselves * wicked treacheries ? ; 
23 They even affirmed the Most High exists not, 
and P ignored” his ways! 
24 His law they did despise, 
and his covenants they denied ; 
In his statutes they have put no faith, 
“and have set at naught his commandments °: 
25 Therefore, O Ezra, 
For the empty, empty things, 
And for the full, full things! 


w-w so % (cf. Ethiop.): & maioris saeculi =-x yeading non videbunt (M)=& E¢hiof.: non viderunt (S A C) 
y-Y reading non es (C*) = Oriental VSS.: non est (A C** M) 2-2 reading pereant .. . neglegatur (soSC): % 
shall perish aa & circumventiones delictorum b-b # non cognoverunt ce so Ar}; X% have set at naught 
his works = E¢hiop.: © et opera eius non perfecerunt 





15. that thou art corruptible ?... because thou art mortal? The seer is bidden not to brood over death and 
mortality, because, though inevitable, they but mark a necessary stage in the transition to something higher and better. 
For different views regarding the connexion between death and sin see 2 Bar. xxiii. 4, notes. 

16. what is to come, rather than what is now present. With these words, as Gunkel points out, the author 
passes from the consideration of the present age and its difficulties to a new problem. It has been made clear that 
a new age is destined to come, when a great transformation will be effected. Then present sorrow will be turned to 
joy, all riddles be solved, all sin wiped out. But the question arises: Who shall be found worthy to participate in the 
new age? With the discussion of this question, and the problems that arise in connexion with it, the book is now 
mainly concerned. - 

17. in thy law. Cf. Deut. viii. 1. ind 

20. Yea, rather, let the many that now are perish, &c. The angelic reply seems to contemplate, in its reference 
to sinners, the heathen world, or world outside the chosen people, exclusively (see introduction to the section above). 
The idea that the Térah was not originally designed to be the exclusive possession of Israel, but was offered by God 
to the Gentiles and deliberately refused by them, is insisted upon in Rabbinic literature (cf. Schechter, Aspects, p. 131 f., 
and see ZA, p. 105 f.). A " 

23. They even affirmed the Most High exists not. Cf. 4 Ezra viii. 59; Ps. xiv. 1, lin. 2. : 

24. His law they did despise ... set at naught his commandments. The heathen in these verses are 
charged with open and deliberate defiance of the divine requirements. This is expressed in unbelief and contempt 
of fundamental moral laws, which are openly spurned. It is a favourite theme in Rabbinical literature that Israel’s 
election was primarily due to faith in God and God’s Law; while the heathen spurned the Térah as unfit. (Cf. 
Schechter, Asfects, p. 59 f.) 4 

25. For the empty, empty things, &c. Those who are destitute of the elements of goodness shall lack the good 
things of eternity, &c.; cf. Matt. xiii. 12. 


581 


R 26 


| 


27, 28 


29 


IV EZRA Y2 26531 


IV. THE TEMPORARY MESSIANIC KINGDOM AND THE END’ OF THE WORLD. 
(vil. 26-44) (R) (E). 
(a) vii. 26-30. The sudden revelation of the Messiah: his 400 years reign and death: the 
End of the Age (R). 


For behold the days come, and it shall be when the signs which I have foretold unto thee shall come 
to pass, E : 
[° Then shall the city that now is invisible appear ®, and the land ° which is now concealed ® be 
seen ; 
ie whosoever is delivered from the predicted evils, the same shall see my wonders. _For ‘my 
Son the Messiah‘ shall be revealed, together with those who are with him, and &shall rejoice® the 
survivors "four hundred years*, And it shall be, after these years, that imy Son! the Messiah 


3° shall die, and allJin whom there is human breathJ. Then shall the world be turned into the 


31 


primaeval silence seven days, like as at the first beginnings; so that no man is left. 


(0) vii. 31-44. The General Resurrection and Final Fudgement,; the Day of Fudgement described (R). 


And it shall be after seven days that the Age which is not yet awake shall be roused, and * that 
which is corruptible * shall perish. 


d-d so Arm.: Ar.' and the city which was not shall appear: Ethiop. (misplacing negative) and the city which now 
appears shall be hidden: & (misreading n vv pn patvouern rods as n vupdy datvopevn woXts) et apparebit sponsa [et] 


apparens (soC M; S apparescens) civitas = $ e-e © quae nunc subducitur ff sa. 2 Ar’: Ethiop. 
my Messiah: Ay.” the Messiah; dvm. the Messiah of God; & filius meus Iesus 8-8 reading locundabit 
(S) = Oriental VSS.; iocundabuntur (A C M N) hb so & Ars; S thirty; Ar? one thousand; L£¢hop. 
Arm. > Mi so © 3; Ethiop. my servant ii reading qui spiramentum habent hominis (S homines) 
kk @ corruptum (sc. saeculum) I 503: Land other VSS. > mm so % (cf. Ethiop.): & > 


vii. 26-44. The eschatological description which was broken off at vi. 28 is here resumed. The present section, 
however, seems to be partly the work of R, who has utilized older material. For a full discussion of the reasons for 
this view reference must be made to EA, pp. 108-112. The section falls into. two subdivisions, (a) vii. 26-30 and 
(6) vil. 31-44. 

i vil. 26-30. This subsection, as we have seen, may be assigned to R, who, however, depends upon an inde- 
pendent Rabbinical tradition, which he here summarizes. But in v. 266 R has introduced a feature which is here 
incongruous—the appearance of the ‘heavenly’ Jerusalem and Paradise. These belong to the future age; whereas 
the temporary Messianic kingdom belongs to the present age and terminates with it. A similar confusion—probably 
also due to an interpolation by R—occurs in ch. xiii, where v. 36 does not harmonize with the context. The confusion 
might easily arise at a time when the earthly Jerusalem lay in ruins and when it would be natural to seek consolation 
in directing the thoughts to the more glorious city in heaven. The purification of the ‘earthly’ city would be the 
natural preparation for a ‘temporary’ Messianic age; but as the city had been destroyed this had been made 
impossible. Hence the necessity of introducing the heavenly Jerusalem—for a Messianic age without Jerusalem as 
a centre would have been inconceivable. In face of conflicting views as to whether Jerusalem was to be restored or 
no, R takes a mediating view. The End is not yet—a temporary Messianic age is to dawn; but the earthly city is 
not to be restored ; instead, the heavenly city is to appear. Primaeval chaos and the End will only follow after this 
interlude. 

The redactor has thus woven together two sets of mutually irreconcilable ideas. This is equally true of his 
representation of the Messiah himself. Tie Messiah is to be ‘revealed ’—suddenly, as it seems—‘ together with those 
who are with him’. As the latter must be the immortal companions ‘who have never tasted. death’ it is clear that 
a heavenly pre-existence for the Messiah himself is implied, as in fact appears in other passages (cf. 4 Ezra xii. Ber 
xiv. 9; 2 Bar. xxx, &c.). At the close of his reign, therefore, the Messiah ought to return in glory to heaven, as he is 
made to do in 2 Bar. xxx. But according to R he and his immortal companions share the common fate with the 
righteous, and die with all men! See further £4, pp. 112-13. 

26. the city that now is invisible, i.e. the heavenly Jerusalem (for text see crit. note). 

the land which is now concealed, i.e. the heavenly Paradise. For the juxtaposition cf. viii. 52. 

28. those who are with him, i.e. the Messiah’s immortal companions ; cf. vi. 28 note. 

the survivors. Only the surviving righteous share in the joys of the Messianic reign; cf. Ps. Sol. xvii. 50. 

four hundred years. The versions are not consistent as to this number (see crit. note). In Rabbinic tradition 
various numbers were deduced for the length of the temporary Messianic kingdom (see the passages cited in EA, 
p. 115 f.) ; the number 400 is associated in one passage with R. Dosa, but elsewhere with the name of R. Eliezer b. 
Hyrqanos. The number was deduced by combining Gen. xv. 13 and Ps.xc.15. It should be noted that the conception 
of a temporary Messianic kingdom which belongs to the present age, and terminates with it, is also met with in 2 Baruch 
(cf. xl. 3); cf. also Rev. xx. 3. It is a compromise between the older prophetic view which looked for a final con- 
summation of felicity on the present earth, and the later transcendental view which transferred it to a future age, 
after the destruction of the present order. 

30. Then shall the world be turned into the primaeval silence seven days. Urzeit = Endzett (Gunkel). 


(6) vii. 31-44. Here again R is summarizing different traditions. These are not always easy to reconcile ; thus, 
€. §., it is difficult to harmonize the ‘ week’ of years (seven years) in v. 43 with the seven ‘ days’ of primaeval silence 
mentioned in v. 30. An important point to note is that the judgement, which is final and universal, and which, 
therefore, is preceded by a ‘general’ resurrection, is depicted as forensic in character. This is implied by the 


582 


33 


34 


35 


36 


37 


38 


39 


40 


IV EZRA 7% 32-40 


And 


the earth shall restore those that sleep in her, 
and the dust those that are at rest therein, 
[and the chambers shall restore those that were committed unto them]. 
And the Most High shall be revealed upon the throne of judgement : 
1(and then cometh the End)’ 
and compassion shall pass away, 
™(and pity be far off,)™ 
and longsuffering " withdrawn ° ; 
But ° judgement ° alone shall remain, 
truth shall stand, 
and faithfulness triumph. 
And P recompense? shall follow, 
and the reward be made manifest ; 
4 Deeds of righteousness % shall awake, 
and deeds of iniquity shall not sleep. 
And then shall 'the pit of torment* appear, 
Sand over against it the place of refreshment ° ; 
The furnace of Gehenna shall be made manifest, 
and over against it the Paradise of delight. 
And then shall the Most High say to the nations that have been raised [from the dead]: 


Look now and consider whom ye have denied, whom ye have not served, whose commandments 
ye have despised. 


* Look, now, before [you]*: 
here delight and refreshment, 
there fire and torments ! : 
Thus "shall he speak" unto them in the Day of Judgement, 
Y For thus shall the Day of Judgement be”: 
[A day] whereon is neither sun“, nor moon, nor stars ; 
neither clouds, * nor thunder, nor lightning * ; 
neither wind, nor rain-storm, nor Y cloud-rack’¥ ; 
neither darkness, nor evening, nor morning ; 


nn # congregabitur 0-0 so © Ethiop.: S my judgement _ PP © opus (= 8; cf. Ethiop.) = Heb. mye 
a-a & justitiae rr yeading \acus tormenti= % (emended) Ethiop. (cf. Ar.) ss reading et contra illum erit 
locus requietionis (or requisitionis) = 3 Ar. t-t — Bderere ovy xatevavrioy (so Oriental VSS.+ you): & videte 
contra et in contra (dttography) u-u so Oriental VSS.: & shalt thou speak v-v yeading dies enim iudicil talis 
qui [neque solem habet]; cf. S (for that day of Judgement is thus; cf. Ethiop.): & haec talis quae (this is such a day 
as) -W cf, $ there is no sun in it: & quae neque solem habet (? Jointing to a text 4 ov« n\tos eoTat ev aut] = 


13 wow am xd avin) _ == 50 & (of. Ar): but 3 Ethiop. invert the order y-y & aerem = anp =prv 





representation in v. 33, according to which the Most High is revealed ‘upon (i.e. seated upon) the throne of 
judgement’; cf. Dan. vii. 9, 1 En. xc. 20, xxv. 3; and in the similitudes (of the Elect One), 1 En. xlv. 3, lv. 4, lxi. 8, 
ixix. 27. In all these passages the Divine Judge is spoken of as seated on the judgement throne (sedes zudicii, 
4 Ezra vii. 33), i.e. to judge in a forensic sense. When, on the other hand, the Heavenly One is said to ‘arise from 
his royal throne’ (Ass. Mos. x. 3), this is the formula for the execution of retributive judgement (cf. Volz, p. 261). 
According to 7. B. Pesah. 54a and Wed. 39 4, this throne was one of the seven things created before the world. 

Both in this section and the preceding, clauses which R seems to have derived directly from S have been enclosed 
in square brackets. The long fragment which is missing from most of the Latin codices, and which was recovered by 
Bensly, begins after v. 35 ; it finds its place between vv. 35 and 36 of the ordinary Vulgate text. These additional 
verses are numbered consecutively in the following translation (as in R.V.), and form vv. 36-105. The remaining 
verses (Vulg. 36-70) now appear as 106-140. j 

Bie A Sei us pouteueie, i.e. the present corruptible and mortal world ; with the appearance of the new 
order this vanishes. Cf. 1 Cor. xv. 26. : ( 

32. the earth shall restore... and the chambers the souls, &c., i.e. the earth shall restore the bodies of the 
dead, and the chambers their souls. At the resurrection the soul would return to and revive the body. ‘This is the 
orthodox Rabbinic doctrine. See further A, p. 119f. 

33. (and then cometh the End). See crit. note. Cf. 1 Cor. xv. 24. j wh Doha 

compassion... (pity) ... longsuffering, viz. of the Divine Judge (Ethiop. renders ‘ his compassioy a Ga 
The final judgement is pictured as conducted in accordance with the strict requirements of perfect equity and justice. 

35. Deeds of righteousness. In Rabbinic language this term would denote definite acts of charity such as those 
enumerated in Matt. xxv. 35-46 (cf. James ii. 14f.), and more particularly almsgiving. Such acts, and the performance 
of religious duties generally, constituted ‘ the treasure of good works laid up with the Most High’ (cf. vil. 77). 

. the pit of torment. Cf. Rev. ix. 2. : 

Bs the Retiens ... raised [from the dead]. Cf. Matt. xxv. 31 f, For the idea cf. EA, p. 124. 


583 


IV EZRA 7. 41-45 


Ra “neither summer, nor autumn, nor winter ; 

neither heat, nor frost, nor cold # : 

neither hail, nor rain, nor dew : 

42 neither noon, nor night, nor *dawn?; 
neither shining, nor brightness, nor light, P 
save only the splendour of the brightness of the Most High, whereby all shall be destined to see 

43, 44 what has been determined (for them). And its duration shall be as it were a week of years. Such 
is my Judgement and its prescribed order”: to thee only have I showed these things. 


V. THE DEBATE CONTINUED (from vii. 25): ISRAEL’S ELECTION AND THE PROBLEM 
OF RIGHTEOUSNESS. 


(vii. 45-ix. 22.) 
(1) vii. 45-74. THE FEWNESS OF THE SAVED JUSTIFIED: THIS FOLLOWED BY A LAMENT 
OVER MAN’s Evi CASE (S). 
(2) vii. 45-61. The fewness of the saved. 


S 45 And I answered and said: O Lord, I said even then and say now: Blessed are °they who come 
(into the world)° and keep 4 thy commandments ¢. 


2% so substantially 3; & neque aestatem neque verem neque aestum neque hiemem neque gelum neque frigus 
«a Z ante lucem (? for an original antelucium: so Bensly) b> & constitutio eius (= ? 9 ovytagis avrov = NPN): 
S its law °° cf. & (all they who come): & qui praesentes d-d % quae a te constituta sunt (?ra cov Siare- 





41. neither summer... cold. The order adopted in the text is substantially that of S$; the first line contains the 
names of three seasons, the second those of three temperatures, The verse is an expansion of Gen. viii. 22¢. For 
the equivalents (Latin, Greek, Hebrew) of the terms used cf. EA, p. 126. : 

42. whereby all shall be destined to see, &c. The meaning is that the uncreated light of the Divine Presence 
will serve to reveal what is prepared for the judgement. For the representation cf. Is. lx. 19f., Rev. xxi. 23. Gunkel 
remarks that the verses breathe the spirit of the mystic before which all that hides the vision of God disappears. 

43. a week of years. Cf. the seven days of silence in v. 30; but here each day = one year. For a week (or 
weeks) of years cf. Dan. ix. 24 f. (the seventy weeks = seventy weeks of years). 

vil. 45-ix. 22. The rest of this long vision, which, with the exception of one section (viii. 63-ix. 12), belongs to S, 
is mainly occupied with the problem which has already been touched upon in vii. 17f. : if, as the Law itself proclaims, 


piety—that is, the pious fulfilment of the duties and obligations entailed by the observance of the Law—is the necessary 


condition for enjoying the future blessedness, what of the godless who do not fulfil these conditions? The heathen, 
it is true, have not fulfilled the obligations of the divine Law, but who has? Who among mortals has not transgressed 
the divine precepts (vii. 46f., cf. vill. 35)? This feeling of human unworthiness, which leads the apocalyptist sometimes 
almost to doubt whether any can be saved at all, and, in the conviction of his own personal unworthiness, to identify 
himself with the transgressors, and even to give noble expression to pity for the fate of the multitudes of mankind who 
are doomed to final perdition, is only set at rest with the assurance that a real difference exists between Israel and the 
heathen world. The election of the chosen people is not for nothing. They at least are the guardians of the divine 
Law, and as a whole strive to observe it, whereas the other nations of the world have deliberately rejected and spurned 
it (cf. vii. 72 and vii. 23f.). The sin that dooms is rejection of the Law—salvation consists in accepting it. Judged 
by this standard Israel, on the one side, is accepted, and the heathen world, on the other, is condemned. Individual 
doubts as to personal unworthiness are resolved by a feeling for the solidarity of the nation. From this point of view 
the merits of the righteous in Israel may be pleaded on behalf of those members of the chosen race who have not kept 
the Law and are sinners (cf. the prayer in viii. 26 f., but note the answer, viii. 37-40). The whole of this part of the 
book forms a vivid and profoundly moving picture of the doubts and questions that must have agitated the minds of 
many pious Jews at the end of the first century. These doubts are calmed, perhaps, but hardly removed by the 
solution. The only consolation the apocalyptist receives is to be bidden to avert his gaze from the awful results of 
human frailty and sin, and contemplate rather the joys reserved for the righteous. The worid to come is reserved for 
few. The whole section may be subdivided as follows — 

(1) vil. 45-74. The fewness of the saved Justified: this followed by a lament over man’s evil case (S). 

(2) vii. 75-101. The state of the soul after death and before the judgement (S). 

(3) vii. 102-115. Wo intercession on the day of judgement (S). 

(4) vii. 116-131. What avails the promise to man who is born to sin 2 Yet, though tragic, the sinners doom 

zs deserved (S). 
(5) vii. 132-vili. 62. Doudts as to how the berdition of so many can be justified from the point of view of 
God’s character and attributes : the divine reply (S). 

(6) viii. 63-ix. 12. The signs of the End reviewed and applied to the author's own times (R). 

(7) ix. 13-22. The divine reply concluded: final justification of the fewness of the saved (Ss): 

(1) vii. 45-74. The apocalyptist resumes the debate which was broken off at vii. 25. He had raised the question 
(vil. 17f.) regarding the justice of the punishment meted out to the ungodly. To this subject he now returns. The 
righteous indeed are to be blessed, but what is to be said of those who have transgressed the divine covenant? The 
doom of disobedience lies not upon a few only, but upon well nigh all who have been created ! True, the angel replies : 
the just are comparatively few, and for them the future felicity is reserved. But this is only in accordance with the 


584 


IV EZRA’ 7, 46-61 
S46 _ But concerning those for whom my prayer (was offered): who is there of those who have come 
(into the world) that has not sinned? Or who of the earth-born is there that has not transgressed | 
47 *thy covenant®? And now I see that the coming Age shall bring delight to few, but torment unto 
48 many. For the evil heart has grown up in us 
which has estranged us ‘from God‘, 
and brought us into destruction ; 
And ‘thas made known to us * the ways of death, 
and showed us the paths of perdition, 
and removed us far from life; 
and that not a few only, but well nigh all that have been created ! 
49 And he answered me and said: 
Hear me,£ and I will instruct thee, 
and a second time will admonish thee: 
50,51 For this cause the Most High has made not one Age but two. And whereas thou hast said that 
the righteous are not many but few, ’ while the ungodly abound }—‘ hear (the answer) to this: 
52 Suppose thou have choice stones, in number exceeding few ; / wilt thou set (place) with them lead 
and clay? 
53 And I said: Lord, how should it be possible ? 
54 And he said unto me: Not only so, but 
Ask the earth, and she shall! tell thee; 
* Speak to her*, and she shall declare it unto thee. 
55,50 Say to her: Thou bringest forth gold and silver and brass—and also iron and lead and clay: but 
silver is more abundant than gold, and brass than silver, and iron than brass, lead than iron, and 
57 Clay than lead. Do thou, then, consider which things are precious and to be desired: that which is 
abundant or that which is rare? 
58 And I said: O Lord my Lord, that which is plentiful is of less worth, but that which is more rare 
is precious. 
59 And he answered me and said: ! Weigh within thyself! what thou hast thought! For he that has } 
m what is rare™ rejoices beyond him that has what is plentiful. ) 
60 ™Soalso shall be my promised judgement ;" I will rejoice over the few that shall be saved, inas- 
much as they it is °that make my glory prevail now already° and through them my name is now 
already named (with praise). 
61 And I will not grieve over the multitude of them that perish: for they it is who now 
are made like vapour, 


Taypeva) e-@ so © Ar’: S commandment; Lvhiop. statute (? diferent readings in Greek, S:aOnxnv, Siatayny) 


f-f % ab his (sc commandments) = $ Ethiop.: perhaps, as Violet suggests, in original Hebrew "NOST{D (i.e. 
ondsn-i9) was misunderstood ‘£59 $3 Art: h> 8 S$+Ezra 2b) so (cf. Ar Ar? Arm): S> + Daudi 
ad haec= 3 i-i so Ar. (cf. $): & si habueris paucos valde, ad numerum compones eos tibi . . . plumbum autem 
et fictile habundat (#700. plumbum et fictile ave fallen out in dotted space: then the last clause will be a gloss: see 
further EA, p. 123) *-* so % Ethiop.: Wadulareei ' so 3 (f. Ethiop. Ars): & corrupt ™™ sod Ar.' (ef. 
Ethiop. Ar”): & quod difficile est u—n sg substantially Oriental VSS.; & sic et a me repromissa creatura 
(confusion of kpisis with xrvots) 2-9 59 & (cf. Ethiop. Ar*): & qui gloriam meam nunc dominationem (/. domina- 
ticrem) fecerunt 





rule that the most precious things are the rarest. Therefore the few that are to be saved, inasmuch as they have 
made the divine glory to prevail, shall be a cause for rejoicing, and the multitude of the lost is not a subject for grief 
(vv. 45-61). If so, the apocalyptist replies, man’s lot is indeed a terrible one: it had been better for him to have 
been like the beasts that perish. ‘For it is far better with them than with us, they look not for judgement, neither do 
they know of torments or of salvation promised to them after death.’ We perish conscious of the doom awaiting us! 
The angel answers: Man brings the doom upon himself—he has deliberately transgressed the divine commandments ; 
and, moreover, the Most High has been very longsuffering (vv. 62-74). 
The section falls into two subdivisions, (a) vii. 45-61 and (4) vii. 62-74. ; 

52. Suppose thou have choice stones ... wilt thou set (place) with them lead and clay. ‘The comparison 
implies that the number of the elect (to borrow the epithet used in the Latin) cannot be increased by the addition of 
baser elements’ (Bensly). ~ ae ; , Bike 

54. Not only so, but. The connexion is: one does not add inferior things to precious, in order to increase the 
number of the latter. There is a real distinction, which one recognizes between them. But further, the earth also 
teaches the same lesson that what is rare is precious. It would appear, as Gunkel remarks, that the author, from the 
emphasis he lays on the statement that what is rare 1s precious, 1s conscious that there is something novel in the idea 

his readers. ee ; 

a 55. Say toher. For the representation (asking the earth) cf. vill. 2, Job xvi. 18, &c. 
56. but silver...lead. This, according to Ewald, is to be regarded as the answer of the earth. 
61. are made like vapour. For the figure cf. Ps. cxliv. 4, James iv. 14; also 2 Bar. Ixxxil. 2 f. 


585 


IV EZRA 7. 61-74 


P counted as smoke, 
are comparable unto the flame? : 
They are fired, burn hotly, are extinguished ! 


(0) vii. 62-74. The apocalyptist’s lament over man’s evil case. 


62 And I answered and said: O thou Earth, what hast thou brought forth, if the mind is sprung 
63 from the dust as every other created thing! It had been better if the dust itself had even been 
unborn, that the mind might not have come into being from it. : 
64 But, as it is, the mind grows with us, and on this account we are tormented, because we perish 

and know it. 

65 Let the human race ‘lament 4, 

but the beasts of the field be glad! 
Let all the earth-born 4 mourn 4, 
but let the cattle and flocks rejoice! F 

66 For it is far better with them than with us; for they have no judgement to look for, neither do 
they know of any torture or of any salvation promised to them after death. 

67 For what doth it profit us that " we shall be preserved alive’, but yet suffer great torment ? 

68 For all the earth-born 

* are defiled with iniquities 8, 
full of sins, 
laden with offences. 

69 And if after death we were not to come into judgement, it might, perchance, * have been * far better 
for us ! 

7° And he answered me and said: When the Most High made the world, and Adam, and all that 
came “of him", he first prepared the Judgement, and the things that pertain unto the Judgement. 

7% But, now, from thine own words understand: for thou hast said that the mind grows with us. 

72 For this reason, therefore, shall the sojourners in the earth suffer torture, because having under- 
standing they yet wrought iniquity, and receiving precepts they yet kept them not, and having 
obtained the Law ‘they set at naught ¥ that which they received. 

73 What, then, will they have to say in the Judgement, or how shall they answer in the last times? 

74 For how long a time hath the Most High been longsuffering with the inhabitants of the world— 
not for their sakes, indeed, but for the sake of the times which he has ordained ! 


PP so S: H et flammae ac fumo adaequati sunt (= Ethiop.) 141" so % (using two different verbs) : 
# lugeat .. . lugeant rr & salvati salvabimur: % = viventes vivimus (= Hebr. mn AYN: see EA, p. 138) 
** so S: & commixti sunt iniquitatibus (= cupmeduppevor ecow avouwats) tt so Oriental VSS. (= fuisset): 
@ venisset "“" so Oriental VSS. and CMV (=exeo): Acumeo Y-Y so S: & fraudaverunt (A) fraudati sunt 





are comparable unto the flame. The flame which, as it were, consumes itself, is here a figure, apparently 
for evanescence. 

62. if the mind is sprung from the dust. This materialistic view, though evidently familiar to S,is not shared 
by him ; it is contrary to his theology, according to which the soul (with the mind) is the higher immortal element 
which enters into the body (regarded as the lower element) at birth. 

64. we perish and know it. The possession of mind and reasoning powers only intensifies human sufferings at 
the last, because they must be endured with full knowledge and consciousness of their terrible nature ; inevitable 
and unceasing. 

65. the cattle and flocks. As Gunkel remarks, the statement expressed in this verse is, from the point of 
view of the ancients, startling and revolutionary. It represents a phase of doubt which threatened to subvert the 
whole outlook of the ancient world, which regarded man as lord of creation, and as raised to a pinnacle of superiority 
over all below him. Cf. Gen. i, Ps. viii. 

70. he first prepared the Judgement, &c. It is a fundamental dogma of S that the whole course of the world’s 
history has been predestinated by God: the End, which includes the Day of Judgement, comes when the predetermined 
number of the elect shall have been fulfilled (cf. iv. 35f.). Paradise and Gehenna, the places essentially associated 
with the Judgement, were among the seven things created before the world, according to Rabbinic theology (cf. 
L. B. Pesah. 54 a, &c.) ; cf. also viii. 52, and Pirge Aboth iii. 16 (ed. Taylor). 

72. because having understanding they yet wrought iniquity. Cf. 2 Bar. xv. 5, 6, and xix. 3, xviii. 40; cf. 
also Ep. Barn. v. 4: ‘A man shall utterly perish, who, having the knowledge of the way of righteousness, forceth 
himself into the way of darkness.’ For the idea that the Gentiles had been offered and had rejected the Law, cf. 
Weber, pp. 57 ff. 

73. What, then, will they have to say, &c. The representation is forensic. The questions addressed by God to 
those who appear at the bar of judgement at the last great assize are referred to in several passages both in apocalyptic 
and Rabbinical literature (cf. Z. B. Yoma 35; and see further Volz, p. 246 f., EA, p. 140). 


586 


IEA Y Sh, 75-76 


(2) vii. 75-101. THE STATE OF THE SOUL AFTER DEATH AND BEFORE THE JUDGEMENT (S). 


75 ‘And I answered and said: If I have found favour in thy sight, YO Lord ™, show this also to thy 
servant : whether after death, even now when every one of us must give back his soul, we shall be 


kept in rest until those times come in which thou shalt renew the creation, or shall we suffer torture 
* forthwith x ? 


76 And he answered me, and said: I will show this also unto thee; but do not thou mingle thyself 
with them that have scorned, nor number thyself with those that ‘suffer torment. 


77 For'‘thou hast a treasure of works laid up with the Most High, but it shall not be showed thee 
until the last times. 


78 And concerning death the teaching is: When ¥ the decisive decree’ has gone forth from the Most 
High that the man should die, 


as *the soul’ from the body departs 
“that it may return * to him who gave it, 
79 to adore the glory of the Most High, first of all: if it be one of those that have scorned 


(CMV): /. ? frustraverunt wow so L, &c.: S$ O Lord my Lord x-x % amodo = am’ apru y-y @& terminus 
sententiae (= DSW pn) z-2 & inspiratione a4 so Ethiop. Ar+: © ut dimittatur (ff 3) 

(2) vil. 75-101. The following section describes the state of the soul immediately after death. It is introduced 
between parts of the Apocalypse which have for their theme different aspects of the last Judgement. It is, therefore, 
in the nature of a digression : but the subject is one that logically arises from previous allusions, and comes in at this 
point quite naturally. 

In answer to the apocalyptist’s inquiry he is told that the spirit, after leaving the body, first of all adores the glory 
of the Most High and then enters into a state of misery or bliss, corresponding to its ultimate destiny, according as it 
belongs to the ungodly or righteous. The spirits of the wicked are destined to a wandering existence in torment, in 
seven degrees: (a) They shall be consumed with remorse ; (4) they will recognize that the past is irrevocable; (c) they 
shall see the reward laid up for the righteous; (d@) they shall catch a glimpse of the torment reserved for them after 
the last Judgement; (¢) ‘they shall see the dwelling-places of the others guarded by angels with great quietness’ ; 
(/) they shall see the torment henceforth reserved for them; (g) in the light of the vision of God they shall be 
consumed with agonizing remorse, confusion, and shame (vii. 78-87). 

On the other hand, the spirits of the righteous ‘shall be filled with joy (2) because they have striven to overcome 
the cogitamentum malum ; (6) because they see the perplexity and punishment of the ungodly ; (c) because they see 
the divine witness to their righteousness ; (d) because they understand the rest and quiet of their intermediate state, 
and the glory that awaits them in the final Judgement ; (e) because they realize the painful corruption from which they 
have been delivered, and cherish the hope of immortality; (/) because of the incorruptible radiance and glory that 
await them; (g) ‘‘ because they shall rejoice with confidence, and be bold without confusion, and shall be glad without 
fear, for they hasten to behold the face of him whom in their lifetime they served, and from whom they shall receive 
their reward in glory ”’ (vii. 88—98).* 

These descriptions, which are psychological in character, apparently portray the emotional experiences of the 
soul, through which it passes during the entire period of the intermediate state. In its subtle delineation of the soul- 
life the whole section is remarkable, and by the elevation and refinement of its conceptions affords a striking contrast 
to similar descriptions in other parts of the apocalyptic literature (e.g. 1 En. xxii). No such detailed description of 
the state of the soul occurs in the Baruch-Apocalypse. 

At the end of the section (vii. 100-101) one other detail is added. The souls shall be free for seven days immediately 
after death that they may realize the things which have been described, after which they enter into their habitations. 
Apparently this only applies to the souls of the righteous, as it is explicitly stated in v. 80 that the souls of the wicked 
do not enter into habitations at all, but wander to and fro in torment. How the souls pass from the states here 
described to the final Judgement is not told. In 2 Bar. xxx this is accomplished by means of the resurrection, which 
is there described in detail. See further Volz, p. 135 f.; Charles, Eschatology, p. 294f. 

75. thou shalt renew the creation. For the expression cf. kawn krioi (= AWIN m3), Gal. vi. 15, 2 Cor. vi. 17, 
and for the idea of the renovation of the world, Matt. xix. 28, ‘in the regeneration’ (ev 7 mwadtyyevecia); 2 Pet. ii. 13; 
Rev. xxi. 1. The same phrase occurs in 2 Bar. xxxii. 6, ‘when the Mighty One shall renew his creation’ (cf. xliv. 12, 
lvii. 2). The incorruptible world which is to succeed the present order at the final Judgement is meant. Cf. v. 45. 

77. a treasure of works. The idea of works being stored up in treasuries (in heaven) occurs also in 2 Bar. xiv. 12. 
Cf. 4 Ezra viii. 33 (contrast viii. 36). But much greater stress is laid on good works in 2 Baruch than in 4 Ezra. 
According to the latter very few indeed have, by their strict performance of the requirements of the Law, been able to 
claim any such accumulation of merit. It is faith in the Law (i.e. open acknowledgement of its divine character and 
obligation) which wil] save mest of those who are destined to be saved: cf. ix. 7, ‘ every one that shall be saved, and shall 
be able to escape on account of his works or his faith’), xiii. 23 and vi. 5 (‘treasuries of faith’). The most esteemed 
way in which such treasure in heaven could be gathered, according to the accepted Jewish standard of ethics, was by 
the practice of benevolence (Hebr. gémiluth hdsadim), especially by almsgiving (cf. in the N.T. Matt. vi. 20, Luke xii. 33, 
1 Tim. vi. 17f, and illustrate from Pe‘a i. 1, where it is said that gémilith hasadim, the promotion of peace between 
man and man, and the study of the Law, are ‘the things whose fruits are enjoyed in this life, while their capital 
remains [invested] for the life to come’). : 

it shall not be showed thee until the last times. The treasuries would not be opened till the last Judgement. 
Cf. 2 Bar. xxiv. I. ti : 

78. that it may return to him who gave it. Cf. Eccles. xii. 7. ; ; : ae 

to adore the glory of the Most High, &c. This sentence, as Gunkel points out, is epexegetical to the previous 
line (‘that it may return to him who gave it *). The citation from Eccles. xii. 7 is understood by the author in the 





1 The above excellent summary is derived from Maldwyn Hughes’s Ethics of Jewish Apocryphal Lit., p. 305 f. 
587 


op) 


IV’ EZRA 7." 7o-65 


and have not kept » the ways” of the Most High, 

*that have despised his law,° 

and that hate those who fear God— 
, 80 Such souls shall not enter into habitations, but shall wander about henceforth in torture, ever 
grieving and sad, in seven ways. : 

81,82 The first way (is) that ¢ they have scorned ¢ the Law of the Most High ; the second way, that they 
83 are now unable *to make a good repentance for life®; the third way (is): they shall see the 
84 reward laid up for those who have believed ‘the covenants of the Most High‘; the fourth way, 
85 that they shall regard the torture laid up for themselves in the last days ®; the fifth way, that they 
86 shall see how the habitations » of the other souls® are guarded by angels in profound quietness ; the 
87 sixth way, that they shall see ‘how from now henceforth they must pass over into torture, The 

seventh way, which exceeds all the aforesaid ways, (is) : 
that they shall pine away for shame, 
and be consumed } with confusion 4, 
and withered * with fear *, 
in that they see the glory of the Most High, before whom they have sinned in life, and before whom 
they are destined to be judged in the last times. 
88 Of those, however, who have kept the ways of the Most High this is} the order!, when they shall 
be separated from this vessel of mortality, 
89 ™What time they dwelt therein™ they painfully served the Most High, and were in jeopardy 
every hour, that they might observe the Law of the lawgiver perfectly. } 
go, 91 Wherefore the matter as it relates to them is as follows: First of all they shall see with great joy 
92 the glory of him who receives them; and they shall rest "in seven orders". The first order (is): 
that they have striven much and painfully to overcome ° the innate evil thought °, that it might not 
93 lead them astray ? from life? unto death. The second order (is): that they see 4the round? in 
94 which the souls of the ungodly wander, and ' the punishment that awaits them®. The third order 
(is): they see the witness which their Fashioner attests concerning them, that while they were alive 
95 * they faithfully observed the Law which was given to them*. The fourth order (is): they under- 
stand the rest which they now, being gathered in their chambers, enjoy in profound quietness 


b-» so 3 Ethiop. Ar’: Lviam ¢-¢ so Lthiop.: 2> %4 soX (= nOernoav): S they have resisted (= nrecOnoay) : 

see EA,p.145 © @ Hreversionem bonam facere ut vivant: $ = emtatpepe kat ayaborroue (Bensly adopts) -t sot 
(Ethiop. Ar.): 3 > 8 here 3 adds a verse which is not original: see EA, p- 146 beh 50 © AVA, UR.) 
® aliorum ii yeading quam amodo pertransient in cruciamentum (see EA, p. 146) J so 3 Ethiop, Ar+: © in 
honoribus (= ev riyuas [ for arimas]: read ev arena) kk so 3 Ethiop.: & in timoribus 11 @ ordo (= n rakis): 

& way mm so : £ in eo tempore commoratae un & per septem ordines: & here and in Sollowing verses 
wses Ordo consistently; so Ethiop. Ar2: but 8 Ar? Arm. use way (= 000s) throughout o-o # cum eis plasmatum 
cogitamentum PP so L 3 Ar); but Ethiop. in their present life a~a & complicationem (= cupmdoxny: Hebr. 


MVD; see LA, p. 149) “" reading quae eis (for in eis) manet punitio s-s & servaverunt quae per fidem 





sense that the soul of man after death appears before God for a certain limited time only, and for a certain purpose. 
This follows from his belief as to the intermediate state. 


80. Such souls. For ézspirationes = here disembodied souls, cf. v. 78 above (vecedente inspiratione), TDW) is used 


of the disembodied soul in Rabbinic Hebrew : cf. e. g. T.B. Shabb. 152 6 Dp by iN293, ‘the souls of the righteous’ 
(in reference to the souls being deposited beneath the throne of glory). For the theological controversies regarding 
enspiratio in this connexion cf. Bensly, MEF, p. 64. 

but shall wander about henceforth in torture. In Z. B. Shabb. 1520 the souls of the wicked are said to be 
given no place of rest until the Judgement, while the souls of the righteous are given their resting-place (31D) soon 
‘after death. 

in Seven ways, i.e. seven modes or kinds (= Hebr. derek). The arrangement of the sufferings and joys in seven 
kinds would appear somewhat artificial to us. According to Gunkel, it is derived from the old Babylonian tradition 
(which passed over to Judaism) of the existence of seven heavens and seven hells (this tradition appears in late 
Jewish literature ; cf. Eisenmenger, ii, p. 328, for a description of the seven ndon of Hell). Our passage may be 
a refinement of this idea. See further EEA Deal Se 

81. The first way, i. e. the first kind (of torture) ; a Hebraism (derek, ‘way’= kind, manner) : this meaning, rare in 

Biblical Hebrew, is common in PBX. 


88. from this vessel of mortality, lit. ‘from this corruptible vessel’; Lat. a vaso corruptibili. The Greek 


equivalent for ‘corruptible vessel’ would be 75 pOaprov ockedos = Hebr. (?) Wrd2 >, Cf. 16 bOaprov rotro, ‘this 
corruptible * (that which is liable to corruption), 1 Cor. xv. 53. Notice in our passage the implied view of the body as 
the prison-house of the soul. [On the form vaso cf. Bensly, JZF, p. 66f.] 

gl. in seven orders, i.e. orders or dispositions of mind (or emotion)—here of joys ; for text see crit. note. A good 


Sia equivalent for rds would be 727Y or A33N, which is used (in late Hebrew) in the same way of a disposition 
of the mind. 


92. The first order. Gunkel correctly interprets this as = ‘the first joy’. 
93. the round (or circuit). The word might well be used of wild erratic motion (of the ungodly souls). 


588 


en 


> 96 


97 


98 


99 


roo 


IOI 


IV.--EZRA 7.- 96-102 


guarded by angels, and the glory which awaits them ‘tat their latter end*. The fifth order (is) : they 
rejoice that they have now escaped what is corruptible, and that they shall inherit that which is to 
come; and moreover that they see the straitness and "painfulness* * from which * they have been 
delivered, and the spacious liberty which they are destined “to receive with enjoyment and im- 
mortality ¥. The sixth order: *that* it is shown unto them how their face is destined to shine as 
the sun, and how they are destined to be made like the light of the stars, ¥ henceforth ¥ incorruptible. 
The seventh order, which exceeds all the aforesaid, (is): that 
They shall rejoice with boldness, 
be confident without confusion, 
be glad 7 without fear %, 
for they are hastening to behold the face of him whom in life they served, and from whom they are 
destined to receive their reward in glory. 
This is the order of the souls of the righteous as from now henceforward * is announced *, (? and) the 
aforesaid ways of torture (are) those which they suffer henceforth who? ° would not give heed °. 
And I answered and said: Shall time, therefore, be given unto the souls, after they are separated 
from the bodies, that they may see what thou hast described to me? 
And he said to me: Seven days they have freedom, that during these seven days they may see“ 
the things aforesaid 4, afterwards they shall be gathered together in their habitations. 


(3) vii. 102-115. No INTERCESSION ON THE DAY OF JUDGEMENT (S). 


And I answered and said: If I have found favour in thy sight, show me, thy servant, this also: 
whether in the Day of Judgement the righteous shall be able to intercede for the ungodly, or to 


data est lex (per fidem may have been intended to qualify observed 7x original) ‘-t # in novissimis eorum 
u-u yeading labore plenum (MSS. plenum only); cf. 3 (the much toil) EZ¢hzop. v-V yeading a quo (M)=8: 
quoniam (A C V) w-w # recipere fruniscentes et immortales x-x s0 Ethiop. (= or): & quando (= ore); sod 
y-yY veading amodo (for quomodo) ; cf 3 Ethiop. 2-2 yeading non reverentes (for revertentes): Oriental VSS. 
etther omit or obscure the clause a2 yeading adnuntiatur (for annuntientur) b-b reading (et) praedictae viae 
(sunt) cruciatus quas (so A) patiuntur amodo qui (the bracketed words being supplied) c-e # neglexerint 
d-d % qui praedicti sunt sermones 





96. escaped what is corruptible. Gunkel points out that the implied idea is that what is mortal and corruptible ° 
is an alien element in man’s essential being. : x 

97. their face... as the sun... like the light of the stars. The language is based on Dan. xil. 3, and is 
similarly applied to the righteous (in an eschatological connexion) in Matt. xiii. 43; cf. also 2 Bar. li. 3 (of the 
transformation of the righteous at the resurrection), li. 10; cf.1 En. xxxix. 7 (‘ resplendent as lights of fire’ =‘ shine as 
the stars’ [Charles]), li. 5, civ. 2 (‘soon ye shall shine as the stars of heaven’); cf. also 4 Ezra vil. 125. | Inet Cor: 
xv. 41 the spiritual body of the resurrection is compared to the stars (‘one star differeth from another star in glory’); 
the righteous in the resurrection are compared with the angels in Matt. xxii. 30; cf. 1 En, li. 4 (‘they shall become 
angels in heaven’), civ. 6, and 2 Bar. li. 10 (cited above). Gunkel points out that in the earlier circle of religious 
ideas from which the higher religion received the first impulse towards the development of the doctrine of the 
resurrection stars and angels are equivalent conceptions. In this earlier religion the stars were regarded as gods. 
‘To be made like the stars,’ therefore, survived as a figure for immortality in the phraseology of spiritual religion. 

98. with boldness. Cf. Wisd. v. I, and see Volz, p. 264. 

to behold the face, &c. Cf. Matt. v. 8. 

too. the souls. Here and in the following verse the souls of the righteous only are, apparently, meant. These 
souls enter into the chambers reserved for them; the souls of the wicked do not (cf. v. 80). 

tol. Seven days...freedom. According to the dictum of R. Hisda, cited in 7. B. Shabb. 152 a, the soul of a man 
mourns for him the first seven days after death. It is also said in the same context (1524) that the souls of the 
righteous are given their resting-place soon. The origin of the idea of seven days’ freedom being given to the soul 
immediately after death is obscure. It probably depends upon some primitive tradition. See further £4, p. 153. 

habitations, i.e. in the intermediate state. 

(3) vii. 102-115. The previous section (vii. 75-101) opened with the question whether after death the soul was 
permitted to rest until the Judgement, or whether it entered immediately into torment. The seer was evidently thinking 
of the souls of the unrighteous, with whom he identified himself. The question was answered in the negative—no 
peace is allowed for the souls of the lost. Still full of pity for the awful fate that awaits lost souls, Ezra-Salathiel asks 
whether there is any possibility of escape for the wicked in the Day of Judgement. Will intercession by the righteous 
for the ungodly be permitted ? Again the answer is, No. Father will not be permitted to intercede for ee or son : 
for father, or brother for brother, or friend for friend. This will be just as impossible as for one to ere e place o 
another in illness, or in sleeping or eating : ‘every one ’ in that day ‘ must bear his own righteousness or nes hteourtiee: f 

The seer again pleads the many examples of intercession that are recorded in the Scriptures (Abraham BEA 
for the people of Sodom, &c.), and-is told that while the present (temporary) order endures such gir oS is Beer. e, 
But the Day of Judgement means the closing a eee oe shall no man then beable to have mercy on him 

i in the Judgement, nor overwhelm him who Is victorious. ; é ‘ 
gay iar ae with a Rabbinical literature, that the merits of sons will avail to save the fathers in ae Day ps 
Judgement (cf. e.g. Eccles. rabb. on Qoh. iv. 1) is thus implicitly condemned : indeed, the whole doctrine of impute 


i usness seems to be emphatically repudiated. _ ee. : é Set Hs 
ME Ss eee pic writer is here reaches the height of a pure and strenuous individualism. National limitations, 


589 


IV EZRA 7 etos- as 


103 intreat the Most High in their behalf: fathers for sons, sons for parents, brothers for brothers, kins- 
104 folk for their nearest, friends for their dearest. And he answered me and said : Since on hast 
found favour in my sight, I will show this also unto thee. The Day of Judgement is “4 decisive ,and 
displays unto all the seal of truth. Even as now a father may not send a son, or a son his father, or 
a master his slave, or a friend his dearest, that in his stead ®he may be ill*, or sleep, or eat, or be 
105 healed; so shall f none then‘ pray for another on that Day, neither shall one lay a burden on 
106 another ®; for then every one shall bear his own righteousness or unrighteousness. And I answered 
and said: How is it that we now find that first Abraham prayed for the people of Sodom, and 
107 Moses for our fathers who sinned in the wilderness ; and Joshua after him for Israel in the days * of 
108 Achar™; and Samuel ‘in the days of Saul‘, and David jfor the plague J, and Solomon * for those 
10g that (should worship) in the sanctuary*; and Elijah for those who received the rain, and for the 
110 dead, that he might live; and Hezekiah for the people in the days of Sennacherib, and (others) many 
111 for many? If, therefore, now when corruption is grown up,-and unrighteousness increased, the 
righteous have prayed for the ungodly, why shall it not be so then also ? : 
112 And he answered me and said: The present age ‘is not the End!; ™the glory of God abides not 
113 therein continuously™: therefore have the strong prayed for the weak. But the Day of Judgement 
shall be the end of this age and the beginning of the eternal age that is to come ; wherein 
104 corruption is passed away, 
” weakness” is abolished, 
infidelity is cut off; 
while righteousness is grown, 
and faithfulness is sprung up. 


115 So shall no man then be able to have mercy on him who is condemned in the Judgement, nor 
°overwhelm ° him who is victorious. 


dd-dd 59 & (=? ovrtopos) : Ethiop. suddenly (=? ovvroues): H% audax (=? evtoAuos a corruption of ovvTopos) 


&° so & Ethiop. Arm. (= wa voon): & intellegat (= wa voy) ff so % (cf. Ar) =ovde vores & nunquam 
(= ovderore) 88 s0 3 (of. Ethio~.): L > hb soi (MN A)=8: Achaz (S) : mee NG) os 
Lthiop. Ar*: &(S ACM) > i & pro confractione kk & pro eis qui in sanctificationem (= umep 
Tav ev To wepw): S ELthiop. for the sanctuary (= umep tov cepov) r1 so &% (non est finis): cf Lthiop.; % has an end 
mm s0 8 Ethiop.: & gloria in eo (supply non) frequens manet nn so Ethiop. (=n acbevera): & intemperantia 
(=? acehyeta: of. 8) o-o & demergere (= kKatamovri¢ew) Pp» & coercere (= karexewv) : instructed (= katy- 





distinctions between race and race, are left behind = the individual soul comes to view, and the personal responsibility 
of each individual soul is asserted with the utmost emphasis. Between God and the departing soul no mediatorial or 
mitigating agency is allowed to stand. Here we may detect the influence of Alexandrine theology which tended to 
lay all stress upon the present life as determining the eternal fate of every man (cf. Bousset, R/%, p. 337 f.). 

It is apparently against some such conceptions as have been described above that our passage is directed. It 
definitely excludes the entire cycle of such ideas. Probably at the time when our Apocalypse was written these ideas 
had assumed an exaggerated form in certain circles. It is curious to note that this passage of 4 Ezra gave offence to 
Christian theologians. Its citation as scriptural proof against the efficacy of intercessions for the dead evoked a severe 
reproof from Jerome (Zz... propontis mthi librum apocryphum, gui sub nomine Esdrae a te et stmilibus tucs legitur,; 
ube scriptum est, guod post mortem nullus pro alits audeat deprecard: guem ego librum nunguam legi : [contra Vigilant. 
c. vii]). This objection doubtless accounts for the disappearance of the section from the Latin Cod. S, and nearly all 
later copies—the lacuna only being made good by the discovery of the missing Fragment by Bensly. 

[See, on the section, Volz, PP- 92, 136; Kéberle, p. 662 f.; Bousset, Pp. 339f.; and cf. ZA, pp. 153-6.] 

104. the seal of truth, i.e. the seal of the Judge which attests the truth and Justice of the sentence (Gunkel). The 
representation is again forensic; the sealing of the document recording the sentence being the final act of the Judge. 

105. neither shall one lay a burden, &c. The whole passage is a development of Ezek. xviii. 20. 

106. first. Of the following series, 


Abraham. The reference is to Gen. xviii. 233 
Moses . . . in the wilderness. See Exod. SOT LE 
107, Achar. See Joshua vii. 
108. in the days of Saul. See 1 Sam. vii. On IZ 3. 
for the plague. The reference is to 2 Sam. Xxiv. 15 f, 
for those that (should worship) in the sanctuary. See 1 Kings viii. 22 f., 30f. 
109. Elijah ... the rain. Seer Kings xviii. 42. 
for the dead ... live. See 1 Kings xvil. 20 f. 
110. Hezekiah ... Sennacherib. See 2 Kings xix. 15 f. 
12. the glory of God abides not therein continuously. For the various causes 
which cause the removal of the Shekinah (=the divine presence and glory) from the e 


theology, see Schechter, Aspects, p. 223 et al, Here the idea is that the divine glory cann 
what is essentially transitory. 


(idolatry, blasphemy, pride) 
arth, according to Rabbinic 
ot permanently remain with 


590 


E27, 


“— 


VEE ICA, &, (116-1 32 


(4) vii, 116-131. WHAT AVAILS THE PROMISE TO MAN WHO IS BORN TO SIN ? 
YET, THOUGH TRAGIC, THE SINNER’S DOOM IS DESERVED (S). 


116 And I answered and said: This is my first and last word ; better had it been that the earth had 
not produced Adam, or else, having once produced him, (for thee) ? to have restrained? him from 
117 sinning. For how does it profit us all that in the present we must live in grief and after death look 
118 for punishment? O thou Adam, what hast thou done! For though it was thou that sinned, 4 the 
119 fall was not thine alone, but ours also4 who are thy descendants! For how does it profit us that 
120 the eternal age is promised to us, whereas we have done the works that bring death? And that 
there is foretold to us *an imperishable hope*, whereas we so miserably are brought to futility ? 
122 And that there are reserved habitations of health and safety, whereas we have lived wickedly ? And 
that the glory of the Most High is to defend them who have led a pure life, whereas we have walked 
123 in ways most wicked? And that Paradise whose fruit endures incorruptible, wherein is delight and 
124 healing, shall be made manifest, but we cannot enter it because we have passed our lives *in unseemly 
125 Manners*? And that the faces of such as have practised abstinence shall shine above the stars, 
126 whereas our faces shall be blacker than darkness? For, while we lived and committed iniquity we 
considered not what we were destined to suffer after death! 
127 And he answered me and said: This is tthe condition’ of the contest which (every) man who is 
128 born upon earth must wage; that, if he be overcome, he shall suffer as thou hast said: but if he be 
129 Victorious, he shall receive what I have said. For this is the way of which Moses, while he was 
130 alive, spoke unto the people, saying: Choose thee life, that thou mayst live! Nevertheless they 
131 believed not him, nor the prophets after him, no nor yet me who have spoken unto them. * Therefore ® 
shall there not be such grief at their perdition, as there shall be joy over the salvation of those who 
have believed. ° 


(5) DouBTS AS TO HOW THE PERDITION OF SO MANY CAN BE JUSTIFIED FROM THE 
POINT OF VIEW OF GoD’s CHARACTER AND ATTRIBUTES: THE DIVINE REPLy (S). 


(vii. 132—-viii. 62.) 
(a) vii. 132—viii. 3. Wali God—so merciful and compassionate—suffer so many to perish? (S.) 
132 And I answered and said: I know, Lord, that the Most High is now called compassionate in that 


xew) (= Ethiop.) 1-4 veading non est factum solius tuus casus sed et nostrum (¢/ 3) 1—r % perennis spes 
s-§ of, Ethiop.: & ingratis locis (confusing tponos and tomas): $0 ® tt # cogitamentum =o diadoyiopos = PN 
(law, condition) uu so S$: ® quoniam 





(4) vii.116-131. Itthus having been demonstrated that no possibility of escape from eternal punishment exists for the 
doomed race of sinners, the seer now bursts forth into a passionate lamentation over the fate of the mass of humanity. 
It would have been better if Adam had not been created with freedom of will to sin, than that his descendants should 
be born only to be doomed. To promise them happiness and immortality on conditions which they must almost 
inevitably fail to keep is but to mock their misery. To this the archangel can only reply that such are the conditions 
of the fight; there will be more joy in heaven over those who attain salvation than sorrow over the many who perish. 

116. that the earth had not produced. Cf. iil. 5. - 

or else . . . to have restrained him from sinning. Cf., for the thought, vil. 63. op 
118. the fall was not thine alone, but ours also. a here charged with being the cause of the perdition 
n race; cf. vii. 20f., iv. 30-31, and contrast 2 Bar. liv. 19. ; : 
are) gets defend. For eis ae divine glory (= the Shekinah) being a protection to the righteous, cf. the 
Rabbinic phrase ‘ to take refuge under the wings of the Shekinah’ (7. B. Shadd. 31 a, &c., of one acknowledging God), 
Moses when dead lay in its pinions (Si/re, 355). 

123. Paradise, i.e. the heavenly Paradise. : : y ars 

wherein (i.e. in which fruit) is delight and healing. For the representation cf. Ezek, xlvii. 12 (Rev. xxii. 2). _ 

125. of such as have practised abstinence. The ascetic note here is discernible. For ascetic tendencies in 
Rabbinic theology cf. Schechter, Asfects, pp. 277-8. Z 

shall shine above the stars. Cf. Dan. xi. 3 and Matt. xil. 43. : ; 

whereas our faces shall be blacker than darkness. The conception at the background of the clause is that 
of sinners being banished to night and darkness (cf. the phrase in the Gospels, to be cast forth into the outer dark- 
ness’ Matt. viii. 12, &c.). The conception of hell as a place of fire is a distinct and more developed one. en, 

129. Choose thee life, that thou mayst live. Cf. Deut. xxx. I9. Such words are interpreted in later Judaism in 
a deeper sense: ‘ life’ = eternal life, the blessed life in heaven. In the original context ‘life’ = natural life (regarded 
as the highest of boons). Cf. Gunkel, ad loc. : es 

(5) vii. 132-viii. 62. The seer’s doubts still remain. Ina fine passage he acknowledges (and implicitly appeals to) 
the divine mercy and compassion, which are displayed in manifold ways in the present order. This suggests a Heeson 
which is not directly expressed: Is it possible to reconcile the final perdition of so many with the divine mercy? In 
reply he is told that the present world is for the many, the future world for the few (vii, 132-viii. 3). Again he asks : 
Is it possible that God’s creature, who has been fashioned with such infinite care and skill, can have been created only 
to perish? With this question the seer gives up the problem of the race, and turns to his own people (viii. 4-19). For 


591 


nN 


135; 


133 


IV EZRA..:7. 133—8. 3 


he compassionates those who have not yet come into the world; and gracious, in that he is gracious 


«34 towards those ’ who return to his law’: and longsuffering, because he shows longsuffering to sinners 
136 “as his creatures“; and * bountiful *, since he is ready to bestow favour rather than exact; and of 


137 


138 


139 
140 


81 


iS) 


is) 


great mercy, because he multiplies mercies so greatly to those who are in existence, and who have 
passed away, and who are to come:—for if he did not multiply YmercyY the world with its 
inhabitants could not attain unto life—*and good (?), for if in his goodness he were not gracious”, so 
that evil-doers might be eased of their iniquities, the ten thousandth part of mankind could not attain 
unto life; and * forgiving, for if he did not pardon® those that were created by his word, and blot 
out the multitude » of their iniquities”, there would, perchance, be very few left of an innumerable 
multitude. 

And he answered me and said: This age the Most High has made for many, but the age to come 
for few. I will tell thee, now, a similitude, Ezra: as, when thou askest the earth, it shall say unto 
thee that it produces much more mould from which earthen vessels are made, but little dust from 
which gold comes; so also is ° the course® of the present age. Many have been created, but few 
shall be saved ! 


YY so S Ethiop. & [illis] qui faciunt conversionem in lege eius “-w % quasi suis operibus 
xx yeading munificus: % (cf. Ethiop.) giver YY so 3 (cf. Ethiop.) L > 2% yeading et donator 
quoniam si non donaverit (see EA, p. 167 f.) a~a % et iudex (quoniam) si non ignoverit: Simonsen reads: 
and the righteous judge who hath no respect of persons, but who, if he did not: pardon (see ZA, p. 169) 
b-b © contemptionum = rep aGernpatrwv: & of their sins (= rev adicnpator) c-e # actus (= mpakis: 





them and for himself he utters a beautiful prayer, appealing to God to have compassion on those who are destitute of 
good works (viii. 20-36). The angel briefly replies (viii. 37-40), and proceeds to compare man on the earth to seed. 
As the husbandman sows much seed, but only part comes up, so out of the multitude of created men only a part shall 
be saved. The seer answers that much seed perishes for lack or because of excess of rain, and once again appeals to 
the divine compassion (viii. 41-45). The divine reply that follows (viii. 46-62) constitutes a general answer to what 
precedes. The seer is told that his love falls far below God’s for God’s creature; his (the seer’s) humility is, however, 
commended, and he is assured of felicity with the righteous. He is bidden to ask no more questions regarding the fate 
of the lost, who have brought their doom upon themselves. 

(@) vii. 132-viii. 3. The seer, in his fine appeal to the divine attributes of compassion and forgiveness, obviously has 
in mind the passage of Scripture which has become classical in this connexion, Exod. xxxiv. 6-7 (‘Jahveh . . . a God 
compassionate and gracious, longsuffering and of great mercy and faithfulness ; keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving 
iniquity and transgression and sin’). This had already become a stereotyped formula of address to or description of 
God when the later books of the O.T. were written, and many reminiscences of the language used occur (cf. e. g. 


Neh. ix. 17, Joel ii. 13, Jonah iv. 2, Ps. Ixxxvi. 15, &c.; also Sirach ii. 11 and Wisd. xv. 1). The passage is doubtless ~~ 


based upon, or interweaves, a Midrash on Exod. xxxiv. 6-7, as Prof. Simonsen holds ; see further ZA, pp. 164-165. 

132. those who have not yet come into the world. God, in spite of His foreknowledge which enables Him to fore- 
see man’s future sins before he is born, is yet tender and compassionate towards him, treating him as righteous and free 
from sin until he actually commits sin; cf. Aid. rabd. to Gen. xxi. 17, where God says ‘I judge man’ (as to whether 
he is righteous or wicked) ‘according to his time’ (i.e. as he is at the time, without taking into account his future 
sins). In the passage Ishmael (not yet having sinned) is counted as pious. 

133. who return to his law. God compassionates man both before he sins (v. 132), and also after he has sinned 
and made his repentance. 

135. he is ready to bestow favour rather than exact. Cf. the following (from Seder Eliahu, p. 135): ‘God 
bestows gifts on those who know him and on those who know him not and do not deserve his gifts.’ Simonsen under- 
stands the clause to mean: God is ready to forgive guilt rather than exact punishment. 

137. could not attain unto life, i.e. the future (eternal) ‘life’. This agrees with the doctrine of the school of 
Shammai, according to which the truly pious passed at once, after death, to bliss; the very wicked went at once to 
Gehenna; while the intermediate class (which comprised the vast majority) were only consigned to Gehenna for a time, 
God’s goodness and kindness being shown in allowing their release therefrom, so that they ultimately passed to eternal 
life (so Simonsen). : 

138. and good (?), for if in his goodness, &c. On the textual phenomena of this verse ch ci AS paiGr: 

139. forgiving. The Lat. has zudex, judge ; so the other versions. This has usually been supposed to be based on 
an erroneous reading in the original Hebrew text (DEW for OD). For a brilliant alternative solution (by Simonsen) 
see crit. note. 

140. very few. Simonsen’s suggestion is to read the text of vv. 139-140: ‘and the righteous Judge who hath no 


respect of persons, but who, if he did not pardon,’ &c. (Heb. 1) DD Nw NS SUN APTS ODL). This affords a fine 
paraphrase of Exod. xxxiv. 7 (‘forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin’). God’s attributes of mercy are pleaded 
all through the passage, and the conclusion reached is that if God did not possess these attributes nearly all created 
would be involved in perdition. This accords with one of the traditional interpretations of the words which follow the 
second clause of Exod. xxxiv. 7 cited above, viz. mp3 xb Mp3); i.e. (according to the interpretation referred to) ‘He 
will not utterly extinguish’. 

_ The seer thus, as Moses himself (Num. xiv. 17-18), pleads the revelation of God’s attributes made in Exod. 
XxxlV. 6-7 in mitigation of the severity of the divine judgement. He does so, however, in a paraphrastic form which 
suggests a midrashic influence. E 


_ Vili. 3. Many ... created... few... saved. Cf, Matt. xxii, 14. The illustration in vv. 1-3 is par: 
in thought and expression with vii. 49-61. 3 1s parallel both 


59% 


Ss 


[IME LRA 8. 4-18 


(0) viii. 4-19. Can God’s creature, who has been fashioned with such enfinite skill and 
labour, perish finally ? (S.) 
4 And I answered and said: 
‘O my soul, drink thy fill of understanding 4, 
And, ® O heart °, feed on wisdom! 
5 ®Involuntarily thou camest (into the world), 
and when thou willest not departest s: 

6 for » permission® has been given to thee only to live a brief time. ‘O Lord above us i if thou 
wouldst but suffer thy servant to pray before thee; and wouldst give unto us the seed of a new 
heart and culture to our understanding, whence fruit may come, whereby every corruptible one may 

7 be able to live, who bears jthe form of mani! For one art thou ¥and we are all one fashioning, 

8 the work of thine hands*, as thou hast said. !And when! thou quickenest ™the body which thou 
fashionest in the womb”, and endowest it with members, thy creature is preserved in fire and water, 
and nine months does that which thou hast fashioned (i.e. the womb) bear thy creature ® which thou 

9 hast created within it®. But °that which keeps and that which is kept® are both kept P by thy 

to keeping. And when the womb gives up again 4 what has been created in it 4, thou hast commanded 
that out of the members themselves, * that is out of the breasts", milk, the fruit of the breasts, should 
11 be provided, that what has been fashioned may be nourished for a time. 
12 And afterwards thou sustainest it in thy mercy 
and nourishest it in thy righteousness ; 
Thou disciplinest it through thy law, 
and reprovest it in thy wisdom. 
13 Thou wilt kill it—as (it is) thy creature, 
and quicken it—as (it is) thy work! 
14 If, then, *with a light word*® thou shalt destroy him who with such infinite labour has been 
15 fashioned by thy command, ‘tto what purpose was he made*? But now I will say: Concerning 
man in general, "thou knowest best ¥, but concerning 


Feb. 117) d-d so 3 = absorbe anima mea sensum: Lat. MSS. absolve e-e cf. S my heart: E¢hzop. = to ovs 


(? for rov vovvy): > ff & devoret quod sapit (Greek ? xatapaye ro ppovovy) 8-8 so 3: &L (misreading axovoa 
as akovoat) convenisti enim obaudire et profecta es nolens hh @& spatium (=? cvyxepyors (cf. 3 power) it 2, O 
Domine super nos (so v. 45): S O Lord my Lord (so v. 45) Ti so 3: LZ locum hominis (confusing rorov and troy) 
K-E so S$: H et una plasmatio nos sumus manuum tuarum I-l & et quoniam (= kat ort: for ore) mm 3 nunc 


in matrice plasmatum corpus (= fvod. }D22 ANY ANNY AWIN—zthe two middle words being misread WS) ANY) 
nn so $: & quae in eo creata est °-° yeading ipsum [quod servat et] quod servatur (C)=% A C > words in 


brackets P-P veading servatione tua = S L¢hiop. 94 veading quae in ea creata fuerint 1x & [membris] 
hoc est mamillis: 3 > [clause may be a gloss] s-s @ facili ordine (= cov rafer: Heb. ? Sp 3372 [Gunkel]) : 
S suddenly and quickly tt # et ut quid (= wa tm car: Hed, 71051) : so Oriental VSS, u-u 9 tu magis scis 
(= ov padXov odas) : 

(4) vill. 4-19. 


4. Omy soul ... feedon wisdom. The sentiment expressed in this verse serves to reveal the seer’s despair of 
being able to solve the problem by intellectual means. As the discussion proceeds it seems to become ever more 
unfathomable. a 

5. Involuntarily thou camest ... departest. Cf. 2 Bar. xlviii. 14f.; also xiv. 11. 

only to live a brief time. Cf. 2 Bar. xlviii. 12. 

6. the seed of a new heart and culture to our understanding. 5% renders: ‘the seed and culture of a new 
heart.’ Possibly ‘ seed of a new heart’ is right. In this case the seer asks for that ‘ transformation by the renewing 
of the mind’ (r7 dvaxawvdcer Tod vods), of which St. Paul speaks (Rom. xii. 2; cf. Eph. iv. 23), and which amounts to 
dvayevvnois. The cor malignum is to be replaced by a cor novum,and the granum seminis maiz (iv. 30) by the semen 
cordis novi. The epithet ‘new’ is only found in the Syr. 

whereby ... may... live, who bears the form of man. The meaning of the whole verse is well paraphrased 
by Volkmar: ‘O that thou wouldst grant unto thy human children not merely physical life, but also the seed of 
spiritual life and understanding to be cultivated (by them), so that thereby they might attain true life as 

7. as thou hast said. Isa. xlv. 11, lx. 21; cf. lxv.14f. The combination of the assertion of God’s uniqueness and 
unity (so/us enim es) and of His Fatherhood as the one Creator of all is notable ; cf. vi. 1-6. j ties 

8. thy creature is preserved in fire and water. There is here a clear allusion to the Oriental doctrine t at 
man’s living organism is compounded of the primal elements (‘the things that have intermingled with thy growth’, 
iv. 10, cf. note there). Cf. Philo, de Mundi Op. 51, where the human body is spoken of as compounded from earth, 
water, air, and fire: for Rabbinic views on the same subject cf. Weber, p.210f, on 

and nine months .. . bear thy creature which thou hast created within it, i.e. within the womb. 

13. Thou wilt kill it... quicken it... thy work. Volkmar paraphrases: ‘Thou wilt indeed bring man to 
death, as he is a creature of thine: but thou wilt—such is my hope—summon him also to renewed life, because thou 
hast once given him (physical) life.’ Cf. for a somewhat similar sentiment 1 Sam. ii. 6 ( J. kills and makes alive: 
he brings down to Sheol and brings up’). The reference will then be to the future life: ‘ quicken’ may, however, 
mean only ‘ to preserve alive’ (God kills, or allows ‘ His creature’ to live, as He will, viz. in this life). Cf. also 2 Kings 


. 73 Deut. xxxii. 39. : ) 
3 te ft who ith such infinite labour has been fashioned. Cf. Ps. cxxxix. 14 f. 


1105.2 593 Qq 


9) 


IV EZRA 8, 16-21 


16 Thy people, on whose account I grieve, 

and thine inheritance for which I mourn, 

And Israel for whom I am sad, 

and Jacob’s seed for whom I am dismayed— 
17° Therefore I would fain pray before thee for myself and for them! For I see “the falls” of us 
18 that dwell in the land, * and now also* have heard ¥ the decree of judgement that is to come! 
19 Therefore hear my voice, 

and * consider my words”, 

and let me speak before thee! 


(c) viii. (19 0) 20-40. The seer’s prayer for compassion on his people, and the divine reply (S). 
(i.) 
The Prayer. 
19 6*| The beginning ” of the words of the Prayer” of Ezra before he was taken up. And he said :|* 
ginning ? | 


20 O Lord ° that dwellest eternally °, 
‘whose are the highest heavens 4, 
whose chambers are in the air, 

21 Whose throne is beyond imagination, 

whose glory inconceivable ; 


Vv & for behold w-w # lapsos (= lapsus: ? ta mrwpara) == 50 3: DL sed YY so ZS: BD celeritatem 
iudicii (= amoromiay kpioews: Heb. {I W1: cf partem iudicii, v. 34) 2-2 & intellege sermonum meorum 
(Greek construction): accept the words of my prayer a~a This superscription is no part of the original 
text of the book; but tt must have come into the text very early, as it is attested by S and Ethiop. Its presence shows 
clearly that the passage was early singled out for separate use for liturgical or devotional purposes b-bis0 .@ 
(cf. Ethiop.): & (6) verbi orationis (2) verborum ee so S: ¥& qui inhabitas (4 habitas) saeculum d-d so 
(4) cuius altissimi celi (= caeli) sunt: cif % whose heights (= heavens) are exalted: & (a) cuius oculi elati 





16. thine inheritance. Cf. v. 45; Ps. xxviii. 9. 
Jacob’s seed. Cf. ili. 19. 


(¢) viii. (19) 20-40. The beautiful prayer which follows (viii. 20-36) opens with an invocation to God as the 
eternal, exalted, and omnipotent One, who is appealed to as the Creator to listen to the petition of one who is His 
creature (vv. 20-25) ; a prayer that God will have compassion on His people and regard those who have been loyal to 
His Law rather than its transgressors follows (vv. 26-30); finally an appeal is made to the fact that God has in the 
past been so longsuffering towards the sinners of His people (here the intermingling of appeal and confession is 
noticeable, vv. 31-36). Here as elsewhere in the Apocalypse the seer identifies himself with the sinners (Cirz32))s 
The first part of the divine reply that follows (vv. 37-40), while apparently favourable to the seer’s petition, really 
ignores or even negatives it. God will indeed, says the angel, have regard rather to the righteous than to the sinners. 
He will rejoice over the salvation of the former rather than grieve over, or even think of, the destruction of the latter | 
The issue is not squarely faced. For a similar indirect reply to the same issue expressed in another form cf. vii, 17.5 
cf. also vii. 64 compared with vii. 71 f, : 

The apocalyptic writer is still baffled by the problem of the lost. He is still struggling to arrive at a satisfactory 
solution from the point of view of the Law. One motive of the prayer seems to be to suggest the possibility that the 
merits of the righteous might avail for the salvation of sinners in Israel—the sinners intended being, it would seem 
those mainly who repudiate the divine Law with a high hand and live as the very heathen (cf. vv. 27-30). But the 
divine reply makes it clear that no such hope can be entertained. Thus the problem of the lost, even when restricted 
to Israel, ‘remains unsolved. The beauty of the prayer itself has led to its being excerpted and used for liturgical 
and devotional purposes. As a consequence the Latin manuscript authorities for this particular passage are more 
numerous than for the text of the rest of the book. It occurs ina separate form in a number of MSS. of the Latin 
Bible, and also in MSS. of the Mozarabic Liturgy, some of which are earlier than Codices A and S (cf. Bensly, ZF, 
p. 34). The title often prefixed to the passage is Confessto Esdrae. ; i 

Another curious and important fact to notice is that the Latin authorities yield two distinct recensions of the text : 
i.e. two distinct and more or less independent Latin translations of the Greek text of the passage appear to have been 
made at different times: but, strangely enough, neither recension seems to be represented in a pure form in any extant 
MS. The two recensions have been reconstructed (with the aid of fresh manuscript evidence) by Violet; and these are 
referred to below as text a@ (= the normal text of the liturgical MSS. and of SA C) and text 4 A 
especially represented in M). Both recensions attest good Greek readings, and it is impossibl 
older. See further the detailed discussion in B/ (‘ The Two Texts of the Confessio E 
Violet, Introduction, § 13 (pp. xxvi-xxix). There is a prayer in 2 Baruch which similar 
of Baruch’), ch. xlviii. The prayer in Comstit. Afost. viii. 7 should also be compared. 

20. whose are the highest heavens. For the general thought cf. Ps. ciii. 11; Deut. x. I4. 

whose chambers are in the air. The figure is derived from an older conception according to which the world 
aioe poe si a ee of ia sions in the upper of which God had His dwelling, while the lower 
ormed the world as we see it (Gunkel). ere, however, trz i i 
A Seems fg OS ge ) ; ever, transcendental ideas are dominant. Perhaps the heavenly 

21. throne is beyond imagination. The mystery of God’s throne is the theme of Ezek. i (‘ the chariot’). 


whose glory inconceivable. God’s glory would suggest to the Jewish mind the i ig ivi 
presence which pervades heaven; cf. Rev. xxi. 23, Xxil. 5. g : Pr ids Sie ed eee 


594 


(= the divergent text 
e to say which is the 
sdrae’), pp. Ixxx-Ixxxvi; also 
ly has a separate title (‘ Prayer 


22, 


23 


24 


25 


26 


27 


28 


20 


30 


) 


EZR AVS, 217-76 


* before whom (heaven’s) hosts stand trembling °, 
‘and at thy word change to wind and fire; 
whose word is sure, 
and behest constant, 
whose commandment is strong 
and enactment terrible ; 
whose look drieth up the depths, 
whose indignation melteth the mountains ; 
whose faithfulness § standeth eternal s— 
Hear " the voice ® of thy servant, 
give ear to ‘thy creature’s petition }, 
and attend to my words! 
For so long as I live must I speak, 
and while I possess understanding, answer— 
O look not on the sins of thy people, 
but on them that have served thee in truth ; 
Regard not the deeds of the godless, 
but (rather) them that have kept thy covenants in tortures ; 
) Think not4 upon those that have walked in devious ways before thee, 
but remember them that have willingly recognized thy fear ; 
Will not to destroy those that have lived like cattle, 
but regard them that have gloriously taught thy Law; 
Be not wroth with those that are deemed worse than the beasts, 
but love them that have always put their trust in thy glory— 


ee & (a) cui adstat exercitus angelorum cum tremore: (4) cui adsunt (v. /. assistunt) milicie (militiae) cum pavore 
tf H (4) et dicto tuo in ventum et ignem convertuntur (= 3; cf. Ethiop.): & (a) quorum servatio in vento et igni 
convertitur 8-8 so Ar? (rightly): & testificatur = S$ (Gf Ethiop.): The Greek translator wrongly rendered the 


Heb. ayo nny (which = standeth for ever) as standeth as a witness (misreading syd as syd): apparently the 
mistake was corrected in the Codex used by Ar? b-h so @ (6) = S Ethiop. Ar): & (a) and Ar? prayer eh Gy 
L (a): DL (6) deprecationi meae tui plasmati = other VSS, Ji © neque cogites (= pnde Aoyifov): so S: Ethiop. 
be not angry (= pn opyifov): so Ar.? 


and at thy word change to wind and fire. The meaning is that the angelic watchers serve before God by 
changing at His word into wind and fire. Cf. for the representation Ps. ciii. (Heb. civ.) 4 in the LXX, which renders : 
‘who makes his angels winds (mvevpara) and his ministers a flaming fire’. The Heb. text of the passage can be 
rendered in this way, though it is not usually so rendered (cf. Driver, Heb. Tenses*, p. 262 f.); our passage, therefore, 
is an interesting addition to the ancient authorities (LXX, Targ. substantially) for so understanding it. The reference 
here to angelic agency must not, however, be unduly pressed. One of the most remarkable features of 4 Ezra (and 
especially of S) is its practical ignoring of angelic and demonic agencies. Our present passage is in a poetical context 
and implies little more than that behind physical phenomena there is to be seen the activity of agents in the service of 
God. Of the crude popular angelology, with its distinct orders and personal names, there is here no trace. 

22. constant. Lat. text a, perseverantia; text b, fermanens = (2) Siapévov, The Heb. equivalent would be 1533; 
cf. Ps. cxix. (LXX, cxvili.) 89, where Zermanet (Vulg.) = dtayever (LXX) = Heb. 3¥) and the subject is God’s ‘ word’ 
(‘thy word is fixed in heaven’). There seems to be a clear allusion here to one of the oldest prayers in the synagogue 
liturgy, the benediction which follows the S/éma and is known as gé’u//a (Redemption), ‘This piece begins with the 
two words used in our passage, viz. ‘sure (or ‘true’) and constant’ (Heb. 3°S*) Nis), and is so referred to in the 
oldest Rabbinical sources (cf. e.g. Mishna, Zamid v. 1); and the subject of the opening part of the benediction is 
God’s word: ‘ True and constant, established and enduring . . . is this thy word (i.e. the preceding S/éma) unto us 
for ever,’ &c. (cf. Singer, Authorized Daily Prayer Book (Heb.-English), p. 42 f.). es 

23. whose look drieth up ... eternal. The whole of this clause appears in the Const. Afost. viii. 7 08 1d 
Bréupa Enpaiver GBvacov kai 7 amedi rHKet Spy Kai 7) GA7Oera pever eis TOV ai@va, The seer here appeals to the wonders of 
creation (according to an older tradition) as attesting God’s power. Cf. in Deutero-Isaiah a similar passage (I. 2) 
introduced with a similar motive and reference (‘ Behold with my rebuke I parch the sea’); cf. also li. 10 and the 
introductions to the sections in the present writer’s /sazah. ; 

melteth the mountains. An eschatological feature derived from the representation of the destruction of the 
world by fire; cf. Mic. i. 4; Sir. xvi. 18 f. 

27. them that have kept thy covenants in tortures. Such witnesses for the faith as the famous seven 
Maccabean martyrs are probably referred to. : ok 

28. thy fear, i.e. the fear of Thee. ‘The fear of Jahveh’ is a well-known term for religion, or the Law as revered 


CiP ss Xix. 10): : ; 
29. those that have lived like cattle. Probably Jews who live like heathen are in the author’s mind. See ZA, 


. 181. z 
, that have gloriously taught thy Law, i.e. the orthodox scribes. For the expression cf. Dan. xii. 3, Matt. v. 14-15. 
30. those that are deemed worse than the beasts, i.e. live worse than the heathen (a class of Jews even worse 
than those described in the previous verse). Is there an allusion here to Jewish informers who betray their own 


countrymen to heathen officials ? 
595 Qq2 


Ss 


IV EZRA 8. 31-45 


31 For we and our fathers * have passed our lives in ways that bring death*: but thou, because of 
32 us sinners, art called compassionate. For if thou hast a desire to compassionate us who have no 
33 works of righteousness, then shalt thou be called ‘the gracious One’. For the righteous, who have 
many works laid up with thee, shall out of their own deeds receive their reward— 
34 But what is man that thou shouldst be wroth with him? 
Or what is a corruptible race that thou canst be so bitter towards it ? 
35 For in truth 
There is none of the earth-born who has not dealt wickedly, 
and ‘among those that exist! who has not sinned. 
For in this, O Lord, shall thy righteousness and goodness be declared, if thou wilt compassionate 
them that have no wealth of good works. 


+ 


(ii.) 
The Divine Reply. 


37. Then he answered me and said: Some things thou hast spoken aright, and according to thy 

38 words so shall it come to pass. For indeed I will not concern myself about the creation of those 

39 who have sinned, or their death, judgement, or perdition ; but I will rejoice (rather) ™ over the creation 

40 of the righteous, (over) their pilgrimage also and their salvation and their recompense™. ™As thou 
hast spoken ®, then, so shall it be! 


(d) viii. 41-45. Mankind is like the seed sown by the husbandman (S). 
[ Zhe speaker here is still the angel.| 


4% For just as the husbandman sows much seed °upon the ground ° and plants a multitude of plants, 
and yet not all which were sown shall be saved in due season, nor shall all that were planted take 
42 root; so also they that are sown in the world shall not all be saved. And I answered and said: If 
43 I have found favour before thee, let me speak”. 4*The husbandman’s seed, if it come not up— 
because it has not received thy rain in due season*—or if it be ruined by too much rain, * perishes ; 
44 but the son of man*® who has been fashioned with thine own hands, tand is made like thine own 
image ', for whose sake thou hast fashioned all things—" hast thou likened him to the seed of the 
husbandman " ? 
45  YNay, Lord God!” but 
spare thy people, 
compassionate thine inheritance, 
for thou compassionatest thine own creation! 


kk yeading (& text a) mortalibus moribus egimus (% (4) corruptum locum egimus = Oaprov romov | for tporor| 
dinxOnuev): see further EA, p. 182 ‘I & (a) de confitentibus (read confientibus = ovveornxorwv) : ‘see further 
EA, p. 184) m-m % super iustorum figmentum peregrinationis quoque et salvationis et mercedis receptionis (for 
explanation of wrong construction see EA, p. 185) ou. so Ethiop.: & and other VSS. as I have Said 
9-9 sot = Ar.; 4 Ethiop. > P S+before thee (cf Ethiop.) a £ pr. quoniam (= or introducing direct 
speech, and therefore not to be translated: R.V. wrongly forasmuch) tr so%: S will then the husbandman’s 
seed, if it does not receive thy rain in its season, live? 88 yeading (with Gunkel) sic patitur ; et filius homo 
(XL corrupt: M sic pat et filius: SA C hic pater et filius: see further EA, p. 187) tt © et tuae imagini [nomi- 
natus quoniam] similatus est: ¢he bracketed words are to be omitted with & (cf. Ethiop. Ar): see further EA 
p- 187 ut ¢o be taken as a question: so Oriental VSS. v-V reading non Domine super nos ; 





33. Shall... receive their reward. Cf. 2 Bar. xiv. 12. 

34. that thou canst be so bitter towards it. The whole verse recalls the bitter parody in Job vii. 171.3 clePs, wad. 

37. according to thy words .. . shall it come to pass. The angel refers to the form the seer’s. petition had 
taken: that God would regard not the sinners but the righteous. This part of the petition shall be granted, but in 
a totally different sense from that intended in the prayer. God will ignore the destruction of the godless and think 
only of the achievements of the righteous! For a similar turning of expressions in the dialogue cf. vii. 64 é Wits 

39. over the creation ... recompense. The three words, ‘ pilgrimage’, ‘salvation *, ‘recompense’, form contrasted 
expressions to ‘death’, ‘judgement’, and ‘perdition’ in the previous verse: so ‘ pilgrimage’ (= amodnpuia) must mean 
departure from this life to a better, a return home to God; cf. 2 Cor. v. 6f. for the idea. ‘Salvation’ here may mean 
the state of safety, security, and peace of the righteous dead in the intermediate state. 

(d) viii. 41-45. 

44. hast thou likened him... husbandman? To be taken as a question (against R.V.): i 
Versions rightly. The seer warmly protests against the comparison of ae to ee sown in ses fells ee 
the parable of the Sower in the Gospels. For the image cf. also 4 Ezra iv. 28f. : 

45. for thou compassionatest thine own creation, i.e. for (in doing so) thou compassionatest (or wilt com- 
passionate) ; the creature appeals to the Creator. Note the passionate, almost despairing note of entreaty. Theseer 
is all but overwhelmed with anguish in the face of the problem that confronts him. 


596 


ba] 


IV EZRA 8. 46-52 


(e) viii. 46-62. The final divine reply: The seer ts assured that his lot is with the blessed, and is 
bidden to contemplate their felicity, and not to think of the fate of sinners (S). 


-S 46 And he answered me and said: 
Things present (match) them of the present, 
Things future them of the future! 
47 For thou comest far short of being able to love my creation more than I! 
Thou, however, hast many times “ ranged thyself with ¥ the ungodly. * This must not be! * 
48, 49 But even on this account thou shalt be honourable before the Most High; Sens thou hast 
humbled thyself, as it becomes thee, ¥ and hast not assigned thyself a place’ among the righteous ; 
5° and so thou shalt receive the greater glory. * For” with many afflictions shall they be afflicted that 
51 inhabit the world in the last times, because they have walked in great pride. But do thou (rather) 
“think of thine own case?, and of them who are like thyself search out the glory. 
52 For for you 
is opened Paradise, 
planted the Tree of life; 
the future Age prepared, 
plenteousness made ready ; 


w-w te et ipsum proximasti [iniustis] =x 59 S (= py ovros): ZH numquam (= pymore) y-y &@ et non 
iudicasti te 2-2 so S (= ort): H propter quod (= dor) a-a % pro te intellege 





(e) viii. 46-62. In the reply that follows the angel lightly brushes aside the seer’s objection to the comparison of 
mankind to seed sown in the field, by reminding him that the simile suits the present corruptible order ; with the future 
it will be different. Moreover, God’s love of His creatures far exceeds that of any other being. A remarkable passage 
follows in which the seer’s self-identification with sinners is partly rebuked and partly commended. He is told not to 
range himself with the ungodly, but his humility in doing so is commended. Many shall be brought to ruin in the last 
times by the sin of pride. But let the seer contemplate the glory that awaits him with other righteous—the delights 
of Paradise, and the abolition of evil, death, and corruption. Let no more questions be asked as to the lost, who have 
deserved their fate, because they have defied the Most High, and scorned the benefits prepared for them. The con- 
clusion of this section, which follows in ix. 13-22, sets forth the almost total corruption of the world as due to man’s 
sin. Only a remnant of the sinful mass has been rescued with difficulty and by the grace of God. 

Here we have the apologia of orthodox Judaism as S conceived it. It is the best answer that can be furnished, 
from the orthodox standpoint, to meet the objections and difficulties that have been raised ; and with it the seer has, 
perforce to be content. But, at the best, his doubts and perplexities can only have been stilled, they cannot have been 
really satisfied, by such a reply. 

46. Things present ... future. Gunkel renders crisply: ‘ Heute den heutigen, einst den Einstigen!’ For the 
form of the sentence cf. vii. 25 (vacua vacuis et plena plenis). Hilg. renders: ra mapdvra trois mapovar kai ra peAdovra 
rois péAover; i.e. present things are like present people, &c. The angel brushes aside the seer’s objection (raised in 
v. 44) to the comparison of mankind to seed sown in the fields, by reminding him that both the comparison and the 
thing compared belonged to the present order; the future (and all that belongs to it) has standards of its own. Here, 
again, the dualism of present and future is marked. Cf. vii. 16. 

47. to love my creation. Cf. v. 33, note. 

50. in the last times. It should be remembered, however, that the conceptions of S and E regarding ‘the last 
times’ are very different. While S thinks of this period as an evil time, when a generation lives that is distinguished 
by overweening arrogance and pride, and upon which judgement will descend suddenly, according to E the last period 
is to bea time of felicity for a righteous generation (cf. vi. 26-28), while according to R the final period is the (temporary) 
Messianic one of 400 years (vil. 28-29). : a 

because they have walked in great pride. The emphasis laid by the author on the virtue of humility and the 
sin of pride is remarkable. The latter was a conspicuous and besetting fault of a section of the Pharisaic party in 
the first half of the first century (cf. Mark xii. 38f, Matt. xxiii. 5f.; cf. also for a more general reference Luke 
xiv. 7-11); and the present passage seems to be directed by the author against some of his contemporaries (end of 
first century A.D.). he } ; : 

51. of them who are like thyself, i.e. those whose destiny is like thine own—the righteous dead who in the inter- 
mediate state enjoy righteousness and peace, and who are to enjoy even greater glory after the Judgement. Here 
Salathiel is the subject. Contrast xiv. 9, where Ezra is the subject. : : ; ; a 

52. for you is opened Paradise. In vv. 52-54 the ‘ glory’ spoken of in v. 51 is unfolded in a series of explicit 
references detailing the happy accompaniments of the future life of the righteous in heaven. In accordance with 
a mode of representation common in apocalyptic literature these various sources of happiness and delight are declared 
to be already in existence, prepared beforehand and held in reserve for the future delectation of the righteous. The 
contemplation of these future joys is regarded as a source of perennial consolation to the faithful in their trials and 
tribulations on earth: cf. in the N.T. such passages as 1 Pet. i. 4 (‘an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, that 
fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you,’ &c.); Heb. xi. 16, &c. See further Volz, p. 124 f, ‘ : ; 

By ‘ Paradise’ here is meant the heavenly Paradise, which was shut up on account of Adam’s sin, and which will be 
opened after the last Judgement to receive the righteous and elect. See, further, the additional note in EA, p. 195. 

planted the Tree of life. The idealized ‘ Tree of Life’ is one of the striking features of the heavenly Paradise 
on which the apocalyptists love to dwell. Cf. vii. 123; Rev. ii. 7, xxii. 2; 1 En. xxivf. 


597 


IV EZRA 8. 52-63 


Ss a City builded, 
a Rest appointed ; 
» Good works established ?, 
© wisdom preconstituted ° ; 
93 The (evil) root is sealed up from you, 
infirmity from your path extinguished ; 
And Death is hidden, 
4 Hades fled away ¢; 
° Corruption forgotten °, 
sorrows passed away ; 
54 and in the end ‘the treasures of immortality are made manifest. ; ; 
55,56 Therefore ask no more concerning the multitude of them that perish ; for having received liberty 
they despised the Most High; 
scorned his Law, 
and £ forsook & his ways: 
57,58 Moreover "his saints» they have trodden under foot; and have said in their heart that there 
59 is no God—yea, though knowing full well that they must die. iTherefore asi the things aforesaid 
Jabide for you), so thirst and anguish -await them*. For the Most High willed not that men 
60 should come to destruction; but they—his creatures—have themselves defiled the Name of him 
that made them, and have proved themselves ungrateful to him who prepared !life for them 4. 
61, 62 Therefore my judgement is now nigh at hand; and this I have not made known unto all men, 
but only unto thee and to a few like thee. 


(6) THE SIGNS OF THE END REVIEWED AND APPLIED TO THE AUTHOR’S 
OWN TIMES (R) (E). 


(viii. 63-ix. 12.) 


R 63 Then I answered and said: Behold, O Lord, thou hast already shown me a great number of the 
signs which thou art about to do in the last times, but at what time thou hast not shown me. 


bP perfectaest bonitas ¢-¢ ¥% ante perfecta sapientia 4-4 Hinfernum fugit °° so %: Let corruptio in oblivionem, 
which joined with the previous clause infernum fugit has led to the rendering ‘hell and corruption are fled into forgetful- 
ness’(R.V.) ffs03: Lthesaurus immortalitatis 8-8 so h Ethiop. (= karehurov): S they made to cease (= katehvov) 
BD $0 B (= rovs ogtovs avrov): WH iustos eius (= rous Suxaovs avtov): so Ethiop. 4 s0 3 (cf. Ethiop.): & sicut 


enim I so S: LH vos suscipient k-k # quae parata sunt which prod, disguises a verb (= ? peAder Heb. ny) 





a City builded, i.e. the heavenly Jerusalem which will more than compensate for the loss of the earthly city. 
Apparently S did not contemplate a restoration or rebuilding of the earthly Jerusalem. See further, HA, p98 fi 

a Rest appointed. The ‘rest of God’ is the final sabbath-rest (caBBariopds, Heb. iv. 9) which awaits the people 
of God. 

Good works established (founded). Cf. Eph. ii. 10. 

wisdom preconstituted. Cf. 1 Cor. ii. 7. 

53. The (evil) root is sealed up from you. Cf. iii. 22, 

Death is hidden. For the abolition of death cf. Isa. xxv. 8 ;,2 En, lxv. 10; Rev. xxi. 14. 

Hades fled away. Cf. 2 Bar. xxi. 3; notice the personification of Hades, as in Rey. vi.8. For the juxtaposition 
of Death and Hades cf. Isa. xxviii. ES BI NCais Sey wos 1 aH), 

54. and in the end the treasures of immortality are made manifest. The sequence of thought-in vv. 53-54 is 
noticeable ; first the sources of sin are abolished, then its consequences (death, Hades, corruption, sorrows), and lastly 
the positive boons of the future life are revealed (the treasures of immortality). 

59. thirst and anguish. For the representation cf. Luke xvi. 24. 

62. to a few like thee, i.e. prophets (apocalyptists) like Salathiel or Ezra, 

(6) viii. 63-ix. 12. At this point the divine reply in the dialogue (of S) is interrupted by a section which has obvious 
affinities with the eschatological sections describing the signs of the approaching End, derived from the older source E 
(iv. 56-v. 13a, vi. 11-28). It has been inserted in its present position by R, who, as in vii. 26-44, has embodied 
other material summarized partly from S. The composite character of the section as thus described will appear from 
an examination of its contents. 

The seer begins by asking to be informed something as to the time of the End. He is told in reply to note care- 
fully that when a certain number of the predicted signs are past, that is the very time when the Most High will visit 
the world (ix. 2). A short enumeration of the Messianic “woes” follows—describing a time of physical, social, and 
political convulsions (ix. 3). This is particularly interesting here as it seems clear that R intends this description to 
apply to the times in which he himself is living (ix. 4-6). All who are able to escape by works or by faith shall see 
God’s salvation (i.e. the Messianic Age that precedes the End of the world) within the borders of the Holy Land 
which has been sanctified from the beginning (ix. 7, 8). The verses that follow (ix. 9-12) recall the tone of SF and 
have probably been derived in some way from that source by R. They describe the punishment and pains of those 
who have defied the Law and been unbelieving. Their punishment comes immediately after death, in accordance 


598 


IVE ZARA (9. 1-12 


R 9:1 Andhe answered me and said: Measure (the matter) carefully in thy mind, and when thou seest 
2 that ™a certain part™ of the predicted signs are past, then shalt thou understand that it is the very 
3 time when the Most High is about to visit the world which he has made. When in the world there | 
shall appear 
3 > quakings of places”, 
tumult of peoples, 
°schemings of nations °, 
P confusion of leaders ”, 
disquietude of princes, 
R (E) 4 then shalt thou understand that it is of these things the Most High has spoken since the days that 
5 were aforetime from the beginning. For just as 4 with respect to all that has happened in the world 4 
6 *the beginning is obscure (?), but the end (issue) manifest’, so also are the times of the Most High: 
the beginnings ‘are [visible]* tin portents and secret signs‘, and the end "in effects and marvels”. 
7 And every one that shall (then) be saved, and shall be able to escape on account oof his works or his 
8 faith ‘by which he has believed Y, “such shall survive ™ from the perils aforesaid, and shall see my 
9 salvation in my land, and within my borders which I have sanctified for myself eternally. Then 
shall they be amazed that now have abused my ways; they shall abide in the torments which they 
10 have spurned and despised. For *all who* failed to recognize me in their lifetime, ¥ although 
11] dealt bountifully with them’; and all who have defied my Law, while they yet had liberty, and, 
12 while place of repentance was still open to them, gave no heed but scorned (it) ; these must be 
brought to know after death by torment. 


11 @ eis nunc vitam_ m—m yeading pars quaedam (so % Ethiop.) n-n % motio locorum (= kiwyos toTwv) 
o-o ¥ gentium cogitationes (? vead coagitationes) p-p % ducum inconstantia (= nyepovey axaracracta) a-a © 
omne quod factum est in saeculo (casus Pendens) rr & corrupt: % the beginning is known and the end manifest : 
perhaps Greek had ev apaver . . . ev eppaver: see further EA, p. 202 s-s # manifesta: so S t-t X& in prodigiis 
et virtutibus = ev repact kar duvapece (Ovvapis = movdyn Job xi.6 LXX: see further EA, p. 203) u-u so Ethiop.: 
% in actu et in signis (reading onuacrors for Gavpaciors) v-v yeading in qua credidit w-w yeading is relinquetur 
x-x HF quotquot (= ovo) y-¥ so S$: & beneficia consecuti 





with the theology of S, whereas the older view is that punishment only comes completely after the resurrection; while 
it is partly effected by the destruction of the ungodly in the wars and tumults which precede the Messianic Age, and 
which the righteous survive. 
The inconsistency of the section, as a whole, with S can easily be shown (see EA, p. 200). The whole section is 
a compilation from the hand of R, who has drawn partly upon E (ix. 3, 7, 8), and partly upon S (ix. 9,12). It thus 
exhibits phenomena essentially the same as vil. 26-44. 
63. at what time. Contrast Acts i. 7. 


ix. 3. tumult of peoples. Cf. Isa. xvii. 13. 

4. then shalt thou understand ... these things... from the beginning. The author is conscious that the 
tradition he is citing is extremely old. The antiquity of one element in the eschatological tradition will, perhaps, 
account for its association with such names as Adam, Seth, Enoch, Noah—the heroic figures of the primaeval age. 
See RWS (ed. 2), p. 36. 

5-6. For just as...marvels. For text see crit. notes. The point of the saying seems to be that the portents of 
the last times can be detected and read beforehand by the initiated, though their true significance is missed by the 
world at large; just as the real significance of the obscure beginnings of things that develop into great events or issues 
in human life and history generally is only grasped at first by the discerning. 

6. in effects and marvels. Gunkel renders v.6: ‘so also are the times of the Most High: their beginning 
is in word (i.e. the prophetic word revealed to the apocalyptists referred to in v. 4) and portents, but their end in 
deeds and marvels’ (ai dpyai ev pavais kat év onueiors, kal 7) ovvredeta ev evepyeia kal Suvduer). He compares Justin Martyr, 
Apol. i. 12, where it is remarked that it is God’s property to announce beforehand what is to occur, and then to bring 
it to pass. For the text adopted by Gunkel cf. ZA, p. 203. d 

7. on account of his works or his faith, &c. BR here combines the statements of S regarding faith and works. 
Chi vies, Vil. 77- 

8. my salvation, i.e. the Messianic salvation. ; 

which I have sanctified for myself eternally. The Holy Land as sacrosanct—chosen by God—will be the 
scene of the Messianic salvation. Cf. xii. 13, 34, xiil. 48, 49; 2 Bar. xxix. 2, xl. 2. The idea of the specially privileged 
and sacrosanct character of the Holy Land lived on in various forms, even after the destruction of Jerusalem. Cf. 
Volz, p. 308 f., and see Charles’s note on 2 Bar. xxix. 2. ; 2 

12. while place of repentance was still open to them. For the phrase ‘place of repentance’ cf. Wisd. vil. 10, 
20; Heb. xii. 17. 

” after aeath by torment. Verses 9-12 represent the point of view of S, and refer to the state of the wicked 
immediately after death ; this representation is essentially inconsistent with the previous verses, which refer to Messianic 
blessedness. 


399 


14 


IV EZRA 9, 13-22 


(7) THE DIVINE REPLY CONCLUDED: FINAL JUSTIFICATION OF THE FEWNESS 
OF THE SAVED (S). 


(ix. 13-22.) 


13 So, then, be thou no longer curious as to how the ungodly shall be punished, but inquire (rather) 
how the righteous “shall be saved *—they to whom the world (belongs) and for whose sakes, also, the 
15 world has come into existence*. And I answered and said: I have already said, and say now, and 
16 shall say (it) again: There are more who perish than shall be saved, even as the flood is greater than 
a drop! 
17 And he answered me and said: 
As is the ground, so the sowings ; 
as are the flowers, so are the colours ; 
As is >the workman ?, so is the work; 
as is the husbandman, so is the threshing-floor— 
18 °For there was (a time) in the eternal ages when I prepared for those who now exist—before they 
had come into being—a world wherein they might dwell*; and then none gainsaid me—for none 
19 existed. But now they that have been created in this world—(a world) made ready with both an 
unfailing table and an enexplorable pasture—have become corrupt in their manners. 
20 Then I considered my world, and lo! it was destroyed ; 
and my earth, and lo! ‘it was in peril W— 
on account of °the tumults ° f of those who are (living) in it £. 
21 And I saw, and spared (some) £ with very great difficulty %, and saved me a grape out of a cluster, 
22 and a plant " out of a great forest ». Perish, then, the multitude which has been born in vain; but 
let my grape be preserved, and my plant, which with much labour I have perfected ! 


22 so Ar: but $ Ethiop. live (as often elsewhere) * H%+et quando: but other VSS. > b-b & opera 
(= epyaoia: Heb, YD: the latter = workman or work) °° so D3 of. Ethiop.: & quoniam tempus erat saeculi 
et tunc cum essem parans eis qui nunc, antequam fieret illis saeculum in quo inhabitarent a-d & erat peri- 
culi » ° reading coagitationes (for cogitationes) ; Cf ff of. Ethiop.: & quae in eo advenerunt 


8s & vix valde (= ravv poyis) bh so 3 Ethiop. (of. Ar’) = ah vans roddns: W de tribu multa (pvdns for avdns) 





(7) ix. 13-22. The first verse of this section forms the immediate continuation of viii.62. The seer had been assured 
that the Judgement was near at hand, and had been revealed only to him and a few like him. Now he is once again 
told not to concern himself with the fate of the ungodly, but to fix his attention, rather, on the salvation which the 
righteous attain (cf. viii. 55). This declaration is not, as Volkmar and, later, Gunkel have supposed, the enunciation 
of a new subject for discussion in the visions that follow, but merely a recapitulation of what has already been discussed 
in the former part of the present vision. The seer’s reply is also a repetition of former complaints about the large 
number of those who perish (ix. 15-16). The final form of the divine reply follows (vv. 17-22). The evil of the 
present world is due to man’s sin. There was a time—before the generation of men had been created—when none 
defied the Most High ; but now those who have been placed in the world, which has been provided and furnished for 
their needs, have degenerated and become corrupt. In order that the purpose of Creation shall not be entirely 
frustrated a few have been spared—‘a grape out of a cluster, a plant out of a great forest?: ‘Perish, then, the 
multitude which has been born in vain ; but let my grape be preserved, and my plant, which with much labour I have 
perfected.’ 

It should be noted that the preservation of a small remnant from the corrupt mass is due entirely to special efforts 
on God’s part. In other words, it must be attributed entirely to the divine grace. 

13. be thou no longer curious... the righteous shall be saved. Cf. 2 Bar. xlviii. 48. 

15. more who perish than shall be saved. Cf. vii. 47. 

16. as the flood is greater than a drop. Cf. iv. 48-50. 

17. as are the flowers, so are the colours. Brilliant colouring betokens a beautiful flower. 

18. For there was (a time) in the eternal ages... they might dwell. So & (cf. crit. note). The Latin 
(apparently misreading the Greek, see EA, p. 207) renders: guontam tempus erat saeculi et tunc cum essem parans 
eis gui nunc, anteguam fieret illis saeculum in guo tnhabitarent = ‘For there was a time in the world, even then 
when I was preparing for them that now live, before the world was made for them to dwell in; [and then,’ &c.]; 
R.V. The Latin misses and obscures the point. To say that there was a time in the history of the world—which 
had been created for man’s sake—when sin and rebellion did not exist, viz. before man had appeared on the scene, 
adds point to the divine indictment of the human race that follows: but to say (as the Latin text says) that before 
the world was made man did not exist, and therefore could not sin, is banal. The Ethiop. agrees essentially with the 
Syr. (cf. Violet); but the original Greek text appears to have been in some disorder in the MSS. used by the 
Latin and Ethiop. 

19. (a world) made ready with both an unfailing table and an unexplorable pasture. The reference is to 
Paradise and its marvellous fruits (‘an unfailing table’) which its trees bear without cessation. The banquet which 
the righteous are to enjoy in the future world is often referred to (sometimes also in Messianic Passages): cf. Rev. ii. 7 
(‘hidden manna’) and see Bousset, R/*, p. 327: the Greek of the phrase ‘an unexplorable (= mysterious) pasture’ = 
va (Av Serer (Volk.). The Versions read vopoy, ‘law’, for voudy, ‘pasture’ (or? vouny): hence ‘ unsearchable 
aw o Vede 


600 


S 


23 


EVP EAI. 9) 23-97 


VI. ix. 23-25. CONCLUSION OF THE VISION (Sy 
But if +thou wilt separate thyselfi yet seven more days—thou shalt not, however, fast in them 
b) b 


24 but shalt go into a field of flowers, where no house has been built, and e: i 
5 ‘ ‘ at only jof the fr f. 
25 fieldi; and thou shalt taste no flesh and drink no wine, but (eat) only the i ae ees ce 


26 


Most High continually, then I will come and talk with thee. 


THE FOURTH VISION. 
(ix. 26—x. 59.) 
I. ix. 26-28. INTRODUCTION (S). 


So I went, as he commanded me, into the field which is called * Ardat *, and there I sat among 


27 the flowers, and did eat of the herbs of the field; !and the eating thereof satisfied me}. And it 


i-i so S$: & [si] intermittas i so Ethiop. & de floribus campi K-k so &@ (S**); = Ar? 

. ZF pi sod (S**); = Ar.2(2); uv, 7 Ad 
Ardad, Ardas, Ardaf: 5 Ethiop. Arpad (cf. 2 Kings xviit. 34); Ar Araab or Araat; Arm. Aaa 1-1 Ler 
facta est esca earum mihi in saturitatem 


_ ix, 23-25. This short section forms the conclusion of the long third vision and the transition to the fourth. The seer 
is bidden to wait another seven days, when a further revelation shall be vouchsafed to him. He is, however expressl 
told not to fast—as he had done in preparation for former visions—but to go into a field of flowers and eat Gale 
flowers (?) or herbs of the field; he is, moreover, to abstain from tasting flesh and wine, and is bidden to pray 
continually. The field is to be destitute of any building. As the following vision makes clear, this locality is to be 
the scene of a vision of the Heavenly Jerusalem. The direction as to eating only of the produce of the field is 
remarkable. What is its significance? It is clearly not to be regarded as on a par with the strict fast, from which it 
is expressly distinguished. Moreover, in the introduction to the third vision (vi. 35) the seer says that he fasted seven 
days in order to complete the three weeks of fasting that had been commanded him (i.e. a week of fasting before each 
of the first three visions). Thus this form of preparation had reached its climax at the beginning of the third vision 
and it is curious to note that no further direct mention of fasting is met with in the remaining chapters of the book 
(x-xiv), though contexts occur in which such might have been expected (cf. xi. 1, xiii. 1, xiv. 1).! 

Is, then, the direction as to eating herbs or flowers here to be regarded as a substitute for fasting proper—as 
a form of half-fasting? This is possible, as abstinence from flesh and wine is decidedly in the direction of a mild 
asceticism. But it may be argued that more probably what is intended is rather in the nature of an antithesis to strict 
fasting. It should be remembered that the destruction of the Holy City—and, above all, of the Temple—in a. D. 70 
gave rise to a widespread ascetic movement among the Jewish people who survived, especially in Palestine. Man 
gave expression to their grief in severe and regular forms of fasting. It is this situation which is contemplated here. 
The seer is about to receive a vision in which grief at the desolation—bitter as it is—of the earthly Sion is to be 
transcended by a vision of the heavenly City. He is bidden, therefore, not to fast, but, in solitude, and far from 
human habitation and proximity, to prepare himself by partaking of the simplest food of nature, and by prayer, for 
the coming revelation. The food most appropriate in the circumstances would be that of the primaeval age and the 
age of man’s innocence. See further A, p. 209 f. 

24. thou shalt taste no flesh . . . no wine, but (eat) only the fruit, i.e. eat only what grows in the field. So 
Daniel and his companions ate only vegetable food, and drank water rather than suffer defilement; cf. 2 Macc. v. 27. 

ix. 26—-x. 59. THE FOURTH VISION. The following vision seems to have been preserved largely without interpola- 
tion, and as it was composed by the author of S, the pen of the Redactor (R) only coming into evidence in one or two 
places and in the transitional verses at the end (x. 58-59). The composition is even and flowing, and moves in an easy 
logical sequence. The seer proceeds, as he has been commanded, to a field which bears the mysterious name of 
‘Ardat’, and there lives on herbs for seven days (ix. 26-28). Then he addresses God, giving utterance to the thoughts 
that have arisen within him. Israel had been entrusted with the divine Law—it had been sown in their hearts—but 
they had failed to keep it. The vessel that received it was doomed to perish because of sin, while the Law remained 
‘in its honour’, imperishable (ix. 29-37). This speech is interrupted by a vision of a woman in distress, who is 
mourning the death of an only son—a son who, born after thirty years of sterility, had died on the very morning of 
his wedding. The seer, therefore, by way of consclation, admonishes her that her loss is small compared with the 
disasters that have befallen the chosen people as a whole, and more especially the crowning disaster of the destruction 
of Sion (ix. 38-x. 24). Then suddenly the scene changes: the woman vanishes, and in her place appears a great and 
splendid city—the heavenly Sion (x. 25-28). The section closes with an account of the intervention of the angel (Uriel) 
and the explanation of the vision given by him to the seer (x. 29-57, followed by the conclusion x. 58-59). 

The whole section thus falls into the following divisions :— 
i. Introduction (1x. 26-28) ; 
ii. Zhe abiding glory of the Law and Israel: a contrast (ix. 29-37) ; 
iii. Zhe vision of the Disconsolate Woman (ix. 38-x. 24). 

With this vision, which transports him into the heavenly world, the Apocalypse of Salathiel doubtless ended. 
The visions that follow, as we shall see, belong to other sources. Some fragments of the work of S are embedded in 
these later visions (xii. 40-48 and xiv. 28-35) ; these will be discussed later in connexion with their present contexts. 

ix. 26-28. The mysterious locality which is described as ‘ the field which is called Ardat’, whither the seer went, in 
accordance with the divine command, and meditated for seven days, living on ‘ the herbs of the field,’ has been the 


subject of much debate. The view that the name means ‘the wilderness of Judah’ (Liicke) or (as A7vdahk = TINY, 














1 This fact affords a strong confirmation of the correctness of the critical analysis which separates these chapters 


from the Salathiel-Apocalypse. 
60T 


MN 


— 


IV EZRA 9. 28-37 


28 came to pass after seven days, as I lay upon the grass, that my heart was again troubled as before. 
Then ™I opened my mouth™, and began to address the Most High. 


II, ix. 29-37. THE ABIDING GLORY OF THE LAW, AND ISRAEL: A CONTRAST (S). 


29 And I said: »O Lord”, thou didst verily reveal thyself unto our fathers ° in the wilderness? when 
they went forth out of Egypt, and when they walked through the untrodden and unfruitful wilder- 
30 ness; and thou didst say: 
O Israel, hear thou me; 
O seed of Jacob, attend unto my words! 
31 + For, behold, I sow my Law in you, and it shall bring forth fruit in you, and ye shall be glorified 
in it for ever. 
32 But our fathers, who received the Law, observed it not, and the statutes they did not keep, and yet 
33 the fruit of the Law did not perish, nor could it—because it was thine; but they who received it 
34 perished, because they kept not that which had been sown inthem. Now, it is a general rule 4 that, 
when the ground has received seed, or the sea a ship, or any other vessel food or drink,* and when 
it happens that what is sown’, or * what is launched , or the things that have been taken in come to 
35 an end,—these come to an end, while the receptacles remain: but with us it has not been so. 
36 We who have received the Law and sinned must perish, together with our heart, which has taken 
37 it in: the Law, however, perishes not, but abides in its glory. 


mm so Ethiop. Ar+: Hapertum est os meum: soS Ar. %™ so: but S Ethiop. O Lord my Lord (= Acomora kupte) 


°#+in nobis (prod. a gloss): other VSS.> ? S+of Sinai 4 = Sand this is the rule (Hed. bban mn): HL et ecce 
consuetudo 'tsoH: S> *&8H quod missumest *t so $Ar1 Arm. U& et respexi oculismeis *%™ reading adii- 





‘ desert’) is a symbolical name for the Holy Land generally, which might -have been represented at the end of the first 
century A.D, as a veritable wilderness to the Jews (Volkmar), may be at once dismissed. More plausible is the 
suggestion put forward by Mr. Rendel Harris (Zhe Rest of the Words of Baruch (Cambridge, 1889], pp. 35-39) that the 
locality intended is the neighbourhood of Abraham’s oak, near Hebron. This would be a highly suitable place for a divine 
revelation ; and, moreover, Hebron is mentioned in 2 Baruch as one of the seats of prophetic inspiration (xlvii. 1). 
Prof. Harris concludes that the scene of the fifth vision in 4 Ezra (ch. xi) is Hebron, and that this is identical with 
the scene of the fourth vision, i. e. ‘the field of Ardat’. But in this view no account has been taken of the different sources 
which appear in these chapters; the connexion of the scene of the two visions is a purely artificial one, and is due to 
the compiler. Nor is it at all certain that the ‘oak’ mentioned in 4 Ezra xiv. 1 as the place where Ezra received the 
revelation is ‘ Abraham’s oak’, as Prof. Harris supposes. It may have been some well-known tree in Jerusalem (see 
notes ad oc.). 

Thus the attempt to locate ‘the field of Ardat’ at Hebron cannot be regarded as successful. Whatever may be 
the true explanation of the name ‘ Ardat’, it seems clear that its significance must be mainly of a symbolical character. 
The repeated statement that the mysterious place was one ‘where no house has been built’ (ix. 24, x. 51) not only 
excludes the actual site of the ruined earthly Jerusalem, but also points to a place which was still untouched by human 
hand, and so fit to be the spot where the heavenly city could (temporarily) rest. Presumably the reader was expected 
to think of this locality as in the immediate neighbourhood of Babylon, where Salathiel is represented as residing at 
the beginning of the Apocalypse (4 Ezra iii. 1). 

One slight indication (cf. x. 58) suggests that the time when this revelation took place was during the day, and 
not by night, as is the case with the dream-visions. See further EA, p. 212f. 

ix. 29-37. After seven days’ meditation in ‘ Ardat’ the seer gives characteristic expression once again to the thoughts 
which have agitated his heart. This takes the form of a soliloquy on the relation of Israel to the Law. At the 
Exodus from Egypt—when Israel became a nation—God had sown the Law in the heart of His people, with the 
promise : ‘It shall bring forth fruit in you, and ye shall be glorified in it for ever’ (ix. 31). But the fathers observed it 
not; yet ‘the fruit of the Law did not perish ’—it could not—because it was essentially divine. But ‘they who 
received it perished, because they kept not that which had been sown in them’. The law that obtains in the natural 
world is that the receptacles remain after that which they have received has passed away—for instance, the ground 
remains after the:seed that has been sown in it has sprung up and been gathered, the sea remains after the ship 
that has been launched in it has come to an end, and so on. But with Israel it is different. For ‘we who have 
received the Law and sinned must perish, together with our heart, which has taken it in: the Law, however, perishes 
not, but abides in its glory’. 

_ The application of the moral remains. The divine element is eternal—the corruptible vessel that receives it 
perishes. Even so the eternal reality which was partially and imperfectly expressed by the earthly Jerusalem remains ; 
but the vessel that mediated it has perished. The earthly vessel (i.e. the earthly Jerusalem) has been destroyed—it has 
perished : how foolish and perverse to look for its revival! Hope should rather be fixed on the eternal City which 
exists—and has always existed—in the incorruptible world, and which is to be enjoyed by those who pass into the 
blessed immortal life of the age that is tocome. The confirmation of the truth of these hopes—and the answer to 
any lingering doubts that may remain—is the burden of the vision that follows (ix. 38f.). 

29. thoudidst verily reveal thyself. The reference is to such passages as Ex, xix. 9, xxiv. Io, &c. 

when they went forth out of Egypt. Cf. Judges xi. 16. 

31. For, behold, I sow my Law in you... in it for ever. Thisis the author’s paraphrase of the O.T. description 
of the relation set up between God and Israel by Israel’s acceptance of the Law, and entry into the covenant-relation 
with God. He reads into the naive O. T. promises of temporal reward his own transcendental views, and understands 
the glory promised to Israel to mean the unfading glory of the eternal and incorruptible heavenly world. For asimilar 
heightening of O. T. language cf. vii. 129, where Deut. xxx. 19 is cited (‘ Choose thee life’, &c., i.e. eternal life). 

37. the Law, however, &c. The Law does not perish because it comes from heaven: it is spiritual (wvevpatikés, 


602 


IV EZRA 9, 38-10. 9 


III. ix. 38-x.24. THE VISION OF THE DISCONSOLATE WomaN (S). 


5: 38 ge when I spake thus in my heart *T lifted up my eyes *, and saw a woman upon the right ; and 
o! she was mourning and weeping with a loud voice, and was much grieved in mind, and her clothes 
39 were rent and there were ashes upon her head. Then I dismissed my thoughts in which I had been 
40 preoccupied, and turned to her and said: Wherefore weepest thou? And why art thou grieved in 
41 thy mind? And she said unto me: Suffer me, my lord, to indulge my sorrow and “continue my 
grief, for I am embittered in soul and deeply afflicted. 
42 And I said unto her: What has befallen thee? tell me. 
43 She said unto me: I, thy servant, was barren, and bore no child, though I had a husband thirty 
44 years. Both hourly and daily during these thirty years I besought the Most High night and day. 
45 And it came to pass after thirty years 
God heard thy handmaid 
and looked upon my affliction ; 
He considered my distress, 
and gave me a son. 
And I rejoiced in him greatly, I and my husband and Yall my fellow townsfolk ’, and we gave great 
46, 47 glory unto “the Mighty One’. And I reared him with great travail. So when he was grown up, 
I came to take * him * a wife, and made ‘a feast day’. 
10 x And it came to pass when my son entered into his wedding chamber, he fell down and died. 
2 Then *I removed the lights’, and all my fellow townsfolk rose up to comfort me; but I remained) 4) 
3 quiet *until the night of the next day*. >And it came to pass when they were all quiet (and | 
desisted) from consoling, as I remained quiet”, I rose up by night, and fled, and came to this field, ~ 
4 as thou seest. And I purpose “never again® to return to the city, but here to stay and neither eat 
5 nor drink, but continually to mourn and to fast till I die. Then I left the thoughts in which I was 
6 still occupied, and answered her in anger, and said: O thou above all other women most foolish! 
7 Seest thou not our mourning,and what has befallen us? How Sion, the mother of us all, is in great 
8 grief and deep affliction? ‘It is right now to mourn 4, seeing that we all mourn, and to grieve, seeing 
9 that we are all grief-stricken ; thou, however, art grief-stricken for one son®. But ask the earth, and 


ciamdolere Y~-Y so S (Zt. all the sons of my town) E¢hiop. Ar Ar2: Homnescivesmei W-¥ % Fortem (= roy 
to Xupoyv = 5x7 in LXX) xX yeading ei y-y & diem epuli: S+and great rejoicing 2-8 of, & (ist Pers. 
sing.) : & evertimus omnes lumina (everti = ? caBethov = Heb. DN) a-a so Ethiop. © usque in alium diem usque 
in noctem b-b % et factum est cum omnes quievissent ut me consolarentur ut quiescerem (ov¢ginal Heb. text 
perhaps was: OM) NW Hd DMD DI Dw ND ONIN: see EA, p. 221)  — &? so S (= pyeert); Gf. Ar 
Ar’; & iam non (=? pn apre) 4-4 59 3 Ar) = & (Violet): lugere validissimum est nunc (B/ lugete validissime 
[ead of v. 7). Et nunc) @ $+ but we the whole world for our mother 

Rom. vii. 14): cf. also 2 Cor. iii. 7f. [With vv. 36, 37 cf. 2 Bar. xiv. 19: ‘And now I see that as for the world 
which was made on account of us, lo! it abides, but we, on account of whom it was made, depart.’] 

ix. 38-x. 24. We now reach the final sections of the Salathiel-Apocalypse. It is altogether fitting that the close of 
the (Salathiel) book should contain a revelation of the realities of the future world where, according to the theology of 
S, the felicity and blessedness of the righteous can alone be consummated ; and it accords with what would be 
expected that this revelation should be concerned with that part of the heavenly realities (viz. the heavenly City) 
whose earthly counterpart (viz. Jerusalem), in its humiliation and ruin, had formed the starting-point of the debates 
of the Apocalypse (cf. iii. 27). It has already been declared (cf, viii. 52) that the heavenly Sion is one of the things 
which belong to the eternal order, and which should be made freely available for the enjoyment of the righteous after 
the final Judgement. It is this heavenly reality which is now manifested to the seer. An examination of this section 
and the following makes it clear that the disconsolate woman who appears to the seer, mourning the death of her 
only son, must be the heavenly Sion: she cannot be identified with the earthly Jerusalem, as Kabisch justly points 
out, without making the-story meaningless. See further ZA, p. 216f. 

38. ashes upon her head. A sign of grief and humiliation. Cf. 2 Sam. xiii. 19; Isa, Ixi. 3. 

45. we gave great glory. To ‘give God the glory’ (cf. Luke xvii. 18) for boons bestowed was an all-important 
religious duty. The fact that this duty was religiously performed seems to be emphasized here in order to exclude the 
possibility of a suggestion that the calamity which followed was a judgement of God (so Gunkel). 

47. afeast day. Cf. Matt. xxii. 2; Luke xiv. 16. 

x. I. and died. With the death of the bridegroom here cp. the story in Tobit (esp. ch. viii). Kabisch thinks this 
points to a knowledge of the Book of Tobit by S; but this does not necessarily follow. zi 

2. Lremoved the lights. For the wedding lights cf. Matt. xxv. 7. Note the violent contrast between the brilliant 
illumination of the wedding-feast and the sudden darkness following on the death of the bridegroom. 

to comfort me. To condole with mourners as well as to assist in the burial of the dead is a part of the practice 


of benevolence. ‘ : : , 
I remained quiet. A mother’s grief would normally show itself in loud lamentation; but here she remains 


dumb. 
7. Sion, the mother of us all. Cf. Gal. iv. 26 (but there of the heavenly Jerusalem). ? on 
8. It is right now to mourn, &c. The point of the passage is that the nation is now plunged into calamities, and 


therefore all may now properly mourn. 





603 


IV EZRA 10, 9-22 


she shall tell thee, that it is she who ought to mourn‘ the fall of so many‘ that have sprung into 
to being upon her. 8 Yea, from the beginning all who have been born, and others who are to come— 
11 lo! they go% almost all into perdition, and the multitude of them comes to destruction. Who, then, 
should mourn the more? Ought not she that has lost so great a multitude? or thou who grievest 
12 but for one? But if thou sayest to me: My lamentation is not like the earth’s, for I have lost the 
fruit of my womb 
which I bare with pains 
and brought forth with sorrows— aca 
13 "but as regards the earth, (it is) according to the course of nature*; the multitude present in it is 
14 gone as it came: then I say to thee: Just as thou hast borne (offspring) with sorrow, even so also 
the earth has borne (given) her fruit, namely man, from the beginning unto him that made her. 
15 Now, therefore, keep thy sorrow within, 
and bear gallantly the misfortunes that have befallen thee. zie 
/16 For if thou wilt acknowledge God’s decree to be just, thou shalt receive thy son again in (due) time, 


17, 18 and shalt be praised among women. Therefore go into the city to thy husband. And she said unto 


19 me: ?I will not do so?: I will not enter the city, but here will I die. Sol proceeded to speak further 
20 unto her, and said: } No, woman! no, woman!i do not do SO; 
but * suffer thyself to be prevailed upon by reason of Sion’s misfortunes , 
be consoled by reason of Jerusalem’s sorrow. 
21 For thou seest how 
our sanctuary is laid waste, 
‘our altar! thrown down; 
our Temple destroyed, 
our harp laid low; 
22 our song is silenced, 
our rejoicing ceased ; 
the light of our lamp is extinguished, 
the ark of our covenant spoiled ; 
our holy things are defiled, 
the name that is called upon us ™is profaned ™; 


f reading tantorum casum (47SS. > casum): so Ethiop. Ar3 8-s & (Violet) et ex ipso initio omnes nati et 
alii venientes, ecce, S-c.; of. S hh & terra autem secundum viam terrae 11 so 3 (ff. Ethiop. Ar): 
% non faciam Fi so 3: other VSS. > k-k so $ Arm.: & consenti persuaderi quid enim casus Sion 
bt ee m™ 50 3 (f. Ethiop. Ar+): & paene profanatum est 





14. even so also the earth. The idea is peculiar and the parallel intended not quite clear. Man is earth’s highest 
production ; but this her choicest fruit is produced only to be gathered in by the Creator (i.e. ? by the death of man) ; 
and the constant loss of her best, in this way, involves the earth in ceaseless anguish. Such seems to be the general 
meaning intended. 

16. thou wilt acknowledge . . . to be just. Cf. Ps. of Sol. viii. 7, 27, 31; il. 16; Luke vii. 29, 35. To acknow- 
ledge the justice of God’s decree is equivalent to pious submission to His will. 

thou shalt receive thy son again in (due) time, i.e. either the dead son shall be restored to life, or another 
son shall be given to her in his stead, and so she shall win honour among women. It is possible that, as Gunkel 
suggests, the sequel of the original story set forth the restoration of the dead son to life ; but it is significant that the 
writer here says nothing of this. He stops short at relating the son’s death. 

21. our Temple, i.e. the Temple-building proper, exclusive of the outer court. 

our harp laid low: ‘harp’ here probably symbolizes the service of praise which has ceased in the ruined 
sanctuary. 

22. our rejoicing ceased. Cf. Isa. xxiv. 8, 9. 

the light of our lamp . . . extinguished. The extinction of the continual lamp marked the cessation of the 
functions of the Temple-services and sacrifices; cf. I Macc. iv. 36-59. 

the ark of our covenant spoiled. This detail, of course, fits the position of the historical Salathiel (in 
the Exile), and can only be referred in strictness to the first Temple. The ark of the Covenant disappeared at the 
destruction of Solomon’s Temple, and nothing took its place in the later Temples. Two divergent traditions are met 
with as to its fate; according to the one (which our text follows) the ark was carried off with the other holy vessels 
into Babylonia (cf. 2 Chron. xxxvi. 10); according to the other, the ark was concealed within the Temple; cf. 2 Macc. 
il. 5-8 and 2 Bar. vi. What is the significance of the mention of the spoiling of the ark in our passage? Perhaps the 
writer intended to suggest that it was vain to look for the restoration of the ark and other holy things in the Messianic 
Age in the last times. In other words, there would be no Messianic Age, and no restoration of the Temple on earth. 
The other form of the legend which makes the ark to be concealed within the Temple precincts seems to be governed 
by the idea that it would be brought to light again in the Messianic Age. It is significant that these two contradictory 
ideas are represented in 4 Ezra and 2 Baruch respectively. 

our holy things are defiled, i.e. the holy vessels which fell into the hands of the heathen. The writer, though 
the reference is directly to the first Temple, is thinking of the similar events connected with the destruction in a.D. 70 
(e.g. the great candelabrum fell into the hands of T itus). 

the name that is called upon us, i.e. the sacred name that has been bestowed upon us by God, the name of 
Israel; cf. Gen. xxxii. 28. 


604 


iV er ZA LOY 32-20 


our nobles are dishonoured, 
our priests burnt, 
our Levites gone into captivity ; 
our virgins are defiled, 
our wives ravished ; 
"our righteous are seized, 
[our saints scattered, ] 
our children are cast out®, 
our youths are enslaved, 
our heroes made powerless: 
23. and, what is more than all— 
Sion’s seal °is now sealed up dishonoured °, 
and given up into the hands of them that hate us. 
24 Do thou, then, shake off thy great grief, 
abandon thy much sorrow, 
That the Mighty One may again forgive thee, 
and the Most High give thee rest, 
a respite from thy troubles! 


IV. x. 25-28. SIon’s GLORY: THE VISION OF THE HEAVENLY JERUSALEM (S). 


25 And it came to pass, while I was talking to her, lo! 
her countenance on a sudden shone exceedingly, 
and P her aspect became brilliant as lightning , 
so that I was too much afraid 4(to approach her, and my heart was terrified exceedingly) 4: and 
26 while I was debating what this might mean, she suddenly uttered a loud and fearful cry, so that the 
27 earth shook at the noise. And when I looked, lo! the woman was no longer visible to me, * but 
there was a City builded", and a place showed itself of large foundations. Then I was afraid, and 
28 cried with a loud voice, and said: Where is Uriel, the angel who came unto me at the first? For he 
it is who has caused me to fall into this great bewilderment ; 
and so *my prayer ® is made futile, 
and my request disappointed ! 


V. x. 29-57. INTERPRETATION OF THE VISION (S). 
2g And while I was speaking thus, lo! the angel came to me, who had come to me at the first ; and 
n-n Aj] VSS. give only two clauses here, except Ar which has three; clauses 1 and 3 are attested by & Ethiop. Ars: 


2 : ‘ E cocaine 
% (in an emended form) supports clause 2 and omits clause 3; see for details EA, p. 2281. o-o @& resignata 
oe gloria sua nunc p-p & species coruscus fiebat vultus eius 9-4 so 3 Ethiop. Ar): but & ad eam 
rr sq Oriental VSS.: & sed civitas aedificabatur s-8 % finis meus=% Lthiop. Ar. (cf R.V. mine end): 


prob., as Violet suggests, there was a corruption in the Hebr. text here, yndan being misread NIK 


our priests burnt. An allusion to the destruction of the Temple by fire. Josephus (Wars, vi. 5. 1) specially 
mentions two priests of eminence, who threw themselves into the fire ‘and were burnt together with the holy house’. 

23. Sion’s seal is now sealed up dishonoured, lit. ‘is sealed up away from its honour’, i.e. is robbed of its 
honour. The ‘seal of Sion’ is doubtless a symbolical representation of Sion’s independence. A more specific 
allusion to the issue of a national coinage may be intended; see EA, p. 229. In vv. 22-23 the utter ruin of Israel is 

in detail. (3 | 
tones aecin forgive thee. The death of the son manifested God’s wrath; therefore divine forgiveness was 
Bs iseias 

ene oe aspect became brilliant as lightning. This recalls the representation of the heavenly bride (= the 
heavenly Jerusalem) of Rev. xxi. 9; cf. Rev. xu. 1. 

27. of large foundations. Cf. Rev. xxi. 19 i ; ; saree ee . 

28, my prayer is made futile, Kc. The seer hastily concludes that the revelation regarding Israel’s future glory— 
how it was to be attained (cf. ix. 29-37)—which he had been expecting: and for which he was longing so ardently, has 
been denied him, because the vision he has seen has simply left him in a state of bewilderment and terror, while in 
fact it is but the prelude to a revelation all the more complete. This, as Gunkel remarks, is a fine touch. ; 

The state of terror into which the seer falls at the ee ee ese ee the woman is a feature derived, 

tual experience of such ecstatics; cf. similar features in fermas. ae 

re Be aac tater precanion of the vision by the angel follows. The seer is told that the transfigured woman is Sion. 
Which Sion? the heavenly or the earthly? The most natural interpretation is that the heavenly Sion is represented 
by the woman. In this case her son must stand for the earthly Jerusalem, and the son’s death for the downfall and 
ruin of the earthly city. It is difficult on any other interpretation to understand the significance e the son in the 
allegorical interpretation. If the woman stands for the earthly Sion, whom does her son represent ? porns to 
Welihausen (Skizzen, vi, p. 219 n.), the Messiah! But how can the Messiah have been pictured as being born w = 
the Temple was founded by Solomon, and dying when the Temple was destroyed? The true explanation seems to be 


605 


Sie20 


31 


32 
33> 34 


35) 
36 


39 


40, 41 
42 
43 


IV EZRA 10. 30-45 


when he saw that I lay on the ground as one dead, ‘my understanding being confused‘, he grasped 
my right hand and strengthened me, and set me on my feet, and said to me: 
What aileth thee? 
Why art thou so disquieted ? 
Wherefore is thy understanding confused, 
and the thoughts of thy heart? 
And I said: Because thou hast forsaken me! Yet I did as thou commandedst, and went into the 
field, and lo! I have seen—"and yet see*—that which I am unable to express. 
And he said unto me: Stand up like a man, and I will advise thee. Then said I: Speak on, my 
lord; only forsake me not, lest I die to no purpose. 
For I have seen what I did not know Yand heard’ what I do not understand. 
Or is my mind deceived, 
and my soul in a dream? 
Now, therefore, I beseech thee to show thy servant concerning this perplexity ! 
And he answered me, and said: 
Hear me, and I will teach thee, 
and tell thee concerning the things thou art afraid of; 
for the Most High hath revealed many secrets unto thee. 
For he hath seen “ thy righteous conduct ¥, 
how thou hast sorrowed continually for thy people, 
and mourned greatly on account of Sion— 
*The matter, therefore, is as follows.* The woman who appeared to thee a little while ago, whom 
¥thou sawest¥ mourning and begannest to comfort: whereas now thou seest no likeness of a woman 
any more, but ”a builded City * hath appeared unto thee: and whereas she told thee of the misfortune 


44 of her son—this is the interpretation: This woman, whom thou sawest, is Sion, whom thou now 
45 beholdest as a builded City ; And whereas she said unto thee that she was barren thirty years: the 


reason is that there were * three thousand years in the world before any offering was offered ” in (it) 


** et intellectus meus alienatus erat (=? kav o vous pou nAdorpta@bn) 8 Let video; so S$: but Ethiop. Ar) Arm. > 
VY reading audivi (C M) = £thiop. Ar.’ Ar2 Arm.: & I hear = audio (S A) ww # rectam viam tuam: & (cf. 
Ethiop.) = rnv evdvtnta cov *"* so XS (= ovros ovy eatw o Noyos: IN AN): of. Ethiop. Arm.: & hic ergo 
intellectus visionis yy S> *2 so Ortental VSS.: %& civitas aedificari (2. V. a city in building) a8 so all 
the Versions except the Arm. (which has many years) and & (best MS S.) anni... tres b-b yeading in eo (for in 





oe the ee represents the heavenly, and the son the earthly Sion. For a full discussion of alternative views see 
» P- 2331. 

The original meaning of the vision has been obscured by two slight alterations in the text from the pen of R ; in 
v. 45, ‘in it’ (= ev avira, i.e. in the world) has been changed to ‘in her’ (= ev atry, i.e. in Sion), thus producing the 
meaning that for 3,000 years no oblation was offered in Sion, i.e. the earthly Sion; and in v. 46 ‘ David’ has been 
altered into ‘Solomon’. In this way R secures the interpretation that the woman = the earthly Sion; the son = the 
Temple (the son’s birth = the founding of the Temple by Solomon), &c.; while the transfiguration of the woman is 
a prophecy of the future glory of the earthly Sion. But this destroys the original significance of the vision, and cannot 
be harmonized with the theology of S. See further EA » 40C. Cit. 

29-30. and when he saw that I lay on the ground as one dead. For the representation cf. Dan. viii. 17, 18+ 
65 Gh, UGG IRCWE Ie 7A Bae, lias 

and set me on my feet. Cf. v.15; vi. US GAs 

32. and yet see. The vision of the City is still before the seer’s eyes. 

that which Iam unable to express. Cf. 2 Cor. xii. 4 (also of an ecstatic experience). 

33. Stand up likea man. Cf. v.15; vi. 13, 17. 

45. three thousand years. For text see crit. note. Gunkel adopts the Latin ‘three years’, and (with Wellhausen) 
explains thus: the three years = the three years that elapsed after Solomon became king and before he began to build 
the Temple (cf. 1 Kings v1. I with vi. 38) ; and these three years mystically = three millennial years, 1.€. 3,000 years. 
But according to v. 45 in the Latin the three years = thirty years, i.e. thirty generations (?); thus it would have 
a mystical meaning (3,000), a literal (three), and again a literal (= thirty generations) meaning, all in juxtaposition. 
It is better to adopt the reading of the Versions (3,c00), and to regard this as an actual reckoning (see next verse). 

before any offering was offered in it (i.e. in the world). The Lat. has guando non erat in ca adhuc oblatio 
oblata = ‘when as yet there was no offering offered in her’ (i.e. in Sion; so all the other Versions). By the slight 
emendation suggested by Kabisch (viz. to read iz eo [ev avr@] for im ea) the difficulty of the text-reading can be 
removed. Jz her can only mean in the czvztas aedificata, which for 3,000 years was without a son, i.e. the heavenly 
Sion; but the statement that no offering was as yet offered in the heavenly Sion is meaningless. The unfruitfulness 
of the heavenly Sion consisted rather in the fact that for 3,000 years there was on the earth—in this aeon—no corre- 
sponding reality, no aedificata civitas where the cultus of the sacrificial worship was established. (So Kabisch.) 

It is true altars had been erected and sacrifices offered before the time of David (e.g. by Abraham, Gen. edi 9 
and others) ; but no ‘regular system of sacrifice’ had been established in one spot which was sufficient to make this 
the earthly dwelling-place of Jahveh. At any rate such seems to have been the view of S, who in his survey of the 


606 


Sy 


IV EZRA 10. 46-55 


46 (@.é. in the world)”. And it came to pass after ° three thousand years that ° 4(David) 4 built the City 
47 and offered offerings: then it was that the barren bare a son. And whereas she told thee that she 
48 reared him with travail: ®*that was the (divine) dwelling in Jerusalem*. And whereas she said unto 
thee: ‘My son entering into his marriage-chamber died, ‘and that misfortune befell her ‘—this was 
49 the fall of Jerusalem that has come to pass. And lo! thou hast seen £ the (heavenly) pattern of her 
how she mourned her son, and thou didst begin to comfort her for what had befallen ®. 
so Now, the Most High seeing 
that thou art grieved ‘deeply 
and art distressed whole-heartedly on account of her ; 
hath showed thee the brilliance of her glory, 
and jher majestic beauty 3. 

51, 52 Therefore I bade thee remain in the field where no house has been builded ; for I knew that the 
53 Most High was about to reveal all these things unto thee. *[Therefore I bade thee come into the 
54 field where no foundation of any building is, for in the place where the City of the Most High was 

about to be revealed no building-work of man could endure *. ] 
sg Therefore be not thou afraid, and let not thy heart be terrified ; but go in and see the brightness 
1and! vastness of the building, as far as it is possible for thee with the sight of thine eyes to see! 


ea) c-e see note a above d-d al] the VSS. read Solomon ; see exegetical note e-e ¥ haec erat habitatio 
Hierusalem f-f s9 &@ Ar): Ethiop. has direct speech (this grief befell me): 3 > s-s © similitudinem eius 
h % + haec erant tibi aperienda = Ar.?: other VSS. > (doubtless a gloss) ii Dexanimo JJ HL pulchritudinem 
decoris eius (Hebr. ? 7770 NNN) kK-k yy, 51-52 and 53-54 are doublets: perhaps 53-4 are more original 
Ll so all VSS. except & which has vel 





world’s history in ch. iii ignores all previous sacrifices and offerings till he reaches the name of David. The earthly 
Jerusalem became the holy city—the czvztas Dei—when David offered sacrifices init. Cf. ill. 24. 

46. after three thousand years. According to the LXX at least 4,227 years elapsed from the Creation to the 
founding of the Temple ; thus S here follows the Hebrew text against the LXX. The period between the Creation of 
the world and the foundation of the Temple is estimated by Gutschmidt to be 3,043 years. Allowing 430 years for 
the oppression which ended in the Exodus (cf. Exod. xii. 40), and deducting from this the first three years of Solomon’s 
reign and the forty years of David’s, we reach 3,000 as the sum of the years from Creation to the beginning of David's 
reign, which may be the point of time fixed on by the apocalyptic writer as that of the founding of the earthly Sion, 
though, as a matter of fact, it was seven years later. This presupposes the emendation of ‘Solomon’ in the next clause 
to ‘ David’ (see following note). 

[It is true that in vii. 28 the reckoning 400 for the years of the oppression, in accordance with Gen. xv. 13, is 
implied ; but that passage belongs to a different source. | 

David built the City. All the Versions read ‘Solomon’; but this is inconsistent with ili. 24 (‘ David; and thou 
commandedst him to build the City (which is called) after thy name, and to offer thee oblations therein of thine own’). 
There is, therefore, a strong presumption that the emendation adopted above (proposed by Kabisch) is right. If the 
reading of the Versions is retained ‘ City’ must be understood to mean ‘ Temple’; so Ar. and Arm. add ‘Temple’ 
here (‘the City and the Temple’). Volkmar is obliged to explain that in the apocalyptic writer’s thought Temple and 
City are identical, so that he can speak indifferently now of one, now of the other, and similarly interchange David 
and Solomon. From the language of S, however, it seems clear that it was the inauguration of the regular ‘ offering 
of oblations’ to God in the earthly Sion that constituted it as the cévitas Dec. The altar erected to the Lord (cf. 
2 Sam. xxiv. 18f.; 1 Chron. xxi. 28, xxii. 1) by David marked the turning-point ; this was the most sacred spot in the 
Holy City—the Temple, erected later, being regarded merely as the shelter or covering which contained it. To the 
apocalyptic writer (S) David was the founder and builder of Jerusalem, regarded as the one holy city of God (cf. iii. 24). 

a son, i.e. the earthly Jerusalem (the heavenly Jerusalem being the mother). The representation of Jerusalem 
as a son, and not as a daughter, is certainly peculiar. It is probably due to the fact that the writer is adapting 
a popular tale to the purposes of his allegory ; see further ZA, p.239. | : ; 

47. reared him with travail. The difficulty referred to (‘with travail’) lay in the fact that during the existence 
of the first Temple the sins of the people (especially lapses into idolatrous worship) constantly threatened to interrupt 
the continuance of the divine dwelling (see next note) in the Holy City. — ‘ if i ; 

that was the divine dwelling in Jerusalem. The (divine) dwelling = the ‘Shekinah’ or visible manifestation 
of the divine presence in Jerusalem. It was the presence of the Shekinah in Jerusalem and the Temple, which 
sanctified the Holy City. According to one current view the visible Shekinah was one of the five things lacking in the 
second Temple (cf. Targ. to Hag. i. 8 and parallels in Talmud)—its throne being between the cherubim on the ark, 
which was absent after the destruction of the First Temple. But so long as a Temple existed in Jerusalem, and the 
sacrificial cultus was maintained, these, in a sense, were pledges and symbols of the divine presence. With these all 
visible tokens of the divine presence disappeared (in A. D. 70). : ; 

48. the fall of Jerusalem that has come to pass. The death of the son, according to this verse = the fall of the 
earthly Jerusalem, which confirms the interpretation that the son = the earthly Jerusalem. a 

49. the (heavenly) pattern (or ‘model’) of her. The ‘heavenly pattern’ or model of the earthly city is the 
heavenly Sion, The conception is similar to that which is met with in the Ep. to the Hebrews (xi. 10, 16 [‘ The City 
which hath the foundations, whose builder and maker is God’ ], xii. 22, xiil. 14), according to which the heavenly Sion 
is the heavenly counterpart of the earthly City, ‘the eternal reality of which the literal City is but a shadow.’ For the 
idea of the heavenly counterpart or model cf. Heb. viii. 5; Exod. xxv. 9 and 40. The vision of the heavenly reality is 
the culminating point’in the disclosures made to the seer. ; : 

how she mourned her son, i.e. how she (the heavenly City) mourned her son (the ruined earthly Jerusalem). 
55. as far as it is possible for thee... to see. The permission given to the seer implies that he saw and heard 


607 


IV EZRA 10, 56-60 


S 56 Then shalt thou hear as much as the hearing of thine ears can hear. 
57 For thou art blessed above many, 
and art named before the Most High as but few ! : 

(The true sequel should be xii. 39 4, xiii. 57-58, and xii. 40-48 (xiv. 29-35); see introductions to the 
two latter sections. The sequence ts shown by the following verses :) 

[ (xii. 39 5) And he departed from me. (xiii. 57) And I went forth and walked in the field greatly 
magnifying and praising the Most High on account of the marvellous acts which he performs in due 
season ; (xiii. 58) and because he governs the times, and the things which come to pass in due time. 
(xii. 40 f.) And it came to pass when all the people heard, &c.] 


VI. x. 58-59. REDACTIONAL TRANSITION TO THE FIFTH VISION (R). 


R 58,59 But ™on the night of to-morrow™ thou shalt remain here ; so will the Most High reveal to thee 
59 “in dream-visions® what the Most High will do unto the dwellers upon earth in the last days. 


THE FIFTH (EAGLE) VISION. 
(x. 60—xii. 35) (A). 
I. THE VISION. 
(x. 60-xii. 3a) (A) (R). 
A 60 So I slept that night and the following as he had commanded me. 


mm nocte ... quae in crastinum futura est nn % eas visiones somniorum (= ravra ra opapata Tey evuTuev: 
? ravta a corruption of kata: so Volk.) 





(see next verse) much more than is told in the vision. As Gunkel remarks, this statement (obviously natural and 
unforced) makes it clear that the vision is the record of an actual experience. In the end what the seer saw and heard 
was SO overpowering and marvellous that his powers of describing it all failed. Cf. 2 Cor. xii. 4. With vv, 55-56 cf. 
I Cor. ii. 9 and Isa. Ixiv. 9. It should be noted that the City is conceived as still standing before the seer’s eyes. 
58-59. The seer is bidden to remain where he is (i.e. in the field of Ardat) for another two nights, in order that he 
may receive in dream-visions a revelation of what shall happen to the dwellers upon earth in the last days. It is 
obvious that these verses, which form the transition to the visions that follow, are the work of R. The situation 
presupposed is hardly a possible one for S. The seer had been bidden to resort to Ardat—the field untouched by any 


Moreover the burden of the dream-visions, the revelation of what is to happen in the last days, has already formed 
the subject of long debates in the former visions of S. The dream-visions that follow, as we shall see, belong to other 
sources; and the transitional verses have been inserted by R in order to fit in and link together these other elements 
with the Salathiel-Apocalypse. 
58. on the night of to-morrow, i.e. the night that follows to-morrow. Thus the words would be spoken during 
the day. The vision in the field of Ardat, accordingly, was not a night- but a day-vision, 
The chapters that follow are drawn from three main independent sources, viz. : 

A (= Adlergesicht), the Eagle-Vision, ch. xi-xii ; 

M (= Menschensohn), the Son of Man Vision, ch. xiii ; 

E* = the Ezra-legend, ch. xiv. 


X. 60-xil. 35. THE EAGLE-VISION. The famous Eagle-Vision—the last, apparently, of a series of dream-visions— 
follows. The seer in his dream sees an eagle, furnished with twelve wings and three heads, ascending out of the sea. 
It stretched its wings over all the earth, and all the winds of heaven blew upon it. From its wings eight other smaller 
wings developed ; the three heads, of which the middle one was larger than the others, remained at rest. The Eagle 
flew with its wings, and reigned with undisputed sway over the whole earth. It stood up upon its claws, and told its 
wings that they should not all waken together, but each should sleep in its place, and awaken and keep watch in its 
own proper time ; the heads were to be kept tothe End. The voice announcing this proceeded not from the Eagle’s 
head, but from the midst of his body. Presently a wing arose on the right side, reigned over the earth and dis- 
appeared. The second arose and reigned a long time—a voice announced that none after it should reign een half as 
long—and this also disappeared. So it happened to the third and following wings. The seer now saw that the little 
wings were set up, on the right side, in order to rule; and of these some held it but disappeared at once while others 
rose up, but did not exercise rule. After this it was seen that the twelve wings had disappeared, and also two of the 
little wings—nothing remained in the Eagle’s body but the three heads at rest and six little wings. Two of these 
latter were seen to detach themselves, and remained under the head at the right-hand side, while four remained in 
their place. These thought to set themselves up and reign. One did so and forthwith disappeared ; and the second 
vanished even more quickly than the first. Two were now left in their original place, and while these were thinking 
to reign the middle head awoke and, uniting with itself the other two heads, devoured them. This head exercised 
tule over the earth with much oppression ; but it, too, suddenly disappeared even as the wings. The two remaining 
heads reigned over the earth; but that on the right side devoured the one on the left. At this point the seer hears 
a voice telling him to look carefully and note what he should see. He saW a roaring lion come out from the wood, 


608 


IV EZRA 11, 125 


J]: And it came to pass the second night that I saw a dream: and lo! 
2 an eagle which had twelve (?) feathered wings, and three heads. 

his wings ° over ° the whole earth, and all the winds of heaven blew on him, and ? (the clouds) were 

3 gathered together (unto him)”. And I beheld, (and lo !) out of his wings there grew “anti-wings 4 - 
4and they became wings petty and small. But his heads were at rest ; the middle he ayy 


: ad was greater 
5 than the other heads, yet it rested with them. And I beheld, and lo! the eagle flew with Hee 


there came up from the sea 
And I beheld, and lo! he spread 


°° so Ar? Arm.: & in = 3 Ethiop. PP so Oriental VSS, (except Arm.) & colligebantur ( 


> nubes ad eum 
aa ¥ contrariae pennae (= ? avrumtepvyta): other VSS. = TTEpvyla 





which, with a man’s voice 
destruction: 
‘Therefore shalt thou disappear, O thou Eagle, 

and thy horrible wings, 

and thy little wings most evil, 

thy harm-dealing heads, 

thy hurtful talons, 

and-all thy worthless body ! 

And so the whole earth, freed from thy violence, shall be refreshed again, and hope for the judgement and mercy of 
him that made her ’ (xi. 45-6). 

While the Lion spoke, the last head disappeared ; the two little wings which had detached themselves and gone 
over to it rose up to reign, but their reign was short and full of uproar. Then they, too, vanished, the whole body of 
the Eagle was consumed in flames, and the earth was greatly terrified. 

On awaking from his dream-vision the seer, much perturbed by what he has seen, prays that the interpretation 
of it may be granted him. He is told that the Eagle is the fourth kingdom which appeared to Daniel. The twelve 
wings represent twelve kings who shall reign in it one after the other. The second reign shall be longer than any of 
the other twelve. The voice proceeding from the midst of the body signifies that in the middle period (xii. 18, ‘in the 
midst of the time of that kingdom,’ according to the true text) great commotions shall arise, and it shall stand in peril 
of falling ; but it shall recover, and regain its stability. The interpretation of the eight under (little) wings is: there 
shall arise in this kingdom eight kings ‘ whose times shall be transient and years swift’; two of these shall perish 
when the middle time of the kingdom approaches ; four are to be kept for the time ‘ when its time for dissolution shall 
approach’; but two are to be reserved for the End. The interpretation of the three heads is: in the last days of the 
kingdom the Most High will raise up three kings who shall renew many things in the kingdom, and shall rule over 
the earth with much oppression above all that were before them. They are called the heads of the Eagle, because 
they shall bring its wickedness to a head and consummate its end. The disappearance of the largest (i.e. the middle) 
head signifies that the first of these three kings shall die upon his bed, but yet with torment. The other two are 
destined for the sword—one is to fall by the sword of the other, and the latter shall perish himself by the sword in the 
last days. The two wings that passed over to the right-hand head are reserved for the End. They shall reign for 
a brief time after the disappearance of the last head; but their reign shall be full of trouble and uproar. The Lion is 
the Messiah whom the Most High has reserved for the End. 

Such is the vision and its interpretation as they lie before us in our present text. At first sight all seems clear ; 
but a closer examination of the details reveals, as will appear, many grave difficulties. For a discussion of these see 
the introduction to the interpretation of the vision (xii. 3 0-39) below. 

The vision must thus be regarded as an independent writing. It apparently belongs to a series of dream-visions, 
of which it forms the last, and which already existed in written form in a book when our vision was excerpted by R 
(cf. xii. 37). As in similar cases elsewhere R has inserted harmonistic additions designed to bring the matter into 
accord with other elements in our Apocalypse. Such are clearly xii. 9 and 34. But further, there seems to have 
been a revision of a more far-reaching character, as will appear when the details of the interpretation come to be 
examined. 

The whole vision is clearly much influenced by, if it is not actually based upon, Dan, vii. The identification of 
the Eagle with the fourth kingdom of Dan. vii is an interesting case of the reinterpretation of prophecy. 

With the Eagle-Vision should be compared the fountain and forest vision of 2 Baruch (xxxvi-xl), which remarkably 
enough is a dream-vision of the fall of the Roman power. As in our vision, this is effected by the Messiah ; the last 
leader of the hostile host is taken captive to Mount Sion, where the Messiah, after upbraiding him with his wickedness, 
destroys him. ee oe, 

For a fuller discussion cf. A, pp. 244-9. The vision in its original form appears to have been composed some 
time in the reign of Vespasian (A. D. 69-79) or possibly laier (A. D. 96-97). 


, upbraided the Eagle for his tyranny and cruel oppression, and announces his coming 


xi. 1. Isawadream. Cf. Dan. vii. 1. A dream-vision (not merely a dream) is meant. 
from the sea. Cf. Dan. vii. 3; Rev. xiii. 1. In the latter passage, as here, the monster that ascends out of the 
sea = the Roman Empire. The latter, for the Orientals, came up, as a matter of historical fact, from the sea (i.e. the 
Mediterranean), and it is this fact that is doubtless present in the apocalyptist’s thought here. [It is clear that 
the (perhaps contemporary) apocalyptic writers of Rev. xii and our chapter both identified the fourth beast of Dan. vii 
with Rome: cf. esp. 4 Ezra xil. 10f.] ah ' 
- an eagle. The eagle of the Se ieee Earn reps the Roman Empire. The symbolism was 
i riate to Rome, whose military emblem was the eagle. , 
ca tind e. according to the Pete oniginal meaning of the vision the three Flavian Emperors (Vespasian 
and his two sons, Titus and Domitian). Cf. the four wings and four heads of the leopard in Dan. vil. 6. 
2. all the winds of heaven blew on him. Cf. xiii. 2, and Dan. vil. 2. ; , i e 
3. out of his wings there grew anti-wings. As mrépv§ = Baorhevs, SO avturtepuytoy would = dytiBaoidevs (so 
Volk.). Usurpers or military commanders who might prove to be dangerous rivals to the Emperors are apparently 


meant. 
1105.2 


609 ROE 


A 


15 


8 


’ 


2T, 


27 


. 


IV EZRA 11. 6-29 


6 to reign over the earth and over them that dwell therein. And I beheld how all things under 
heaven were subject unto him, and no one spake against him—not even one of the creatures upon 
7 earth. And I beheld, and lo! the eagle rose upon his talons, and uttered his voice to his wings, 
> 9 saying *, Watch not all at once: sleep every one in his place, and watch by course: but let the heads 
10 be preserved for the last. And I beheld, and lo! the voice proceeded not from his heads, but from 
11 the midst of his body. And I numbered his anti-wings, and lo! there were eight. 
12 And I beheld, and lo! [on the right side] there arose one wing, and reigned over the whole earth. 
13 And it came to pass that, after it had reigned, it came to its end and § disappeared §, so that the place 
14 of it was not visible. Then arose the second and reigned, and this bare rule for a long time. And 
it came to pass that, after it had reigned, it also came to its end, so that it disappeared even as the 
16 first. And lo! a voice sounded which said to it: Hear, thou that hast borne rule over the earth so 
17 long a time: *this I proclaim * unto thee before thou shalt disappear—After thee shall none bear 
18 rule (the length of) thy time, nay not even the half of it! Then the third lifted itself up and held 
19 the rule even as the former, and it also disappeared. And so it fell to all the wings ["in turn™] to 
20 rule and then disappear. And I beheld, and lo! in process of time ¥ the little wings ¥ also were set up 
[" «pon the right side] that they also might hold the rule; and some of them bare rule but 
22 disappeared suddenly : and some of them were set up but did not hold the rule. After this I beheld, 
23 and lo! the twelve wings disappeared, and two little wings ; and nothing was left in the eagle’s body 
24 save only the three heads that were at rest, and six little wings. And I beheld, and lo! from the 
six little wings two detached themselves, and remained under the head that was upon the right side: 
25 but four remained in their place. And I beheld, and lo! these under-wings thought to set themselves 
26 up and to hold the rule. And I beheld, and lo! one was set up, but immediately disappeared ; 
28 a second also, and this disappeared more quickly than the first. And I beheld, and lo! the two 
29 that remained thought also in themselves to reign ; and * while they were thinking thus*, lo! ¥ one 


* 3 (against all the other VSS.)+Go, rule over the whole earth: but remain quiet now (? am explan. gloss) 





s-s # non apparuit *t veading hoc (v. 2. haec) adnuntio u-u ¥ singulatim vv so & Ar: & sequentes 
pennae WW so 3 Ethiop. Arm.: but Ar’ Ar2> x= @ in eo cum cogitarent (= ev T@ AoyCeoOa avra) 
y-y & unum de quiescentium capitum (¢mztating Greek construction) 

8. Watch not all at once: ... watch by course. Each wing (or pair of wings) is to be awake and watch (i.e. 
reign) for a certain season, its allotted time ( per tempus = xara xapdv) and in succession; all are not to be awake 
at once. 


12. [on the right side]. This certainly looks like an addition. If it were an original feature in the vision there 
would be a corresponding mention of the wings ‘on the left side’, and we should expect some comment upon the 
symbolical significance of right and left in the interpretation. But nothing of the kind occurs there. Consequently 
we are justified in regarding the words here as an interpolation: if by R, or some other reviser, then it would seem he 
is dividing the wings into two sets, right and left, and this might imply that previously they had been reckoned by 
pairs. But the words may be a gloss. 

one wing. Lat. wnua penna = &v mrepdy: if pairs of wings were in the original writer’s thought here we should 
expect ‘the first wing’ (Hebr.? D'D997}9 NNN). Possibly something like this originally stood here, and has been 
modified by R; in this case ‘the first of the wings’ would have meant the first pair of wings. 

17. Shall none bear rule (the length of) thy time, nay not even the half of it. The reference is clearly to 
the long reign of Augustus (over fifty years). 

19. it fell to all the wings. The expression ‘all the wings’ is noticeable ; it refers, apparently, to all the twelve 
wings : therefore what follows in v. 20 must refer to the other set of ‘ little’ wings. 

20, the little wings. The verse describes the general character and fate of the eight little wings. Some such 
introductory statement is required before v. 22, where it is said that the twelve great wings and two of the little wines 
had disappeared (so Drummond, /J/, p. 102 f.). si 

[upon the right side]. Ifthe wings referred to were the twelve greater wings this clause could have no meaning: 
the left side would be required by the context (and so Hilg. renders here dé rijs apiorepas : but against all the textual 
evidence, though five MSS. of the Ethiopic have ‘ on the left side’). In reference to the little wings it may be meant 
to suggest their elevation to actual power. The clause may possibly be an incorrect gloss.’ 

22. the twelve wings disappeared, and two little wings, i.e. (according to the original significance of the vision) 
the six Julian Emperors came to an end, and, about the end of the reign of the last emperor, Nero, ‘ two little wings’ 
rose and disappeared : perhaps the fate of the conspirators Vindex (March, A.D. 68) and N ymphidius (a few months 
later) is referred to. Both were active in the last months of Nero’s reign. 

24. under the head that was upon the right side. This, according to the original meaning of the vision, must 
mean Domitian. Who the two “little wings’ represent in this case it is difficult to say—two Roman governors or 
generals probably who were expected to claim the imperial throne. Gunkel suggests Mucianus, proconsul of Syria 
and Tiberius Alexander, prefect of Egypt (a. D. 69). But these leaders attached themselves to the cause of Vespasian 
(the middle head) ; it does not appear that either played any prominent part in the reign of Domitian (‘the head on 
the right side’). Gfrérer suggests Agrippa II and Berenice, who went over to the Romans and were in favour with 
the Flavian family, 


27. a second ... disappeared more quickly than the first. Perhaps Galba’s colleague (f i i 
meant, viz. Piso. But more probably Galba and Otho are intended. a pe va re 
28. the two that remained. Perhaps Civilis (died June, 69) and Vitellius (died December, 69), 


610 


A 


; 





30, 3 than the two [other] heads. And I beheld how it allied with itself the two 


38, 


IV EZRA 11. 29-45 


of the heads that were at rest Y—it, namely, that was in the midst —awoke ; for this one was greater 


other heads; and lo! 
the head was turned with them that were with it, and did eat up the two under-wings that thought 


32 to have reigned. This head “bare rule over the whole earth *, and exercised lordship over the 

dwellers therein with much oppression ; [and it wielded more power over the inhabited world than 
33 all the wings that had been.] And after this I beheld, and lo! the middle head * suddenly 2 
34 disappeared, ? even as the wings’. But there remained the two heads which also reigned over the 
35 earth, and over the inhabitants therein. And I beheld, and lo! the head upon the right side 
36 devoured that which was upon the left. Then I heard a voice, which said unto me: Look before 
37 thee, and consider what thou seest. And I beheld, and lo! as it were a lion, roused out of the 

wood, roaring ; and I heard how he uttered a man’s voice against the eagle; and he spake, saying: 
39 Hear, ° thou Eagle ‘“—I will talk with thee; the Most High saith to thee: Art thou not it that 

remainest of the four beasts which I made to reign in my world, that the end of ‘my times4 might 


40 come through them? ®Thou, however, the fourth, who art come, hast overcome ® all the beasts that 
are past ; 
* Thou hast wielded power over the world‘ with great terror, 
and over all the inhabited earth with grievous oppression ; 
* Thou hast dwelt £ so long in the civilized world with fraud, 
41 and hast judged the earth, (but) not with faithfulness; 
42 For thou hast afflicted the meek, 
and oppressed the peaceable ; 
Thou hast hated » the upright 2, 
and loved liars ; 
Thou hast destroyed ‘the strongholdsi i of the fruitful j, 
and laid low the walls of such as did thee no harm— 
43 And so thine insolence hath ascended to the Most High, 
and thy pride to the Mighty One. 
44 Then the Most High regarded his times— 
And lo! they were ended ; 
And his ages— 
(and) they were fulfilled. 
45 Therefore * shalt thou disappear *, O thou Eagle, 
and thy horrible wings, 
and thy little wings most evil, 
‘thy harm-dealing heads}, 
™thy hurtful talons™, 
and all thy worthless body ! 


cS j i zs : -b © et hoc sicut alae (ce KQl TOUTO 
2-2 reading percontenuit omnem terram 24 so 3: other VSS. > P e 7 r 

xadws au eae) ce so B: but other VSS. (including L) > a-d so XL: other VSS. of the (ne) times 
°° reading et quartus veniens devicisti: cf. 3 Ar) Ar? Arm.: Ethiop. Lat. MSS. have 3rd person OG EGE 


fe Pech f : 5 ; bol 
Ar} Ar? Arm. 8-8 so 3 (f. Ar” Ar? Arm.): B& inhabitabant zo be emended to inhabitabas (Violet) 50 5 

(of. Ar): Ar? - pious): # ee dicentes (cf. Ethiop. Arm.) *} so Oriental VSS. (= ta oxupwpara) : LH habi- 
tationes (? dependent upon variant Hebr. readings: NYO and ‘i\Y'2) Jj & qui fructificabant: 3% of the prosperous 


(= toy evOqvovvtay: evdnvovea = 7" Ps. cxxviii. [cxxvii] 3) k-k @ non apparens non appareas (= adaviobers 
ahavic Anon) ll et capita tua maligna m-m #% ungues tui pessimi 
32. [and it wielded ... that had been]. This clause is somewhat tautologous after the two preceding, and is 


iti i i i j i Trajan, would 
bably an addition of R, who identified the middle head with Trajan. The statement, as applied to jan, 
tiie eee point in view of his conquests and vast additions to the Roman empire. Volkmar supposes that in the 
first clause omnem terram (‘over the whole earth’) should be rendered ‘ over all the land’, i.e. the land of Palestine, 
bem terrarum in the last clause stands in contrast with this. ae - 
peer teed upon the right side devoured that which was upon the left. In the original form of the vision 
this doubtless referred to Domitian (the right head) and Titus (the left head), whose death was at the time supposed 
to have been brought about by Domitian. But R probably identified the right head with Hadrian, who recalled and 
z si ietus (the left head). See introduction to the next chapter. : 
ao em oe es Dan. un The eagle is here identified with the fourth beast of Dan. vii, as in the 
i i ] S il. I I Fi . . . . . 
pe ans they were fulfilled. The meaning is: the predetermined time is fulfilled. The 
conviction was common to all the apocalyptists that they were standing at the end of the age. It should be remembered, 
however, that in the eschatology of A the end of the present age coincides with the downfall of Rome; the future age 
is the Rule of God that is to succeed the heathen empire on the present earth. ae pai 
45. thy hurtful talons. It should be noted that this detail receives no explanation in the interpretation that 
follows in chap. xii. Probably the Roman armies are meant. 
611 REZ 


A 40 


12 1,2 


a 
o 


IV EZRA We 46a 


And so the whole earth, freed from thy violence, shall be refreshed again™, and hope for the 
judgement and mercy of him that made her. 

And it came to pass, while the lion spake these words unto the eagle, I beheld, and lo! the head 
that remained disappeared. And the two wings, which went over unto it, set themselves up to 
reign ; and their rule was short and full of uproar. And I beheld, and lo! these also disappeared, 
and the whole body of the eagle was burnt ; and the earth was terrified greatly. 


II. xii. 36-39. THE INTERPRETATION OF THE VISION (A) (R). 


Then I awoke °by reason of great perplexity of mind® and from great fear, and said unto 
my spirit: Lo! this hast thou brought unto me because thou searchest out the ways of the 
Most High. 


n-n & refrigeret et revertetur (Hedy. WDIN TWN) °~° reading a multo (for tumultu) excessu mentis 





46. and hope for the judgement and mercy of him that made her, i.e. after the world-empire has been 
destroyed the Rule (or Sovereignty) of God follows. ‘Judgement’ here cannot have the same sense as in S, where it 
means the judgement of the last day: it here =the Hebr. mishfat and means the judicial process by which the 
Roman Empire is condemned and destroyed. 


xil. 30-39. THE INTERPRETATION OF THE VISION. It has already been pointed out that a close examination of 
the details of the vision and its interpretation reveals many grave difficulties, and it has been suggested that these are 
probably due to later revision and readjustment. No solution known to the present writer has so far been proposed 
that entirely meets these difficulties. A most illuminating review and critical discussion of the more important of the 
suggestions and hypotheses that have been made is given in Dr. Drummond’s Jewish Messtith, pp. 99-114. For a full 
discussion of later views reference must be made to ZA, pp. 262 ff. 


A NEw SOLUTION. 


Is it possible to frame a hypothesis which will meet the objections that have been adduced and satisfy the data 
of the text? The following seems to the present writer to be a possible solution. It may be taken for granted that 
whatever revision or readjustment has taken place in the text of the chapters must have been the work either of the 
editor who compiled our book, or of some redaction previous to his use of the special source. As there is no trace of 
specifically Christian influence in the text of the vision the possibility of later redaction is ruled out. It becomes 
important, therefore, to fix approximately the date of the editor (R), and to determine the meaning of the vision for 
him. Kabisch fixes the date of R at about A.D. 120, and this—or possibly even a later year—may be accepted as 
correct. It may be assumed that in the original form of the vision the three heads represent the three Flavian 
Emperors ; the twelve wings represent the six Julian Emperors from Caesar to Nero, reckoning the wings by pairs. 
The present writer suggests that the reckoning by pairs in the original vision was intended only to apply to the twelve 
wings, and had a symbolical significance. The pairs served to emphasize the greater dignity and power of the real 
Emperors as contrasted with the ephemeral rulers symbolized by the little wings. In order to exaggerate the contrast 
the latter were intended to be reckoned singly. The eight little wings represent, in the original form of the vision, 
Vindex (March, 68), Nymphidius (a few months later)—these disappeared about the same time as the last of the twelve 
wings (end of Nero’s reign), as represented in our text (xi. 22). The middle four represent Galba, Otho, Civilis (died 
June, 69), and Vitellius (died Dec., 69). 

The two little wings that were to survive the last head probably signify Roman governors or generals who were 
expected to claim the imperial throne at the last, or possibly the two last members of the Herodian family, Agrippa II 
and Berenice. In its original form, then, the vision may date from the closing years of Domitian’s reien (circa 
A.D. 95).' But if the editor did not incorporate it into his book—our Ezra-Apocalypse—till a.D. 120 or later (some 
time certainly in the reign of Hadrian), what, it may well be asked, was the significance he himself attached to the 
vision? He can no longer have identified the three heads with the Flavian Emperors, seeing that the reigns of these 
had already long ended and the predicted deliverance had not yet come. 3 

It seems to the present writer that the requirements of the situation will be met by the hypothesis that R identified 
the three heads with Trajan, Hadrian, and Lusius Quietus. The last mentioned was a favourite of Trajan, of princely 
birth, who was generally expected to succeed to the Empire. His memory is deeply impressed upon the “Tews owing 
to the stern part he took in suppressing Jewish rebellions first in Mesopotamia, and later in Palestine (A.D. 116-117). 
In the Rabbinical sources he is sometimes spoken of as if he were actual emperor. As a matter of fact he was recalled 
by Hadrian, soon after the latter's accession to the throne, and executed. 

Having identified the three heads in this way, the editor reinterpreted the twelve wings to be the ‘twelve Caesars” 
—a numeration which is found in Suetonius—i.e. the six Julian Emperors, Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, and the three 
Flavian Emperors. In accordance with this view the present text of the vision has been redacted. ans in xi. 12 
the words ‘on the right side’, if not a gloss, are probably due to R, so also in xi. 19 ‘in turn’ (stngulatim). In si. 20 
the words ‘on the right side’ (they are omitted in the Arabic Version) may be a gloss; and in x1 32 the clause § and 
it wielded more power over the inhabited world than all the wings that had been’ would apply with special force to. 
Trajan, whose conquests were remarkable, though the possibility of their application to Vespasian is not excluded 
They may be due to later revision. ; 

In the interpretation of the vision in ch. xii the marks of revision are naturally more in evidence. 


iia: 3 ) Thus v. 
(‘In it twelve kings shall reign, one after the other ’) we have the later interpretation clearly expressed. Co * 


ming to the 





* Or possibly in some part of Vespasian’s reign. 
612 


(R) 


IV EZRA 12. s—21 


OV 


Lo! I am yet weary in my soul, 
and very weak in my spirit, 

nor is there (left) the least strength in me on account of the great fear wherewith I have been 
6 affrighted this night. Therefore will I now beseech the Most High, that he will strengthen me unto 
7the end. And I said: O Lord my Lord, if I have found favour in thy sight, if I am justified with 
8 thee above many, if my supplication in truth be come up before thy countenance—Strengthen me, 

and show me, thy servant, the interpretation and ” distinct explanation” of this fearful vision, that 
9 thou mayst completely comfort my soul! [For thou hast judged me worthy to show me % the end of the 
times and the last of the periods 4.| 


Io, 1r And he said unto me: This is the interpretation of the vision which thou hast seen. The eagle 


which thou sawest come up from the sea is the fourth kingdom which appeared in vision to thy 


12, 13 brother Daniel; [but it was not interpreted unto him as I now interpret it unto thee or have interpreted 


it]. Behold, the days come when there shall arise a kingdom upon the earth, and it shall be* more 


14, 15 terrible’ than all the kingdoms that were before it. [Zz ¢¢ twelve kings shall reign, one after the other ;| 


16 And the second that shall reign, he shall bear rule a longer time * than (any of) [ he ¢welve]*. This is the 
17 interpretation of the twelve wings which thou didst see. And whereas * thou didst hear ‘a voice which 
18 spake, going out not from his heads, but from the midst of his body, “this is the interpretation*. Y In 

the midst ¥ of the time of that kingdom there shall arise no small contentions, and it shall stand in peril 
19 of falling ; nevertheless it shall not then fall, but shall be restored again“ to rule’. And whereas thou 
20 didst see eight under-wings grow up with his wings, this is the interpretation: In it there shall arise eight 
21 kings, whose times shall be transient and years swift: and two of them shall perish when the middle 

time (of the kingdom) approaches ; and four shall be kept for the time when its time for dissolution 


p-P @& distinctionem (= ryyv cudnveray) a-a &% temporum finem et temporum novissima: other VSS. = rev xpovev 
To Telos kat T@Y Katpwy Ta ex XATA rr yeading timoratior s-s & prae xii (prae = uzep) tt so Arm.: out 
= Ethiop. Ar thou didst see u-u % haec est interpretatio: du¢ 3 Ethiop. Ar = ovtos eatty o oyos (Hebr. 
92377 7) Y-V so 3 (of. Ethiop.) and Arm. (= petagv): & post (= pera: a mistake) wow so Ethtop. (cf. 
Ar) Arm.: & in suum initium (sésunderstanding evs apxny avrns) 





heads we read: ‘And whereas thou didst see that the great head disappeared—[one of them shall die upon his bed, 
but yet with pain. But as for the two who remain the sword shall devour them. For the sword of the one shall devour 
him that was with him; nevertheless this one also shall fall by the sword in the last days’. 

This description would suit admirably the circumstances of Trajan’s end. He died in Cilicia in the year 117, 
upon his bed, it is true, but mortified by his half-successes and by the unrest in the East. It need hardly be added 
that ‘the sword of the one shall devour him that was with him’ suits the identification of right and left heads with 
Hadrian and Lusius Quietus admirably. Further, if, as is suggested in the note on xii. 21, the four wings (or anti- 
wings) that are kept for the time when the dissolution of the Empire approaches can be identified with the four 
senators who were executed by Hadrian at the beginning of his reign, we have a further confirmation of the correctness 
of the hypothesis of reinterpretation already set forth. 

7. if I am justified with thee above many. Cf. vi. 32, vil. 26, ix. 49, x. 39, Xvill. 14. 

8. completely. This implies that the seer had already been partially consoled (by the vision of the heavenly 
Sion)—a mark of R’s hand. 

g. the end of the times, &c. The whole verse reveals the hand of Rk. The Eagle Vision is not concerned with, 
and is not a revelation of, the ‘last things’—these are treated in the preceding work of S and E—A is concerned only . 
with the downfall of the Roman Empire. The reference here, therefore, to the end of the world is out of place, and is 
due to R (so Kabisch). 

11. is the fourth kingdom which appeared in vision to thy brother Daniel. Cf. Dan. vii. 7f. This is 
a particularly clear and interesting case of the way in which apocalyptic prediction was reinterpreted and reapplied. 
It is interesting to note that in the Talmud (7. B. Abdda Zara 1 6), Dan. vii. 23 (i.e. the fourth kingdom) is inter- 
preted of Rome. ch Kas AE 

14. In it twelve kings shall reign, one after the other. This sentence is evidently the work of R, who under- 
stood the twelve kings to be the ‘ twelve Caesars’. It cannot be explained as an interpretation of the original form of 
the vision, as it is impossible to enumerate twelve rulers, beginning with Julius Caesar and excluding the three heads 
(Vespasian, Titus and Domitian), who ruled consecutively. R may have altered a number merely, or may have recast 
the entire sentence. ’ : 

15. than (any of) [the twelve]. The number ‘twelve ’ here reflects ex Aypothesi the later interpretation. 

18. In the midst of the time of that kingdom. The time referred to is the period of anarchy that ensued at the 
close of Nero’s reign, and was put az. end to by Vespasian (A. D. 68-70). : 

21. and four shall be kept for the time when its time for dissolution shall approach. Apparently four 
usurpers or possible candidates for the imperial dignity are meant, who are to rise and fall as the time for the 
dissolution of the Empire approaches, i.e. presumably in the reign of one of the three heads (probably either Trajan 
or Hadrian). Now it is worth noting that at the beginning of his reign Hadrian found it necessary to put to death 
four ‘consular senators, his personal enemies, and men who had been judged worthy of empire (Gibbon, Decline and 
Fall, vol. i, ch. iii). If the rise and fall of these four anti-wings is to be placed in the reign of Hadrian, unless the 
revision of the interpretation be credited to R at this point, 1t must already have reached an advanced stage before he 
incorporated A into our present book. In the original vision these four anti-wings apparently represent Galba, Otho, 
Civilis, and Vitellius (cf. xi. 27). In the reinterpretation Galba, Otho, and Vitellius are included in the twelve large 
wings (Civilis could be omitted as unimportant), thus involving the reinterpretation of the four anti-wings. 


613 


IV EZRA PZ 02-37 


A(R) 22 shall approach: but two shall be kept for the end. And whereas thou didst see three heads resting, 
23 this is the interpretation: In the last days thereof the Most High will raise up * three kings*; and 
¥they shall renew’ many things therein, and shall exercise lordship over the earth and over the 
24 dwellers therein with much oppression, above all those that were before them. _ Therefore are they 
25 called the heads of the eagle: for these are they that shall bring to a head his wickedness, 7 and 
26 consummate his last end’. And whereas thou didst see that the great head disappeared—one of 
27 them shall die upon his bed, but yet with pain. But as for the two who remain the sword shall devour 
28 them. For the sword of the one shall devour him that was with him ; never theless this one also. 
29 shall fall by the sword in the last days. And whereas thou didst see two under-wings * passing over 
30 to the head * that is upon the right side; this is the interpretation: These are they whom the Most 
High hath kept for his (i.e, the eagle’s) end; and their rule shall be short and full of uproar, as thou 
31 hast seen. And as for the lion whom thou didst see roused from the wood and roaring, and speaking 
32 to the eagle and reproving him for his unrighteousness and all his deeds, as thou hast heard: This 
is the Messiah whom the Most High hath kept unto the end ( of the days, who shall spring from the 
seed of David, and shall come and speak ») unto them ; 
he shall reprove them for their ungodliness, 
‘rebuke them ° for their unrighteousness, 
‘reproach them to their faces with their treacheries 4. 
33 For at the first he shall set them alive for judgement ; and when he hath rebuked them °he shall 
34 destroy them*®. [But my people who survive he shall deliver with mercy, even those who have been 
saved throughout my borders, and he shall make them joyful until the End come, even the Day of 
35 Judgement, of which I have spoken unto thee from the beginning.| This is the dream that thou 
36 didst see, and this is its interpretation. Thou alone hast been found worthy to learn ‘this mystery f 
37 of the Most High—Therefore write all these things that thou hast seen in a book, and put them in 


“X = tpes Bares: so all the VSS. except LL, which has tria regna (= tpes Bac.decas) YY so Z Ethiop. 
Arm.: & renovabit 4-2 & et qui perficient novissima eius a8 so BD: (= peraBavra evs tyv xepadny) : 
X traicientes super caput >? so & (and the other Oriental VSS. substantially): & > ce so % (of. Arm.): 
> d-d # et infulciet coram ipsis spretiones eorum (= ? cau emumAn€er evwmtoy avrev ta katadpovnuata avtoy) : 
® set in order (=? emrager) before them, &c.: Ethiop. heap up (=?emu)noe) before them, &c. ®&-8 yead- 
ing corrumpet eos: so 3 Ethiop. Arm. (inferior reading corripiet eos = A.V. correct them) ff # secretum hoc 





two shall be kept for the end, i.e. till after the disappearance of the third head 3 Gin sah, OA 

23. in the last days thereof, i.e. of the kingdom. ; 

they shall renew many things therein. The statement would apply equally well to the new period 
inaugurated by Vespasian or Trajan; in both cases the new régime consolidated and strengthened the Empire 
generally. 

with much oppression. This would apply with special point to Trajan and Lusius Quietus, who suppressed 
with great severity the Jewish rebellions of A. D. 116 and later ; and also to Hadrian later. 

26. shail die upon his bed, but yet with pain. This description would certainly better suit the circumstances 
of Trajan’s end than Vespasian’s (see introduction to this section). 

28. the sword of the one shall devour him that was with him, i.e. the sword of Hadrian shall devour Lusius 
Quietus; the latter was deposed and executed by Hadrian. On the other hand, the terms do not suit the case of 
Domitian and Titus. 

32. This is the Messiah. Cf. Rev. v. 5, where ‘the Lion that is of the tribe of Judah’ is identified with the ‘ Root 
of David’ and = the Messiah. 

whom the Most High hath kept unto the end {of the days), i.e. the Messiah is already pre-existent in 
heaven. This representation suits the idea of the heavenly Messiah, but is inconsistent with the next clause, which 
applies to the earthly Messiah: probably the clause is due to R, and is a harmonizing interpolation. 

reproach them, &c. Cf. xiii. 37. 

33. For at the first, &c. One of the principal tasks of the Messiah is to overthrow hostile wicked powers. Here 
it is the power of Rome that is first rebuked and then destroyed ; cf. xiii. 37 f.; 2 Bar. xl if 

34. [But my people who survive, &c.] This whole verse is an insertion of R, according with his view that before 
the End of the world a temporary Messianic kingdom was to be set up (cf. vii. 25 f. and notes). In its present context 
the verse is out of harmony with the representation. The End of the age in ch. xii=the end of the heathen 
domination of the world, and is followed by the rule of the righteous embodied in Israel. 

[even those who have been saved throughout my borders], i.e. those who shall have survived the Messianic 
woes in Palestine; but the writer of the Eagle Vision contemplated a world-wide deliverance in which all earth’s 
inhabitants should participate, after the overthrow of the Roman Empire; cf. xi. 46. The clause is meaningless in its 
present connexion (cf. xii. 48). , 

[he shall make them joyful]. Cf. vii. 28. 

37. Therefore write all these things that thou hast seen in a book, The secret revelation is to be written 
down in a book and preserved in a secret place for the future till the time for publishing it arrives. This representa- 
tion Is common in apocalyptic literature. It partly serves to reflect the originally esoteric character of the teaching 
which was treasured in apocalyptic circles—‘ apocrypha’ in its original connotation (axdékpupos) = ‘esoteric’, ‘secret ’, 
and carried with it no disparaging meaning—and partly serves to explain why, when the books were made known, 
their existence for so long a time previously had been unsuspected. Cf. Dan. viii. 26, xii. 4 (cp. xii. 9) ; 1 En. Ixxxii. 1 
Clv. 11-13; Ass. Mos. i. 16, x. 11, xi. 15 cf. also 4 Ezra xiv. 26, 47. ‘ 


614 


} \ 
: | IV EZRA 12. 38-51 


A(R) 38 a secret place ; and thou shalt teach them to the wise of the people, whose hearts thou knowest are 
39 able to comprehend and keep these mysteries. [But do thou remain here yet seven days more, that 
there may be shown unto thee whatsoever it may please the Most High to show thee.] 


III. xii. 39 0-48. CONCLUSION OF THE VISION (S). 


S 39 And he departed from me. 
| 40 And it came to pass when all the people heard that the seven days were past and I not returned 
| to the city, they assembled themselves together, £all from the least unto the greatest; and they 
. came unto me and said: 
: 41 How have we sinned against thee, 
: or how have we dealt iniquitously with thee’ 
that thou hast forsaken us and sittest in this place? 
42 For of all the prophets thou ® alone” art left to us, 
| as a cluster out of the vintage, 
. as a lamp in a dark place, 
tas a haven of safety for a ship in a storm’. 
_ 43,44 Are not the evils that have befallen us sufficient i(that thou shouldst forsake us also)i? If thou 
: shalt forsake us, how much better had it been for us if we also had been consumed in the burning of 
45 Sion! For we are not better than they who died there. And * they wept * with a loud voice. 
46 And I answered them and said: 
Take courage, O Israel ; 
be not sorrowful, O House of Jacob ! 
47 For you are remembered before the Most High, 
the Mighty One hath not forgotten you ! for ever’. 
48 But as for me, I have not forsaken you, neither will I depart from you; but I have come to this 
place 
to pray for the desolation of Sion 
and to supplicate mercy for ™ our™ sanctuary’s humiliation. 


[Originally it 2s probable that xiv. 29-35 immediately followed xii. 48 (see introductory section to 
xiv. 27-36). | 


IV. xii. 49-51. REDACTIONAL TRANSITION TO THE SIXTH VISION (R). 


R 49,50 And now go every one of you to his own house, and after these days I will come unto you. So 
51 the people went into the city as I had told them. But I sat in the field seven days, as he had 
commanded me: and I did eat only “of the flowers of the field"; my food was of the herbs in 

those days. 


8-8 so & (omnis): S Ethiop. Ar. Arm. all the people hh so Ethiop. Arm. : & (best MSS.) > are 

which = xaOos Any cornpas yy ev Xeport (Gf. Avm.): Sas a haven of life to a ship that 1s set ene Pea dei x sicut 
portus navis (v. /. navi) salvatae a tempestate ii of. S (Ar): & Ethiop. Ar#* Arm. > soL Ethiop. Ar’ 
Arm.: but & Ar. I wept 1-1 59 3 (= es ava): & in contentione (= «ts aywva) m-m s9 % Ethiop. (cf. Arm.) : 
. # vestrae nn so i $: Ethiop. of the fruit of the field 





t - he conclusion of the original vision.] 

: Le an pene pre now forms the conclusion of the fifth vision is plainly a fragment of S, and a been 
: transposed to its present position by R. It forms the true conclusion to the former vision, that of the heavenly Sion. 
For a discussion of the reasons for this analysis reference must be made to ZA, p.276f. The passage is parallel to 
y ey tan ame, saree angel Uriel: the verse forms the immediate continuation of x. 57. 

40. the seven days, i.e. the seven days mentioned in ses ARIE 

42. a cluster out of the vintage. For the figure ef. ix. 21, Isa.x. 6. 

alamp ina dark place. Cf. 2 Pet.i. 19. 


- t. For the representation cf. 2 Bar. xxxii. 8. ; ; 
ae pe A The verses that pilow are clearly the work of R. The latter has introduced another seven days’ stay in 


3 aes a : A eure We have 

dat reparation for the vision that follows (ch. xiii), which, however, is a. dream-vision. é 
eam ie ne hae days’ preparation in Ardat was for the final and crowning vision of the heavenly Sion, 
which concluded the Salathiel-Apocalypse (S). It cannot, therefore, have been repeated. In v. 49 (see note below) 


sion ‘after these days’ must be due to R. : 
aie sogeer these days, icone mentioned in xii. 39: but R has forgotten that this command to the seer had not 


been communicated to the people ; to the latter ‘ these days > would be unintelligible. 


615 


va eye oe 
Ss e 


IV EZRA 18, 1-5 


THE: SIXTH VISION, 
(THE MAN FROM THE SEA.) 
(xiii. 1-58) (M) (R). 

I. xiii. 1-13 a, THE VISION (M). 


M131,2 And it came to pass after seven days that I dreamed a dream by night: °(and I beheld,)° and lo! 
3 there arose a violent wind” from the sea, and stirred all its waves. And I beheld, and lo! “(the 

wind caused to come up out of the heart of the seas as it were the form of aman. And I beheld, 

and lo !)4 this Man *flewt with the clouds of heaven. And wherever he turned his countenance to 

4 look everything seen by him trembled ; and whithersoever the voice went out of his mouth, all *that 

5 heard his voice* *melted away ', as the wax melts when it feels the fire. And after this I beheld, 

and lo! there was gathered together from the four winds of heaven an innumerable multitude of men 


°° so (of. Arm.) : but & Lthiop. Ar Ar2 > PP so 3 (= peyas avepos) Lthiop. Ar’ Arm.: & a wind 
14 sod (of. Ethiop. Ar) Ar? Arm.): & > (2y homoioteleuton) "" reading convolabat (for convalescebat) : 
so Oriental VSS. “* reading qui audiebant vocis (AZSS. voces, vocem) eius = ot nkovaay ths Phavyns avrov 


“t 30% (of. Ar} Arm.) = eraxnoav: %-ardescebant = exanoay 





xiii, I-58. THE SIXTH [SON OF MAN] Viston. A fresh dream-vision reveals a storm-tossed sea, a violent wind 
having arisen. The wind brings up from the midst of the sea the figure of a Man, who flies with the clouds of heaven. 
Everything trembles at his look; whoever hears his voice is consumed with fire. From the four quarters of the world 
a multitude of men presently gather to wage war against him. He carves out—whence, it is not stated—an immense 
rock, which he mounts and from which he annihilates the hostile host with a stream of fire and tempest which proceeds 
out of his mouth. His weapons, it is to be noticed, are not sword and spear, but fire and storm. When the hostile 
multitude has been consumed the Man descends from the mountain, and summons to his side a peaceable host, all 
who—whether from friendliness or fear—had not attacked him. 

The seer, awaking from his dream; prays that the vision may be interpreted to him. The interpretation follows. 
The Man from the Sea is the Messiah ; his enemies are the nations of the world ; the graven rock, whose origin was so 
mysterious, is the heavenly Jerusalem, which comes down from heaven. The annihilation of the hostile powers is 
effected by the fire of the Law. Then the Messiah gathers the ten tribes out of alien lands, and with the joint aid of 
these and of the others who are already in Palestine, he establishes a kingdom of peace and glory. 

A careful examination of the vision proper and the interpretation that follows it reveals certain incongruities 
between what is explained and the explanation. This is a common phenomenon in apocalyptic, and shows that the 
apocalyptic writers were handling traditional material which was already extremely old when they wrote. Thus the 
first point to be noted is that when the vision first assumed a written form (i.e. probably some considerable time before 
the redactor (R) compiled our present book) the real significance of many features in the original vision was already 
lost, and was obscured by a more or less artificially adjusted interpretation. In other words religious thought and 
outlook had long outgrown those of the fixed tradition. It had become necessary to reinterpret the latter to suit later 
conditions. 

For a full discussion of ‘ the original significance’ of the vision reference must be made to ZA, pp. 282-4. Here 
it can only be noted that the term ‘the Man’ (or ‘one like unto a son of Man’ in Dan. vil) apparently denoted, in the 
earlier stages of the tradition, an angelic being who was invested with attributes, proper only to Jahveh Himself, and 
ultimately developed into the heavenly Messiah. In the earliest stage of all this ‘Man’ was the Cosmic Man—the 
‘Urmensch’— who, endowed with supernatural gifts, fights and overcomes the monster of chaos (see further, Volz, 
pp. 214f., 216f.). / 

THE INTERPRETATION OF THE VISION. As has already been pointed out, the written source used by R included 
not only the Vision proper (vv. 1-13 a), but also its interpretation (vv. 25-53). Here the details of the Vision have 
been forced to adjust themselves to a later eschatological scheme. The Man from the Sea = the pre-existent Messiah, 
who shall deliver creation (vv, 25-26); he will first of all destroy with wind, fire, and storm the hostile powers that 
assemble against him (vv. 27-28 and 33-35 [vv. 29-32 may be an interpolation by R]), after rebuking them for their 
offences (vv. 37-38) ; the fire with which he destroys them 1s the fire of the Law (v. 38). The assembly of the hostile 
nations and their destruction thus described correspond to the ‘ wars of Gog and Magog’, which is a regular feature 
in the eschatological scheme. After the destruction of his enemies the Messiah gathers his subjects—the peaceable 
multitude of v. 12. These, it is significant to notice, are identified (v. 40f.) with the Ten Tribes (=Israel’s exiles), who 
now are led back and, together with the two tribes already in Palestine (v. 48), enjoy the Messianic kingdom of peace. 
Nothing is said in the interpretation of the vision of any heathen nations being included in the peaceable multitude 
though such were certainly included in the representation of the vision itself (¥. 12). Possibly, however proselytes 
were intended to be included. ; 

A number of considerations, which cannot be discussed here, show that the vision and its interpretation (i.e. M) 
form an independent source ; and the historical situation presupposed clearly points to a date anterior to A.D. 70 (see 
further ZA, p. 285 f.). 


THE REDACTION OF M. The redactional readjustments made by R are mainly b way of supplem 

other sources of the book. The most considerable of his additions is oe the secon au I Aiko ee piu eat a 
this) ; his hand is also apparent in xiii. 26, xiii. 29-32, xiii. 36, xiii, 48 (see notes on these passages). The vision 
and its interpretation fall naturally into the following divisions: i. The Viston (xill. I-13.) 3 ii. Zhe Afpocalyptist’s 
reflections on the Vision (xili, 13 6-24) ; iii. The interpretation of the Vision (xiii. 25-53 @). 

2. from the sea. Cf. xi. 1. 

4. as the wax melts when it feels the fire. A standing figure in the O. T., especiall in th i ipti : 
cf. Ps. xcvii. 5, Micah i. 4; also Judith xvi. 15, 1 En. 1, 6, &e. ae 3 cata : 

616 





15, 


17; 





oe ee 


—_ 


ee ee 


IV EZRA 18, 6-21 


6 to make war against the Man that came up out of the sea. And I beheld, and lo! he cut out for 
7 himself a great mountain and flew up upon it. But I sought to see the region or place from whence the 
8 mountain had been cut out; and I couldnot. And after this I beheld, and lo! all who were gathered 
together against him to wage war with him were seized with great fear ; yet they dared to fight. 
9 And lo! when he saw the assault of the multitude as they came he neither lifted his hand, nor held 
Io spear nor any warlike weapon; but I saw only how he sent out of his mouth as it were "a fiery 
stream“, and out of his lips Ya flaming breath’, and out of his tongue he shot forth “a storm of 
11 sparks“. And these were all mingled together—the fiery stream, the flaming breath, and * the 
- .. storm *, and fell upon ¥ the assault of the multitude’ * which was prepared to fight, and burned 
them all up, so that suddenly nothing more was to be seen of the innumerable multitude save only 
12 dust of ashes and smell of smoke. When I saw this I was amazed. Afterwards I beheld the same 
Man come down from the mountain, and call unto him another multitude which was peaceable. 
13 Then drew nigh unto him the faces of many men, * some of whom were glad, some sorrowful *; while 
some were in bonds, some brought others who should be offered. 


II. xiii. 136-24. THE APOCALYPTIST’S REFLECTIONS ON THE VISION (mainly R). 


Then through great fear I awoke. And I supplicated the Most High and said: 

14 Thou from the beginning hast shown thy servant these wonders, and hast counted me worthy to 
16 receive my prayer: oh show me now moreover the interpretation of this dream! For as I conceive 

in my mind, woe unto them that shall survive in those days! but much more woe unto them that 
18 do not survive! For they that do not survive must be sorrowful, knowing as they do what things are 
Ig reserved in the last days, but not attaining unto them. But woe unto them also that survive, for 
20 this reason—they must-see great perils, and many distresses, even as these dreams do show. Yet 
>it is better’ to come into “these things ° incurring peril, than to pass away as a cloud out of the 
world and not to see what shall happen in the last time. And he answered me, and said: The 
interpretation of the Vision I will tell thee, and I will also explain unto thee the things of which 


2 


Lal 


u-o # fluctum (v. Z. flatum) ignis YY HZ spiritum flammae ‘~~ reading scintillas tempestatis ** £ multitudo 
tempestatis (we should expect scintillae tempestatis fo be repeated) YY reading multitudinis impetum = ** & 
quod (sc. multitudo = rAnOos—vretaining the Greek gender) a~a ZH quorundam gaudentium quorundam tristantium 
= ov pev ndopevor, ay SeAvroupevav >? so B Ethiop. (cf. Arm.): & facilius (? read felicius: so Hilg.) °~* reading 
haec = 3S Ethiop. 





6. he cut out for himself a great mountain. Cf. Dan. ii. 45 (‘the stone cut out without hands’). = ; 
10. a storm of sparks. The whole representation is based on Isa. xi. 4; cf. Ps. Sol. xvii. 27, 1 En. Ixii. 2. It is 
a striking feature that the Messiah, without the aid of weapons or allies, destroys the opposed nations by supernatural 
means. See further Volz, p. 224f. ‘ hae ; 
11. the ... storm. The description is a threefold delineation of the fiery stormy emission from the Messiah’s 
mouth—fire like a stream, flame like wind, a sea of sparks like a snowstorm, all forming a mingled mass (Volkmar). 
12. and call unto him another multitude which was peaceable. The Messiah first destroys his enemies and 
then gathers his subjects, as in Ps. of Sol. xvii (cf. especially verses 27, 28); cf. Isa. xi, 12. . 
13. the faces of many men. The faces betray the moods (joy, sorrow, &c.) described in the following clause. 
some ... glad, some sorrowful. Jews and heathen, pious and godless, are meant (Gunkel). 
some were in bonds, i.e. Jews in captivity. eae ; 
some brought others who should be offered, i.e. the heathen bring in Jews as an oblation to the Messiah ; 
cf. Isa. Ixvi. 20 (Ps. Sol. xvii. 34). 


xiii. 13 6-24. As would be expected, R has not allowed the old source (M) from which he excerpted this vision to 
remain without revision and interpolation. In the section that follows (vv. 13 6-24) his hand is much in evidence; 
practically the whole of it is his work. Thus vv. 16-20, beginning, ‘ Woe unto them that shall survive in those days! 
but much more woe unto them that do not survive !’ is plainly out of place in the midst of a prayer for enlightenment 
as to the meaning of the vision. Such language is the work of one who knows that the vision describes the advent of 
the Messiah, though this has yet to be explained in the interpretation (vv. 25-52). , in fact, has borrowed the 
laneuage and ideas of this passage from the interpretation that follows, which begins with v. 25, as the form of that 
verse clearly indicates. The whole passage exhibits essentially similar features to those of vili. 63-ix. 12. It is 
a compilation made by R. Its reflective tone also accords with this view of its general character. ; 

Possibly some of the language of the earlier source lies behind wv. 13 0-14, but if so it has apparently been revised 
; further LA, p. 290. : " ro 
ge ren Be olicaged fk Most High. The prayer is addressed directly to God. [What here followed originally 
i orked over by R. ig ' 
oe eG desenine hast can thy servant these wonders. Cf. viii. 63. R here alludes to the disclosures 
which have been made in the former Visions. Hee yes 
ted me worthy to receive my prayer. Cf. ix. 24, 25. Seeat 

ee fuiaes are eaned in the last days. ‘The last days’ here = the temporary Messianic kingdom that 
precedes the End. This view harmonizes with the eschatology of E and R. Cf. vii. 26-44 and vill. 63-ix. 12. 

19. even as these dreams do show. By ‘these dreams >’ R here means the whole series of preceding visicns. 


617 


i 


30 


~ 


IV. EZRA Ass 22-35 


22 thou hast spoken. Whereas thou hast spoken of those who survive “(and of those who do me 

23 survive) “—this is the interpretation: He that shall bring the peril in that time °will himself keep 
them that fall into the peril, even such as have works and faith toward ‘(the Most High and)* the 

24 Mighty One. Know, therefore, that those who survive (to that time) are more blessed than those 
that have died. 


Ill. xiii. 25-52, 53@. THE INTERPRETATION OF THE VISION (M) (R). 


25 These are the interpretations of the vision: Whereas thou didst see a Man coming up from 
26 the heart of the Sea: this is he whom the Most High is keeping & many ages [(and) ® through whom 
27 he will deliver his creation h,] and the same shall order the survivors. And whereas thou didst see 
28 that out of his mouth there came wind, and fire, and storm ; and whereas he held neither spear, nor 

any warlike weapon, but destroyed the assault of that multitude which had come ito fight against 
29 him *—this is the interpretation: [Behold, the days come when the Most fligh ts about to deliver them 
31 that are upon earth. And there shall come astonishment of mind upon the dwellers on earth: and 

they shall plan to war one against another, icity agaist citys, place against place, people against 
32 people, and kingdom against kingdom. And it shall be when these things shall come to pass, and the 

signs shall happen which I showed thee before, then shall my Son be revealed whom thou didst see as 
33 a Man ascending.| It shall be, when all the nations hear his voice, every man shall leave his own 
34 land and the warfare which they have one against another; and an innumerable multitude shall be 
35 gathered together, as thou didst see, desiring to come and to fight against him. But he shall stand 
36 upon the summit of Mount Sion. [And Sion shall come and shall be made manifest to-all men, 
37 prepared and builded, even as thou didst see the mountain cut out without hands.| But he, my Son, 

shall reprove the nations that are come for their ungodliness—which things (i.e., the rebukes) are 
38 like unto a storm—; and shall reproach them to their face with their evil thoughts and with the 

tortures with which they are destined to be tortured—which are compared unto a flame—; and then 
39 Shall he destroy them without labour * by the Law * which is compared unto fire. And whereas 

thou didst see 'that he summoned and gathered to himself’ another multitude which was peaceable— 


d=d s9 S Ars) (ch Ethiop.): & > ee reading ipse custodibit Tt s0 & (of. Ethiop. Ar): &> 
s-s & multis temporibus (= moAdos xpovois) bh & qui per semetipsum (a misunderstanding of \A-WWR = os b1 avTou) : 
the correct translation ts given by Ar: (cf. % Ethiop. Arm.) ++ Had (so S, Sc.) expugnare eum (= mpos To exmoheyew 
avrov) JI & civitatis (a false nom. = civitas) civitatem *-* 50 3: Let legem = !1 s0 3 (cf. Ar): & eum colli- 





23. even such as have works and faith. A reminiscence of the theology of S; so inasimilar composite passage, 
1Xe0/(Chanvalieng3 S)s 

Xi. 25-52, 53 a. 

26. many ages. The pre-existent heavenly Messiah (= ‘the Son of Man’ of 1 En. XxXvli-Ixx) is meant. His 
being hidden with God is referred to in v. 52 below. This heavenly pre-existence must be carefully distinguished from 
the earthly pre-existence which is attributed in various forms to the earthly Messiah in Rabbinic literature. 

[through whom he will deliver his creation]. This clause does not accord with the rest of the interpretation; 
it has probably been interpolated by R from the former vision (A); cf. xi. 46. So, again, v. 29 in this chapter (the 
deliverance of creation), 

and the same shall order the survivors. This is probably due to R (cf. v. 48). 

29-32. [Behold, the days come, &c.] These verses appear to be an interpolation by R intended to explain how the 
nations had previously been engaged in internecine strife. The contents are in the style of E; cf. iv. 52-v.12. The 
verses really interrupt the sequence of the interpretation, which is restored by their elimination. 

29. [Behold, the days come]. Cf. v. 1, vi. 18. 

31. [people against people, and kingdom against kingdom]. Cf. Isa. xix. 2, Matt. xxiv. We 

34. [and an innumerable multitude shall be gathered together]. An important point in the eschatological 
drama is assigned to the final conflict of the assembled heathen nations against the people of God (the ‘wars of Gog 
and Magog’). The annihilation of these hosts forms an indispensable preliminary to the inauguration of the Messianic 
era. Cf, Ezek. xxxviii-xxxix ; Joel iii (Hebr. iv) 12; Zech. xiv. 2; Isa. xxv. 2; and see further EA, p. 294f. 

35. But he shall stand upon the summit of Mount Sion. The identification of the mysterious mountain (which 
the Man cut out for himself and upon which he flew) with Mount Sion is implied. This is natural from a later point 
of view ; cf. Ps. ii. 6. For the original significance of this feature cf. EE Wy PO 

36. [And Sion shall come, &c.] Another interpolation by R. Here Sion = the heavenly City which descends from 
heaven at the end of the Messianic age (cf. vii. 26). Cf. also Rev. xxi. 2, of. 

[without hands]. Cf. Dan. ii. Ban Soh 

37. shall reprove the nations. Cf. xii. 32. 

shall reproach them, &c. Cf. xii. 32. 

38. shall he destroy them. Apparently the hostile multitude here destroyed includes a@// the heathen nations, as 
“the peaceable’ multitude which is preserved is identified with the Ten Tribes. Contrast the original vision (v. 13 a), 
which contemplates the submission of some of the heathen to the triumphant Messiah (so 2 Bar. Ixxii. 2; 3; Ps. of Sol 
XVil. 32). For the older view see Ps. Ixxii. 11 ; Isa. xvi; Zech. xiv; Dan. vii. 14. Possibly in our passage, however, 
proselytes are intended to be included in the ‘peaceable’ multitude. For the conflict of Opinion on the ultimate fate 
of the heathen see Volz, p. 322-325; RWS?, ch. xi. 20. 


618 





Ee 


41 


42 
43 
44 
45 
406 
47 


48 
49 
50 
5I 
52 


53 


530 
54 


ie) 


IV EZRA 18. 40-54 


40 These are ™the ten tribes™ which were led away captive out of their own land in the days "of | 


Josiah™ the king, ° which (tribes)° Salmanassar the king of the Assyrians led away captive; he 
carried them across the River, and (thus) they were transported into another land. ? But they took 
this counsel among themselves”, that they would leave the multitude of the heathen, and go forth 
into a land further distant, where the human race had never dwelt, there at least to keep their 
statutes which they had not kept in their own land. And they entered by the narrow passages 
of the river Euphrates. For the Most High then wrought “wonders for them, and stayed the 
springs of the River until they were passed over. And through that country there was a great way 
to go, (a journey) of a year and a half; and that region was called Arzareth. There they have dwelt 
until the last times ; and now, when they are about to come again, the Most High will again stay 
the springs of the River, that they may be able to pass over. Therefore thou didst see a multitude 
gathered together in peace. [But the survivors of thy people, even those who are found within my holy 
border, * (shall be saved)*.| It shall be, therefore, when he shall destroy the multitude of the nations 
that are gathered together, he shall defend the people that remain. And then shall he show them | 
®very many wonders*. And I said: O Lord my Lord, show me this: wherefore I have seen the 
Man coming up from the heart of the sea. And he said unto me: Just as one can neither seek out 
nor know what is in the deep of the sea, even so can no one upon earth see my Son [or those that 
are with him], but in the time tof his day*. Such is the interpretation of the dream which thou 
hast seen. 


IV. xiii. 530-58. EPILOGUE AND TRANSITION TO THE SEVENTH VISION 
(partly E?, partly S R). 


... Therefore "has this been revealed to thee", and to thee alone, 
because thou hast forsaken the things of thyself’, 
and hast applied thy diligence unto mine 
and searched out my Law ; 


gentemadse ™-™soH: Sthenineand a half tribes = Lthzof. (some MSS.: but others nine) Ar. Arm.: Ar? the rem- 
nant ofthenine tribes ™°™ HL (dest MSS.) Josiae; soSAr?: &(M)Oseae °° sod Ethiop. Ar?: Lquem (due to 
misunderstanding the reference of WN) p-p & ipsi autem sibi dederunt consilium hoc 4-4 s0 Oriental VSS.: 
signa t-t so S: other VSS. (including 1k) > s-s % multa plurima portenta (= zmidyy ma4 mx5p3) Bees) 
many wonders (Violet regards multa im & as an uncorrected mistake for plurima) t-t s0 2 (of. other Oriental 
VSS.) : & diei only u-a % inluminatus es haec = ehwri Ons tava v-v & tua = ra oa 





4o. the ten tribes. This is a purely ideal designation of the Northern Kingdom here. For the legends concerning 
the Ten Tribes cf. ZA, p. 300f.; and tor the explanation of the variant ‘ nine and a half’ cf. ZA, p. 296. _ 
in the days of Josiah the King. This is the true reading of & and the other versions. An historical error is 
involved, Hosea being the name of the king in whose reign the Captivity took place (cf. 2 Kings xvii). The error may 
be due to the original writer (cf. Dan. i. 1, 2 Bar. i. 1), or to textual corruption in the original Hebrew. 
the River, i.e. the Euphrates. 

41. where the human race had never dwelt. As Gunkel remarks, the fact that the Ten Tribes were not known to 
exist in any definite land made it necessary to suppose that they had removed to a locality not otherwise accessible, 
and out of contact with the rest of the world. MG ibe 

44. and stayed the springs of the River until they were passed over. Cf. Josh. ili. 15 f. This will explain 
why it is that the country in which the Ten Tribes are supposed to be dwelling is inaccessible (Gunkel). | 

45. Arzareth, i.e. as Dr. Schiller-Szinessy (Journal of Philology, iii [1871], p. 1 14) correctly pointed out,. the 
eres achereth (=‘ another land’) of Deut. xxix. 25-28 (Hebr. 24-27). The words of this passage are applied to the Ten 
Tribes in the Mishnah (Sav. x. 3). See further ZA, p. 298. ; ] ‘ 

48. [But the survivors... who are found within my holy border, &c.] This verse must be an interpolation of 
R; it represents the point of view of E (cf. vi. 25), which R is fond of insisting upon (cf. vii. 28). The logical con- 
nexion is much improved by its omission. For the idea that Palestine is, in a special sense, the land of salvation 
(cf. ix. 8), and that to dweil there is in itself a source of protection and happiness, cf. 2 Bar. xl. 2 (also xxxix. 2) and 

. See also Volz, p. 308. 
Ties: defend Sic people ‘ial remain, i.e. those, presumably, who do not come under the destructive fire that 
proceeds out of the Messiah’s mouth, viz. Israel, which includes the people in Palestine and the Ten Tribes. The 
latter may be intended to embrace the Dispersion generally, together with proselytes. ; 

51. Show me this. The meaning of the coming up of the Man from the Sea was already obscure to the apocalyptist. 
The explanation that follows is clearly an artificial one, the product of later reflection, ; : 

52. [or those that are with him]. There is no hint in the vision itself, or elsewhere in the interpretation, that the 
Messiah is accompanied by other beings ; probably the words are an insertion by R (cf. vii. 28—also R). The 
Messiah’s immortal companions may be meant (cf. vi. 26), or, possibly, angels. Fae q a 

xiii. 530-58. The verses that follow form, in their present position, a short epilogue to the sixth, and a transition 
to the Seventh vision. Probably vv. 534-55 (which are vigorous and distinctive both in thought and diction) were 
derived by R from E’, while vv. 57-58 are a misplaced fragment of S, which should follow Se RERDCC HEA, pagOl f. 
In order to adjust these verses to their present context R has added the redactional link ‘and there I sat three days’. 
This finds its explanation in the opening words of the next vision. 


619 


IV: EZRAY 8s 514. 2 


Ee 55 Thy life thou hast ordered unto wisdom 
and hast called understanding thy mother. ; : 
56 Therefore have I showed thee this ; for there is a reward (laid up) with the Most High. And it 
shall be after three more days I will speak other things unto thee, and will declare to thee things 
difficult and marvellous, 


REDACTIONAL TRANSITION TO THE SEVENTH VISION 
[vv. 57-58 (S) misplaced : proper position after x. 57]. 


S(R) 57. ['’ Then I went forth and walked in the field ’’, greatly magnifying and praising the Most High on 
58 account of the marvellous acts which he performs in due season ; and because he governs the times 
and the things which come to pass in due season.] And there I abode three days. 


THE SEVENTH VISION. 
(THE EZRA-LEGEND.) 
(Chap. xiv) (E?) (S) (R). 
I, xiv. 1-17. EZRa’s COMMISSION (E2) (R). 
F214 1,2 And it came to pass “after the third day “, while I sat under the oak, lo! there came a voice out 


WW so ® Ethiop. (of. Arm. Ar#): & et profectus sum et transii in campum ww so Ar.* Arm. (cf. after 
this): # tertio die i 

55. hast called understanding thy mother. Cf. Prov. vii. 4. e 

57. Then I went forth and walked in the field, i.e. the field of Ardat, the scene of the Vision of the heayenly 
City. The proper position of this and the following verse is, therefore, after x. 57. In its original context the clause 
means that the seer avails himself of the permission given him in x. 55 to go inand look more carefully at the wonders 
of the heavenly City, still conceived as being visible to his eyes in the field. So he passes from the spot, where he 
has received the revelation, further into the field to gaze upon the City. 


xiv. THE SEVENTH VISION. The so-called ‘ Seventh Vision ’ begins with a narrative description of Ezra sitting 
“under the oak’, and ‘on the third day’ (i.e. at the end of the three-day period prescribed in xiii. 56) hearing a voice 
from a bush (as to Moses), which commanded him to recall carefully the things (of Scripture and tradition) that he 
had learnt, because his departure from the world is at hand—he is assured that he is to be translated to the heavenly 
regions to be with the Messiah and his companions. The age is hastening to its close. Of the twelve periods which 
the world had to run nine and a half have elapsed already, and only two and a half remain. Therefore the prophet is 
bidden to prepare to take his departure. On his asking who is to take his place after he himself has gone, and 
praying that he may be inspired; while he remains on earth, to write down again all the Scriptures that have been 
burnt, he is told to withdraw from the people forty days: during this interval, with the aid of five specially equipped 
scribes, he is to write down all that he has seen and heard. Part of the writings is to be published openly; part to be 
kept secret. The seer, after delivering a farewell address to the people (vv. 27-36), does as he is commanded. A cup 
is given him ‘which was full as it were with water. but the colour of it was like fire’, after drinking which he is 
specially inspired and strengthened to remember all the sacred writings. For forty days he dictates to the five 
scribes, with the result that in all ninety-four books are written down, twenty-four of which (= the Old Testament 
Books) are to be published, while seventy are to be treasured in secret among the wise of the people. In the Oriental 
Versions a short postscript gives the year, according to the Era of.Creation, when these events took place, and ends 
with the announcement of Ezra’s assumption. 

For a full discussion of the significance of the Ezra-legend for the interpretation of the book reference must be 
made to ZA, pp. 304 ff. It should be noted that the legend represents Ezra as the restorer not only of the lost 
canonical but also of the dispersed apocalyptic books. 

This amounts to a claim that the apocalyptic tradition occupies an essential place in genuine Judaism. It claims 
for itself the great names of Moses and Ezra, ‘the second Moses.’ When the date of the formation of our book 
is taken into consideration (? A.D. 120 or somewhat later) it seems impossible to dissociate its appearance with the 
controversies regarding the Canon. The motive of R in compiling his Apocalypse and associating with it the name of 
Ezra seems to have been a desire to reassert the claim of apocalyptic tradition to secure (or maintain) for itself an 
officially recognized place within Judaism as part of the oral tradition. 

While there was, at this time, a party among the Rabbis more or less favourable to apocalyptic, a larger number 
took up a hostile attitude. Our book seems to be due to an attempt to win over opponents by publishing one of the 
secret books (or a collection of selections from them) associated with the great name of Ezra, in which the cruder 
elements of apocalyptic are refined away. 

A number of considerations go to show that E? is an independent source. For a full discussion of these reference 
must be made to ZA, p. 306f. The fitting in of ch. xiv to its present context by R was not accomplished without 
some adjustment and adaptation. This can be seen clearly in vv. 84, 176, 28, and v. 37 (‘into the field’): in vv, 29-35 
we have, apparently, a misplaced section of S; while vv. 49-50 are obviously the work of R. The chapter falls 
naturally into the following divisions: (i) vv. 1-173 (ii) vv. 18-26 ; (iil) vv. 27-36; (iv) vv. 37-48; (v) vv. 49-50. 

Xlv. I-17, 

1. under the oak. Evidently some well-known oak is meant which had been fixed upon by tradition as a place 
where revelations were given. Such an oak is mentioned in several passages in 2 Baruch (vi. 1, Ixxvii. 18, cf. lv. 1), 
and is there located in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem. Doubtless the same oak (in or near Jerusalem) is meant 
here ; it cannot be identical with ‘ Abraham’s oak’ at Hebron. 

2. there came a voice out ofa bush. Cf. Exod. iii. 8. 


620 





6 


H 2 


Oe a ee 


"ry. 


IV EZRA 14. 2-17 


of a bush over against me; and it said, Ezra, Ezra! And I said: Here am I, Lord. And I rose 
3 upon my feet. Then said he unto me: I did manifestly reveal myself *in the bush *, and talked with 
4 Moses when my people were in bondage in Egypt: and I sent him, ¥and led¥ 
Egypt, and brought them to Mount Sinai; and I held him by me for many days. 
5 I told him many wondrous things, 
showed him the secrets of the times, 
* declared to him” the end of the seasons : 
Then I commanded him saying : 
These words shalt thou publish openly, but these keep secret. And now I do say to thee: 
The signs which I have shewed * thee ®, 
The dreams which thou hast seen, 
and the interpretations which thou hast heard. 
9 lay them up in thyheart! For thou shalt be taken up from (among) men, and henceforth thou shalt 
remain with my Son, and with such as are like thee, until the times be ended. 
10 ~=6. For the world has lost its youth, 
The times begin to wax old. 
tt For the world-age is divided into »twelve” parts; ¢nine (parts) of it are passed already °, and the 
12 half of the tenth part; and there remain of it two (parts), besides “the half4 of the tenth part. 
13 Now, therefore, set in order thy house, 


and reprove thy people; 
Comfort the lowly among them, 
°and instruct those that are wise °. 
Now do thou renounce the life that is corruptible, 
14 let go from thee ‘ the cares of mortality ¢; 
cast from thee the burdens of man, 
put off now the weak nature ; 
lay aside thy burdensome cares, 
and hasten to remove from these times ! 
16 For still worse evils than those which thou hast seen happen shall yet take place’. For the 
weaker the world grows through age, so much the more shall evils increase upon the dwellers on earth. 
17. Truth shall withdraw further off, 
and falsehood be nigh at hand: 
for already the Eagle is hastening to come whom thou sawest in viston. 


my people out of 


OO ~T 





x-x & super rubum (= em rns Barov): Av.? in Mount Sinai (confusion of NID [Aram. 1D] bush and 1)"D) Y-Y read- 
img eduxi (SA): the v. ¢. eduxit 7s supported by S Ar. Ar.’ 22 so % (of. other Oriental VSS.) : £ > a-a so % 
Ethiop. Ar: but & (best MSS.) > bb so L Ar?: Ethiop. ten [vv. 11-12 are not attested in S and Arm.] 
‘-e yeading et transierunt elus ix iam (JZSS. of L have x [decem] = Az?) dd yeading dimidium e-8 50 
Oriental VSS.: & > ff # mortales cogitationes (= rovs Oavacipouvs oyiopous) 8-8 reading iterum . 
facientur (JZ.S‘S. facient) 





4. [held him by me, i.e. ‘I held’ Moses (viz. on Mount Sinai) ; cf. Exod. xxxiv. 28. : 

5. the secrets of the times .. . the end of the seasons, i.e. the secret tradition regarding the crises of the 
world’s history (measured by certain periods of time) which was associated with the name of Moses : a specimen of 
this exists in the Assumption of Moses; see i. 16f., x. 12, xi. I. There are traces of a larger apocryphal literature 
which circulated under the name of Moses, but which is no longer extant. Hc : 

6. These words . . . publish openly, but these keep secret. Cf. the narrative in Deut. v. What was published 
openly by Moses was the Torah ; what was kept secret was, according to our author, the apocalyptic tradition. So 
Gunkel. The terms of v. 5 certainly suggest an apocalyptic rather than an oral legal tradition, such as the oral Law 
which was treasured in Rabbinic circles, and which was largely traced back (in theory, at any rate) to Moses. 

8. The dreams... interpretations ... heard. These lines have probably been added by R to connect what 
follows with the contents of the previous visions. ere k Make AS 

9. with my Son, and with such as are like thee. The Messiah is here conceived as pre-existing in heaven, and (as 
in the Parables of 1 Enoch) as surrounded by a community of elect ones (cf. 1 En. xxxix. 7). So, too, in the Parables 
Enoch is removed to heaven to dwell with the Son of Man (1 En. Ixx. 1 f.), just as Ezra is here. See further £4, 


09. : : 
atid the times be ended. The heavenly Messiah does not appear till the End; cf. 1 En. xlv. 3f. 

1o. the world has lost its youth, the times begin to wax old. Cf. 2 Bar. Ixxxv. Io; see the idea worked out 
in 4 Ezra v. 50-55. v PAS : } 

12. the half. For vv. 11-12 the Ethiop. has: ‘ For the world is divided into ten parts and is come to the tenth; 
and there remains the half of the tenth’ (cf. the half-week in Dan. ix. 27 = the last 35 years of tribulation). So in 
Sibyil. Oracles, iv. 47 f., and in the apocalypse of ten weeks, 1 En. xciii (xci). The twelve-period division appears in 
2 Bar. liiif. In our passage it is probable that the time-definition is intended to apply to the historical Ezra. See 
further ZA, p. 310. ; 

13. thy house, i.e. the house of Israel. 

14. cast from thee the burdens of man. Cf. 2 Cor. v. 4. Sih ¥ : 

17. for already the Eagle, &c. This is obviously a redactional link to bring in ch. xi. 


621 


IV EZRA 14. 18-31 


IT, xiv. 18-26. EZRA’S PRAYER FOR INSPIRATION TO RESTORE THE SCRIPTURES (E?). 


E* 18,19 And I answered and said: * Let me speak * before thee,O Lord! Lo, I will depart, as thou hast 


nd tH 


commanded me, and will warn the people who (now) exist: but they that shall be born later, who 
shall admonish them ? 
20 For the world lies in darkness, 
and the dwellers therein are without light. 
21 For thy Law is burnt; and so no man knows the things which have been done by thee, or the 
22 works that shall be done. If, then, I have found favour before thee, send into me the Holy Spirit, 
that I may write all that has happened in the world since the beginning, even the things which were 
written in thy Law, in order that men may be able to find ‘the path?, and that they who would live 
at the last, may live. 
23 And he answered me and said: Go thy way, assemble the people and tell them not to seek thee 
24 for forty days. But do thou prepare for thyself many j writing-tabletsi; and take with thee Saraia, 
Dabria, Selemia, * Elkanah*, and Osiel, these five, because they are equipped for writings wiftly ; 
25 and (then) come hither, and I will light the lamp of understanding in thy heart, which shall not be 
26 extinguished until what thou art about to write shall be completed. And when thou shalt have 
finished, some things thou shalt publish, and some thou shalt deliver in secret to the wise. 
To-morrow, at this hour, thou shalt begin to write. 


III. xiv. 27-36. Ezra’s Last Worps (E?) (S) (R). 


27 Then I went forth as he commanded me, and assembled all the people and said: 

28 | Hear, O Israel, these words !| 

29 on fathers were at the beginning strangers in Egypt, and they were delivered from thence. 
30 And (then) they received the Law of life, which they kept not, !even as! you also after them have 
31 transgressed (it). Then was a land given you for an inheritance ™in the land of Sion™, but ye and 





hh yeading loquar (Lat. SS. mostly >) = Oriental VSS. ii 50 LS: Ethiop.+of life Fig 

buxos (= mvéia: Hebr. nim) kK s0 Zand Arm. (of. Ethiop.): & Ethanus rl ® quem (so 38): 

prob. an original Hebr, WOR was misread WS (so Violet) m-m so, 3 (¢f. Ethiop.): Ar. >: Ar2 on Mount 
xiv, 18-26. 


20. the dwellers therein are without light, i.e. without the light of God’s Law. For the idea of the Law = light 
of arte revelation cf. Ps, xix, especially v. 8. Often, in apocalyptic, light and darkness correspond to piety and 
godlessness. 

21. thy Law is burnt. The reference here is primarily to the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar when, 
with other things, the Law is presumed to have been burnt, 
= the things which have been done by thee, i.e. the narrative of the sacred (historical) books of the Old 

estament. 

the works that shall be done, i.e. according to Gunkel, the eschatological passages of the Old Testament. 
The Old Testament thus consists primarily of sacred history and eschatology. 

22. Law. ‘Law’ here, apparently, has the wide sense of Scriptures of the Old Testament generally ; cf. John x. 24 

Vise 2 Sil COT EXIV 2 ie ; 
that they who would live at the last, may live. Cf. 2 Bar. xli. 1 and notes, and Ixxvi. 5. 

23. for forty days. As at the first giving of the Law (to Moses) and its writing down; cf. Exod. xxiv. 18, xxxiv. 28: 
Deut, ix. 9,18. The precedent is followed in the case of the second Moses here. : ‘ 

24. these five. In Ezra and his five companions there may be a covert allusion to Johanan b. Zakkai—the 
re-founder of Judaism in A. D, 66-70—and his five famous disciples, Eliezer b. Hyrqanos, Joshua b. Hananya, Jose the 
Priest, Simeon b. Nathanael, and Eleazar b. Araq. (so Rosenthal). ; i 

26. some thou shalt deliver in secret to the wise. Just as Moses, according to Rabbinic tradition, had delivered 
the substance of the oral law to the teachers and wise of his people to be handed down to future ages. 


xiv. 27-36. The section that follows is apparently of composite origin. In v. 23 God had said to Ezra: ‘Go thy 
way, assemble the people and tell them not to seek thee for forty days.’ Instead of simply carrying out this command 
Ezra, according to the present form of the section, assembles the people and delivers an address in which he reminds 
them that their fathers, though they were delivered from Egypt and received the Law of life, were unfaithful to their 
trust, and had not kept the behest of the Most High. In this unfaithfulness the assembled people had themselves 
shared. Therefore their land had been taken from them. If they will rule their understanding and instruct their 
hearts rey te be pes see and a death obtain mercy. For after death there is the judgement, when the 
names of the righteous shall be made manifest, and the works of the ungodl : i 
that Be one shall seek after him for forty days. sndnerandee eS UE as ee 

t seems probable that the passage as a whole formed no original part of E2, and has been c mpi 
has detached the original conclusion of S, and placed it here Gene the true sequel to xl. ie ee ike Ee 
p. 315. __In its original form E? here simply had, it is probable, vv. 27 and 36. ; 

28. [Hear, O Israel, these words!] This clause may have been added by R. 

- 2: cote of life, i.e. the Law which, if it was observed, would confer life and immortality—a characteristic 
oug : 


622, 





FE? 


a E_' 





a) 


IVE AR Ar IA) 312% 


your fathers have done unrighteousness, and have not kept the ways which *the Most High® com- 
32 manded you. ° And ° forasmuch as he is a righteous judge he took from you in due time that which 
33 he had bestowed. And now ye are here [? and your brethren are . . ”)., 
34 If ye, then, will rule over your own understanding 
and will discipline your heart, 
Ye shall be preserved alive 
and after death obtain mercy. 
35 For after death shall the Judgement come, 
[when we shall once more live again: 
And then shall the names of the righteous be made manifest, 
and the works of the godless declared. ] 
36 Let no man, then, come unto me now, nor seek me for forty days. 


IV. xiv. 37-48. THE RESTORATION OF THE HoLy SCRIPTURES (E?). 


37. So I took the five men as he had commanded me, and we went forth [¢nto the field| and remained 
there. 
38 And it came to pass on the morrow that, lo! a voice called me, saying: 
Ezra, open thy mouth 
and drink what I give thee to drink! 
39 Then I opened my mouth, and lo! there was reached unto me a full cup, which was full as it were 
with water, but the colour of it was like fire. 
40 And I took it and drank; and when I had drunk 
My heart poured forth understanding 
wisdom grew in my breast, 
and my spirit retained its memory: 
41 and my mouth opened, and was no more shut. 
42 And the Most High gave understanding unto the five men, and they wrote what was dictated ‘in 
order 4, *in characters which they knew not”. 
43 *And so they sat* forty days: 
They wrote in the day-time 
and at night did eat bread ; 


Sinai nn so & Arm. (cf. Ethiop.): % Moses the servant of the Lord: Ar > 9-9 so Oriental VSS.: & > 
p-p %& et fratres vestri introrsus vestrum sunt (¢f Ar.'): Sand your brethren are further inland than you in another 
land (cf Ethiop. Arm.): Ar.? your brethren are in the furthest East a-a & ex successione (= kadeEns; cf Luke 
i. 3) tT yeading [ex successione] notis (4ZS\S. noctis) quae non sciebant (so 3: cf. Ethiop.) (corrupt text is [quae 
dicebantur] excessiones noctis: the wonderful visions of the night that were told A.V.) SS so © Ethiop.: but S 
(cf. Ar Arm.) I sat 


33. ye are here, i.e. in Babylon (if the passage belongs to S). In its present context ‘here’ ought to mean in 
erusalem. 
! [and your brethren are....] The text is very uncertain (see crit. notes). If‘ your brethren’ = the Ten Tribes 
the verse is clearly a harmonistic addition based on xiii. 41. 

34. Ye shall be preserved alive, i.e. spiritually alive. ; ; 

35. [when we shall once more live again]. This clause seems certainly to refer to the bodily resurrection (pre- 
ceding the last Judgement). But such a reference would not harmonize with the theology of S. Kabisch thinks the 
clause may have been originally a marginal gloss, which was added by a pious reader who believed in a general 
resurrection, and which afterwards got into the text. i : ; } 

37. [into the field]. This is probably due to R, who identified the spot to which Ezra and his five companions retired 
with the field of Ardat. Some other expression may have stood in the text originally. 2 : 

39. was full as it were with water .. . fire. The cup is the cup of inspiration full of the holy spirit, which, clear 
as water, is like fire. Ezra after drinking it is inspired. The representation that is given in our passage of the inspired 
state is very interesting. It may be compared with Philo’s conception which was influenced by the Platonic idea of 
the ecstatic or God-intoxicated seer. For an extended reference to this cf. Philo, Quzs rerum divinarum heres stt, 
§8 The representation of the cup here as being the medium by which the prophet receives inspiration is peculiar. It 
certainly suggests Essene affinities ; the idea of divine power being sacramentally mediated was familiar to the members 
of this sect. See further ZA, p. 318 f. 

4o. and my spirit retained its memory. The effect of ecstasy was often such that the subject of it lost conscious- 
ness and memory. In Ezra’s case, however, the natural faculties are immensely strengthened and intensified, This 
is inspiration, so our passage seems to imply, in its highest form. The apocalyptic writer here is obviously well 
acquainted with the experiences and phenomena of the ecstatic state. _ ; ohn : 

42. in characters which they knew not, i.e. in a new Hebrew script, the square or * Assyrian character used in 
our printed Hebrew Bibles. Ezra was traditionally regarded as the inventor of this form of Hebrew writing ; cf. Jerome 
in his Preface to the Books of Kings (the so-called prologus galeatus): certum est Esdram scribam legisgue doctorem 
post captam Hierosolymam et instaurationem templi sub Zorobabel alias litteras repperisse guibus nunc utimur, cum ad 
illud usgue tempus tidem Samaritanorum et Ebraeorum characteres fuerint. 


623 





1 


[IV EZRA. 147 43-56 


but as for me, I spake in the day, 
and at night was not silent. 


44,45 So in forty days were written *ninety-four books*, And it came to pass when the forty days were 


fulfilled, that the Most High spake unto me saying: "The twenty-four books" that thou hast 
46 written publish, that the worthy and unworthy may read (therein): but the seventy last thou shalt 
keep, to deliver them to the wise among thy people. 
47 For in them is the spring of understanding, 
the fountain of wisdom, 
and the stream of knowledge. 
48 ‘And I did so’, “dn the seventh year, of the sixth week, after five thousand years of the creation 
and three months and twelve days™. , 


V. xiv. 49-50. CONCLUSION OF THE BooK (R). 


49 And then was Ezra caught away, and taken up * into the place of such as were like him after 
50 having written all these things. And he is called the Scribe of the knowledge of the Most High for 
ever and ever. 


tt so 3 Ethiop. Ar’ Arm.: the number given in the Lat. MSS. varies between go, 970, and 974 u-u sy S 
(Ar.’): & priora (ff. Ethiop. Arm.)—omitting the number vv here the Latin text breaks off WMP a: SS 
(= 5,042 years) see exeget. notes * =X so B Ethiop. (cf. Arm.): Ar. to the land of the living of such as were 
like him yy soZ 





43. but as for me, &c. Cf. 2 En. xxiii. 3 f. 

45. The twenty-four books. The twenty-four books are, of course, the books of the O.T., which were read openly 
in the synagogue, and were open for all to read. The number 24 is the ordinary reckoning of the O.T. books 
(5+8+11). In the Talmud and Midrash the O.T. is regularly termed ‘the twenty-four holy Scriptures’. Another 
reckoning was 22 (cf. Joseph. c. Apzon, i. 8) in accordance with the number of letters in the Hebrew alphabet (so also 
Origen, Epiphanius, Jerome). This total seems to have been obtained by combining Ruth with Judges, and Lamenta- 
tions with Jeremiah. 

46. the seventy last, i.e. the apocalypses which were secret books. : ; 

47. the spring of understanding. The high estimation in which the apocalyptic literature was held within certain 
circles in Judaism comes here to clear expression. a ; , 

48. AndIdidso. Here the Latin text breaks off. The last verses of the Apocalypse are preserved in the Oriental 
Versions. They were eliminated from the Latin text when the additional chapters that conclude the book in its Latin 
form (15 and 16) were appended by a Christian editor. 

in the seventh year, &c. So Syr. = 5,042 years after the creation of the world (Ethiop. and Arm., 5,coq; 
Ar.1, 5,025). The Versions also vary as to the month: Syr., 3 months 12 days; Ethiop., 3 months 22 days; so Ar.!; 
Arm., 2 months. Kabisch has shown that it is impossible to bring this date into chronological rélation with any known 
system of reckoning the years of Creation. The verse is probably the work of R, and may possibly refer, as Kabisch 
suggests, to the time at which R himself wrote. But the minute specification of 3 months 12 (or 22) days is strange. 
Gunkel remarks that it recalls the 34 months of the Book of Revelation, ; 


Xlv. 49-50. CONCLUSION OF THE BOOK. These verses, which are in the third person, are obviously the work of R. 
49. such as were like him, i.e. the Messiah and his immortal companions ; cf. vi. 26, vii. 28, xiii. 52, xiv. 9. 


50. the Scribe of the knowledge of the Most High. This is otherwise the title of Enoch ; cf.1 En. xii. 3f., xv. 1 : 
also (?) of the archangel Vretil, 2 En. xxii. 11. 


624 





Pie ronL No Or SOLOMON 


INTRODUCTION 


§ 1. SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE BOOK. 


THE Psalms of Solomon are a collection of eighteen Psalms which were written, according to 
the theory (see below) now generally accepted, in the middle of the first century B.C. 

These Psalms passed with many other Jewish writings into Christian use, being classed some- 
times with the ‘apocrypha’, sometimes with the ‘antilegomena’;? but their influence on Christian 
literature was neither very extensive nor intense, and they had passed out of sight and almost out of 
memory when at the beginning of the seventeenth century they again received attention. The 
editio princeps was published in 1626 by John Louis de la Cerda. This edition was based, as 
subsequent investigation and discovery have proved, on a faulty copy of one (H) of the eight now 
known Greek MSS. which contain, together with other canonical and apocryphal books, the Psalms 
of Solomon. Before proceeding to the question of the origin and character of these Psalms it will 
be convenient to consider the material available for determining the text. 

It may be regarded as practically certain (see below, § 4) that the Psalms were originally written 
in Hebrew: but this Hebrew original has perished and no testimony to it even survives. Till recently 
only Greek MSS. were known: nowa Syriac text of the Psalms is known: but the Syriac is not the 
Semitic original itself, nor a direct version of the original: it is a translation from the Greek. The 
hypothetical Hebrew original will be denominated ®, the Greek text &, and the Syriac 3. 


§ 2. THE GREEK (&) MSS. 


The determination of the relation of the existing Greek MSS. to one another is due to 
Oscar von Gebhardt,? on whose discussion the following account is based. All editions previous to 


von Gebhardt’s rest on inadequate textual material. 


The following is a list of the MSS. of &, with the symbols by which they are cited, the ‘century 
in which they were written, and brief description : 
Symbol. Century. Description. 


C 12-13 Codex Casanatensis 1908 (Rome). 
Ps. i. 1-ii. 26 and xvi. 8 to the end of the Psalter is 
missing or illegible. 


H (=K, Ryle and James) IO-II Codex Havniensis 6: purchased at Venice in 1699, but 
since 1732 in the Royal Library at Copenhagen. 
J 14 Codex Iberiticus: in the Iveron Monastery on Mount 
Athos. 
iy alee A Codex of the Laura Monastery on Mount Athos. 
M 12-13 Codex Mosquensis 147: in the Library of the Holy 


Synod at Moscow: formerly in the Iveron Monastery on° 
Mount Athos, whence it was removed to Moscow in 1653. 


P 15 (dated 1419) Codex Parisinus Gr. 2991 A: in the National Library, 
, Paris. 
R II-12 Codex (Romanus) Vaticanus Gr. 336: in the Vatican 
Library at Rome. ' 
Vv II Codex Vindobonensis Theol. Gr. 11 : now in the Royal 


Imperial Library in Vienna. 


The authority cited by Ryle and James (Yadpoi Yodopdvros, Psalms of the Pharisees, Cam- 
bridge, 1891) as A is the faulty seventeenth-century copy of H, which was used for the editio 


princeps. 


1 Swete, Jutroduction to the O.T. in Greek, p. 282; O. von Gebhardt (as cited below), pp. 14 ff. 

2 Von Gebhardt, pp. I ff. 

: Cauen eae Vadpot Sodopavros: die Psalmen Salomo’s zum ersten Male mit Benutzung der Athoshand- 
schriften u. des Codex Casanatensis herausgegeben, Leipzig, 1895. 


625 S.s 


1105.3 


INTRODUCTION 


The genealogy of these MSS., as established by von Gebhardt’s investigations, is as follows : 





where the small letters represent lost MSS. and capitals the existing MSS. : in particular z is the 
archetype of the Greek MSS., y is an (uncial) MS. from which R and x an (uncial) MS. were copied. 
MS. w was also probably uncial; v and w, on the other hand, probably minuscule. As between 
R and = (i.e. practically J LC H in agreement) von Gebhardt finds it difficult to determine which is 
the better MS. The variations between them amount to over 200 (von Gebhardt, p- 71), though 
by no means all of these affect the sense even of the Greek, and still less that of the Hebrew text 
lying behind the Greek. For some of the more important of these variations see ii. 6, 24. 


§ 3. THE Syriac (8): A VERSION FROM THE GREEK. 


The Syriac Version is incompletely preserved: the MS., which also contained the really distinct 
work known as the Odes of Solomon, first published by Rendel Harris! in 1909, is defective at the 
close ; xvii. 38 4 to the end of xviii (the last Psalm) is missing. A small fragment of another MS. 
(containing xvi. 6-13) was subsequently discovered by Dr. Barnes in the Cambridge University MS. 
Add. 2012 (see Harris, p. 16), and Dr. Burkitt has still more recently drawn attention to yet 
another MS? Harris (pp. 38 ff.) has argued (1) that the Syriac is a version of the Greek, not of 
the Semitic original of the Psalms: (2) that the place of the Greek text lying behind & is with 
RJ L, perhaps being intermediate between J and L: (3) that in some passages 8 implies a reading 
of & preferable to that of all existing MSS. of & (e.g. in ii. 41 iad rév %, evdmov &).° From 
these conclusions the present writer sees no sufficient reasons for dissenting: there are, here and there, 
renderings of 3 which might well rest on a Hebrew original rather than on &, or which are not 
entirely explained by the text of any of the existing MSS. of &; but these renderings could scarcely 
establish a Hebrew original, and certainly should not outweigh the substantial evidence that & is 
a version of &. For this evidence see Harris, pp. 38 ff.: he rightly declines to allow this evidence 


to be outweighed by the curious paronomasia in xi. 6 f., where w.3/ might more readily have been 
suggested by an original Hebrew than by the dvéreutev of &. So again we might more readily 
explain ojo>50e> of ii. I as a rendering of MN12 (cp. Ps. ix. 23 (x. 2)) than of é r@ UTEpnpaveverbar 
(= M823), for $ commonly has »9 where & has év with the infin, (see'e. 8. 1.01, 3; v.layvil?. ise rex 
1, 3); yet see v. 7, xv. 1. For another example of passages which might in themselves be well 
explained as resting on ® rather than tr, see xvii, 21. Apart from the general agreement of S$ with 
, even where there is ground for suspecting that the latter rests on corruption in the transmission 
of &, or is the result of original faulty translation from ®, there is evidence which may be illustrated 
by two or three examples: (1) in v.16 KaSo must be due to a confusion of od and of; (2) in 


li, 24 (Vi. 7) €SeHOnv Tod mpoosmov Kod, a euphemistic rendering of °”* 15 dnxy (cp. 2 Kings xiii. 4), is 
literally rendered from the Greek zs09 Laas? Mass; ct. 2 Kings xiii. 4, where ® is, indeed, para- 
phrased, but differently, Luss Pro oe wdQ05 (3) in xiii. 3 the ambiguous clause éy rais pvAas is 


rendered by %, not as the context requires with molar teeth = myn), but zw2th millstones (which 
in ® would have been entirely dissimilar—onn3). See further notes on passages where % agrees 
with & though & appears to have misunderstood # 3 E.G. 11.12; iii, 2, 45 viii. 3 (‘as’), 12, 17 (xvii. 14). 


5 " The Odes and Psalms of Solomon published from the Syriac Version, by J. Rendel Harris, Cambridge, 1909 ; 
ed. 2, 1911. 

* This MS., now in the British Museum (B. M. Add. 14538), was described in Wright’s Catalogue, pp. 1003-1008 
and assigned by him to the tenth century A.D. For a description of that part of the MS. which contains the Odes and 
Psalms of Solomon, and for a collation of the variants as compared with Harris’s MS., see Dr. Burkitt’s note in the 
Journal of T, heological Studies, April, 1912, pp. 372-378. 
~  § See also ii. 20, where all MSS. of & read karéorace(v), but S = xareomdoOy; xvi. 9 €v 7é7@ (so all MSS. but J) 
a scribal emendation of ev remw (so J), which is itself a corruption of évémuoy (so S). 5 é 


626 


ee 


tae PSALMS’ OP SOLOMON 


§ 4. THE ORIGINAL LANGUAGE OF THE PSALMS: HEBREW (3%). 
The Hebrew the basis of the following translation. 


That the Psalms were originally written in Hebrew is now generally admitted: this conclusion 
was indeed disputed by Hilgenfeld (MWesscas [udaeorum, Prolegg. xvi, xvii), but his arguments are 
criticized by Wellhausen (Die Pharisder u. die Sadducder (1874) and Ryle and James (p. Ixxxiv. f.). 

Briefly stated, the argument that the Greek is not the original work, but a translation from an 
original, and now lost, Hebrew text, is this: Not only (1) does the Greek throughout show many 
features in common with Greek versions of existing Hebrew originals, but (2) it contains a certain 
number of strange expressions which are more or less obviously due to blunders in translating from 
Hebrew. As to (1), which might, if necessary, be largely, though not easily altogether, explained as 
not due to translation, but as a Hellenistic style specially influenced by the LXX, it must suffice to 
refer to the illustrations collected by Ryle and James (pp. 1xxx ff.) of peculiar uses of the infin. 


and the aorist, of prepositions, of the negative od... 7as = b> = xd, of nouns anarthrous because 
equivalent to Hebrew nouns in the status constructus, of substantives in the genitive used in lieu of 
adjectives, and many other phenomena. For illustrations of (2) reference may be made to the 
notes below on ii. 12, 13, 19, 29, iii. 2, 4, v. 15, vii. 4, viii. 3, ix. 5, xv. 8, xvii. 14, 36. 

A third line of argument might be urged: in not a few places the Hebrew rhythm can be still 
heard through the Greek version; as for example the so-called £ézah rhythm (3:2) in Ps. viii. 

But if the conclusion is right that behind the Greek lies a Hebrew original, the task of transla- 
tion and interpretation must be constantly governed by it. Passages which might only be translated 
in one way, and so translated might receive some explanation, if the Greek were original, must often 
be translated otherwise, if the Hebrew, lying behind the Greek, would admit, or demands, an alterna- 
tive translation that can receive a more satisfactory explanation. And in every case in which the 
Greek can only be explained in a strained and artificial manner, it is important to bear in mind 
the probability that the meaning of the Hebrew may have been different and simpler, even though the 
exact form and meaning of the Hebrew can no longer be discerned. In the notes that accompany 
the following translation it has been impossible to draw attention to all such alternatives; and 
in particular the tenses of the verbs have been represented by an equivalent in English which seemed 
most likely to express the force of the term in the original Hebrew, but only comparatively seldom 
have alternative possibilities been suggested. For a future tense the reader can always, if the 
context seems to him to render it more suitable, substitute a present and often a past. 


§ 5. DATE, CHARACTER, AND ORIGIN OF THE PSALMS. 

The earliest direct testimony to the Psalms of Solomon is in the catalogue at the beginning of 
the Codex Alexandrinus (A: fifth century A.D.). Here it stands after the final summary of the 
books of the Old and New Testaments. 

Other references to the Psalms by name are later: the Pseudo-Athanasian Synopsis Sanctae 
Scripturae (2 sixth century A.D.) (§ 74) places Wadpol cal 35% SodouGvros among the antilegomena 
after Maccabees (four books) and Ptolemaica, and before Susanna; Nicephorus, Patriarch of Con- 
stantinople (A.D. 806-814), places them between Eccles. and Esther. In the text attached to the 
Quaestiones et Responsiones of Anastasius Sinaita (c. 640-700) Wadpol Lodropdvros are classed among 
twenty-five apocryphal books between the Assumption of Moses and the Apocalypse of Elijah. : 

The provision of the fifty-ninth canon of the Council of Laodicea (c. 360 A. D.), Stu ov det iduwTLKoUs 
Wadpovs A€yeoOar év TH éxxAnoig, may be directed against church use of the Psalms of Solomon; but 
neither this reference nor a similar one in Ambrose, Praef. in Lib. Psalmorum, is free from ambiguity. 
So also the references in the Pastis Sophia (c. 250 A.D.) and Lactantius (fourth century A.D.) to the 
Odes of Solomon have a bearing on the date and history of the Psalms of Solomon only in so far as 
it can be shown that these two entirely distinct works were accustomed at an early date to be 
united as they are in the newly-recovered Syriac MS. On this see Harris, pp. 9 ff. ss 

These references are of more importance as casting light on the circulation and position of the 
Psalms in the early Church than for closely determining the date at which the Psalms were written. 
For this we must turn to the internal evidence. 

No argument can be based on language of the lost original, for though the Hebrew text can be 
to a large extent recovered, it cannot be so re-established in its minutiae as to admit of a linguistic 

sument of any weight. 
si, it is different with the language of the Greek. version, and attempts have been made to 
determine the date of that version, and consequently a éerminus ad quem for the original work, by 
627 Ss2 


INTRODUCTION 


means of the style and affinities of the Greek in which it is written. From the Greek style and the 
relation of Pss. of Sol. xi to the Greek of Baruch iv. 36-v. 9 Ryle and James (pp. Ixxii ff.) have 
argued that the Psalms of Solomon had been turned into Greek before A.D. 70. In so far as this 
argument turns on the assumption that Baruch iv. 36-v. 9 was originally written in Greek and is not 
a translation from the Hebrew, it may require reconsideration : for, to mentign but a single point, 
in Baruch v. 6 aipopeévovs . . as Opdvov seems to be due to a thoughtless disregard of a well-known use 
of the Hebrew particle 3! (BDZ. 458 a): the sense requires borne as on a throne; this the Hebrew 
ND23 would admit, but the Greek yields only the unsuitable meaning Jorne as a throne. However, 
the affinities of the Greek have convinced Viteau (pp. 140 ff.) who rejects, as well as Ryle and 
James who accept, the dependence of Baruch iv. 36—v.g on Pss. of Sol. xi, that the translation was 
made prior to A.D. 70. 

But the main argument for the date of the Psalms must be based on the subject-matter of these. 
Now the state of society reflected in these Psalms and the ideas that dominate them are entirely 
compatible with all that is known of the middle of the first century B.c., while the definite historical 
allusions, if these are rightly explained of Pompey’s actions in Palestine and his death in Egypt 
(48 B.C.), show that it is the middle of the first century B.C., and not any other period at which the 
state of society and the ruling ideas may have been similar, that is the actual age in which the Psalms 
of Solomon were written. 

Not all the Psalms taken separately, it is true, point with equal clearness to the circumstances 
under, or the age in, which they arose: but there is a general similarity of tone and character about 
them which, failing direct evidence to the contrary, justifies the generally accepted theory that they 
are the work, if not of a single hand, yet of a single generation. 

These Psalms are the work of a writer or writers who, in common with the authors of many of 
the canonical Psalms, held firmly by the belief in the relative righteousness of Israel as compared 
with the nations of the world; alien nations are as such ‘sinners’ (i, eid ote dea dis) 

Yet actually Israel is not righteous as it should be, and as it had thought itself (Clg atu 2aiy 
On the other hand, there is within Israel a class, a dominating class so influential and powerful as to 
give in some measure its character to the entire people (cp. e.g. i. 4, xvii. 22), of ‘sinners’, Thus 
throughout the Psalms Israel appears divided into sections or parties ; the one section, or party, 
consists of the righteous,” or pious,® or those that fear the Lord,* or the poor,’ or the guileless ; ® the 
other section consists of the unrighteous,’ or sinners,’ or transgressors,’ or profane,!” or, as they are 
termed in the fourth Psalm, the men-pleasers (dv@pm7dpeckot). 

In this division of the people into two different parties, regarded as morally or religiously opposed, 
and even in the use of the terms employed to describe them, the Psalms of Solomon do not differ 
essentially from a large group of the canonical Psalms. As in those so in these, the writers naturally 
identify themselves with the section of the righteous or the pious. The more closely we can deter- 
mine the actual character of the two parties thus described, the more closely shall we be able to 
determine the nature of the circles from which the Psalms sprang and the conditions under which 
they were written. In attempting to gather from the Psalms this closer determination of the 
characteristics of each party it must of course be remembered, and allowed for, that we are dealing 
with a strongly partisan work. Neither the righteousness of the righteous, nor the sinfulness of the 
sinful, must be accepted too literally. 

The ‘sinners ’ had recently passed through a period of prosperity, and they had acquired wealth ; 
but to ease and prosperity had succeeded the distress of war, which, of course, affected the whole 
nation, ‘sinners’ and ‘righteous’ alike (i), though in some ways more particularly the ‘sinners’; 
it was members of that party, if not exclusively yet predominantly, who were led away captive by 
the invaders (ii. 3-15, ix. 3 ff., viii. 24). 

Prosperity had produced in the ‘sinners’ insolence and self-reliance (i) and disregard of God 
(iv. 14,24). They are charged, in particular, (1) with gross sensual sins (ii. 13-15, iv. 4 ff, viii. 9 ff., Daye 
(2) with profanation of the sanctuary, or the sacred objects (i. 8, ii. 3 a, viii. 12, 26), and of the sacrificial 


* Cf. Judges xx. 39, where nonbdns, ‘as in the war’, is rendered in the LXX xa6ds 6 médeuos. See also my note at 
end of § 6 in Introd. to 1 Baruch, vol. ii—Gen. Editor. 


® Oékaroz, i.e. DYPTY ; see ii. 38, iii. 3-8, 14, iv. 9, x. 3, xiii. 5-8, xiv. 6, xv. 8, xvi. 15. 
ogwot, 1.€. OYDDN ; see iii. 10, iv. 1, 7, 9, viii. 28, 40, ix. 6, x. 7, xii. 5, 8, xiii. 9, 11, xiv. 27s XV Oy XVI, 18s 
(ot) PoBovpevor (rév) Kiprov, i.e. NT; see ii. 37, iii, 16, iv. 26 (ct. v, 24), v. 21, xii. 4, xiii. TTS ex Vg ese 


Pe © 


® mre@xot (DIY?) ; see Vv. 2, 13 (also mévns), x. 7, XV. 2, xviii. 3. 
2 78); ’ ’ 3 
® dkakos ; see iv. 25, xii. 4. 7 ddikor, ice. YW; see xii. 6, xv. 6. 
dpaptonds, 1.€, DNDN; see ii. 38 f, iii. 11, 13, iv. 9, 27, xil. 8, xv. 9-14, xvii. 6, and elsewhere (cp. xiii). 
* mapdvopot, i.e, DYYWD (?) ; see iv. PHI SGU si ahi (6) 19 BeBndos, i.e. IM; see iv. 1, 


628 


oy 


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 


as . aie eens eae ae once they are said to have exceeded the nations in trans- 

- 8, ii. 11, 7 ays et they are, or at least attempt to be, outwardly extremely 
respectable (iv. 2, 11, 25); they are hypocrites—imoxkpivdpevor (iv. 22), ot ev daoxpicer Cévres (iv. 7). 
As a class they are, especially as contrasted with the righteous poor, wealthy (cf. xii. 4, xv. 7); as 
a set-off against this they will, in the judgement of their opponents, have no portion in the life of 
blessedness to come: all that awaits them after death is destruction in Sheol (xiv. 4 ff., xv. 11-14). 
The charges of profanation of the sacred offerings seem to imply that the wicked, or the nucleus of 
the party, were intimately connected with the Temple-service: another charge, viz. that they had 
set up a non-Davidic monarchy (xvii. 7, 8), points to their being the adherents of the later Hasmo- 
naeans who from Aristobulus I (104 B.C.) and onwards claimed the title of king till the time (63 B.C.) 
when Pompey deposed Aristobulus II, and, while leaving Hyrcanus high-priest, deprived him of the 
title of king. 

Over against this wealthy governmental party of ‘sinners’ stand the ‘righteous’, who are also 
called doo, a term which doubtless here, as in the LX X version of the canonical Psalms, represents 
the Hebrew hastdim, godly or pious. In x. 7 the poor stands in parallelism, and probably in synony- 
mous parallelism, with ¢he pious: and there are other indications, besides the further occurrence 
of the term ‘poor’, that the party of the righteous consisted largely of persons of restricted means 
(cp. xv. I, xvi. 12 ff.). The ‘righteous’, moreover, were political quietists (xii. 6), accepting the 
present distress as a discipline from God, which it was their duty to endure patiently (xiv. I, xvi. 11), 
and assured that such patience would find its reward, if not in this age or life, yet in the life to come 
(xiii. 9-11, xiv. 3, xv. 15, xvi. 1-3). They waited for the fulfilment of the promises (xil. 7), especially 
for the coming of the promised Messianic king (xvii. 23 ff., xviii. 6 ff.), who would fulfil the prophetic 
ideal of rule based, not on material resources, but on the power of God (xvii. 37). 

Conspicuous elements in the righteousness of the righteous were abstention (xvi. 7 f.) from the 
sexual sins which so offended them in their opponents, and scrupulous anxiety about sins done in 
ignorance (xiii. 4 ff.): their righteousness was pre-eminently ‘a righteousness according to the Law’ 
(xiv. 2). Here,again, we are face to face with a circle not remote, in character at least, and probably 
not very remote in time, from circles whence some of the canonical Psalms proceeded (ei gi xix; iexina) 

Thus apart from xvii. 7, 8, which if it is to be interpreted strictly must point to a date after 
104 B.C., none of the passages so far cited are decisive as between the two periods ¢. 165 and 
c. 63 B. C., which have chiefly been claimed as the period of origin of these Psalms. More decisive, in 
the opinion of the majority of recent scholars, are the allusions to external events. These Psalms 
bring before us not only Jewish society divided into two parties, but also a foreign conqueror. The 
references to this conqueror are, again, in part general and applicable to almost any foreign foe: 
for example, we may compare ii. 25-28 with what is said in Isa. x. 5-15, and even the striking use of 
the term ‘dragon’ in ii. 29 has its parallel in the comparison of Nebuchadnezzar to a dpdkoy=fpn in 
Jer. li. (xxviii.) 34. But others are more specific ; this conqueror comes from the West, for thence he 
carries his captives (xvii. 14): though at first welcomed by (a party of) the nation, who left the way 
open for him to approach Jerusalem (viii. 18 f.), he later found resistance and was compelled to use 
battering-rams to destroy the fortifications of Zion (ii. 1 f.); having captured Zion he defiled the 
altar by letting his soldiers contemptuously trample it (ii. 2, cp, vii. 2): ultimately he is slain 
dishonourably in Egypt and his body lay exposed for lack of burial (ii. 30 f.). Nowall these some- 
what particular characteristics of the conqueror agree pretty closely with what is known of Pompey, 
and in their entirety they do not agree with any other known historical character: as a Roman, 
Pompey came from the West, and thither he carried back captive Aristobulus and his children ; at first 
he was not merely not resisted by the princes Aristobulus II and Hyrcanus II, but on his way 
from Damascus southwards ambassadors met him bearing a rich present, and the fortresses on the 
way to Jerusalem were delivered up to Pompey ; later, however, the party of Aristobulus entrenched 
themselves in Zion, and then Pompey brought up battering-rams and therewith demolished the 
walls that protected the Temple area ; it is true the profanation of the altar to which allusion is 
made in ii. 2 is not directly mentioned in the accounts of Pompey’s capture of Jerusalem, while his 
intrusion into the Holy of Holies is not alluded to in the Psalms ; yet the alternative identification 
with Antiochus Epiphanes is in this respect not preferable, for the ‘ abomination of desolation eas 
just as little covered by the terms used in these Psalms. Finally, like the conqueror in the Psalms, 
Pompey is slain in Egypt, and his body, after being exposed on the beach, was hastily burned on an 
improvised pyre.? 

It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that these similarities between the conqueror of the Psalms 
and Pompey can only be due to the fact that the conqueror in the Psalms and Pompey are one and 


1 For references to the sources for these or other details see notes on the passages cited above and others (ii. I, 2, 
30, 31, vill. 18, 19, 22, 23, 24, Xvll. 6, 14). 


629 


INTRODUCTION 


the same person. Frankenberg, who has most elaborately in recent times argued for identification 
with Antiochus Epiphanes, is compelled, not very satisfactorily, to treat the description of the death 
of the conqueror in ii. 30 ff., not as reference to fact, but as uszrealized prophecy.’ So also, on his 
interpretation, xvii. 7-10 is prophetic not historic, and ‘the man alien to our race’ (dvOpwos addorptos 
yévous jy.6v) is not Pompey, nor even Antiochus, but the Messiah! : : 

If we are right in identifying the person slain in ii. 30 f. with Pompey, that Psalm in particular 
was written after, and probably soon after, 48 B.C., the date of Pompey’s death. None of the other 
Psalms refer to Pompey’s death, and the majority of them may well be somewhat earlier than the 
second, and have been written soon after Pompey’s invasion of Palestine (63 B.C.). Wellhausen 
suggested that iv might refer to, and also have been written in, the reign of Alexander Jannaeus 
(103-78), but this is uncertain. On the other hand, Ryle and James argue with some probability that 
Psalms iv and xii, in which the ‘sinners’ are denounced but not yet punished, and the intervention of 
the Gentiles was apparently as yet unforeseen, may be the earliest of the collection. These may have 
been written before Pompey’s invasion. 

If, now, the date of these Psalms is correctly determined, we need not hesitate to see in the 
‘righteous’ of the Psalms the Pharisees, and in the ‘sinners’ the Sadducees (cf. iv. 2 ff.) ; and in the 
Psalms themselves the work of one or more of the Pharisees. It is the Pharisaic piety that breathes 
through the Psalms; it is their opposition to the worldly, non-Davidic monarchy, and to the 
illegitimate high-priesthood, of the ruling Hasmonaean king, Aristobulus, that finds expression 
here; the Messianic hope (esp. xvii. 23 ff.), the firm belief in a future life which characterizes 
them later (N.T., Jos.), and renders them naturally political quietists and indifferent to political 
schemes, are already conspicuous here. And, again, the later attitude of the Pharisees in the matter 
of free-will as described by Josephus (Z. /. ii. 8. 14)—these ascribe all to fate and to God, and yet 
allow that to act as is right, or the contrary, is principally in the power of men: although fate does 
co-operate in every action—is almost exactly paralleled by two passages in these Psalms, v. 4, ix. 6. 

A considerable literature has grown up around the Psalms: an account of what had appeared 
down to 1891 is given by Ryle and James, and the more recent, as well as the earlier literature, will 
be found in the extensive bibliography in J. Viteau, Les Psaumes de Salomon (Paris, 1911), pp. 240— 
251. The most important works are : for the Greek text, von Gebhardt’s edition (cited above, p. 658) ; 
for the Syriac versions, Harris’s edition, cited above (p. 659), in the second edition (pp. ix-xii) of 
which a full bibliography of discussions of the Syriac are given; for interpretation and the con- 
sideration of the original Hebrew, Wellhausen (cited above, p.659),and Ryle and James (cited above, 
p- 658). Seealso Viteau, of. cét.; Kittel, in Kautzsch’s Die Apokryphenu. Pseudepigraphen zum A.T. 
ii. 127-48 (a German translation arranged in distichs and strophes, with brief introduction and 
notes); R. H. Charles in &. Bz. i. 241-945. 


q nig also Cheyne’s rejection of the identification of Pompey with the dragon of ii (Hddert Journal, Oct. 1910, 
Pp: 207 f.). 


630 


— 


be Sd J 


it Pon lMSeOE. SOLOMON 


I 


1 «I cried unto the Lord when I was in distress [ ], 
Unto God when sinners assailed. 
2 Suddenly the alarm of war was heard before me; 
(I said), He will hearken to me, for I am full of righteousness. 
3 I thought in my heart that I was full of righteousness, 
Because I was well off and had become rich in children. 
4 Their wealth spread to the whole earth, 
And their glory unto the end of the earth. 
5 They were exalted unto the stars ; 
They said they would never fall. 
6 But they became insolent in their prosperity, 
wind). =) 
7 Their sins were in secret, 
And even I had no knowledge (of them). 
8 Their transgressions (went) beyond those of the heathen before them ; 
They utterly polluted the holy things of the Lord. 


Il. A Psaln. Of Solomon. Concerning Ferusalem. 


2 x When the sinner waxed proud, with a battering-ram he cast down fortified walls, 
And Thou didst not restrain (him). 
2 Alien nations ascended Thine altar, 
They trampled (it) proudly with their sandals ; 
3 Because the sons of Jerusalem had defiled the holy things of the Lord, 
Had profaned with iniquities the offerings of God. 


I. t. when I was in distress. So perhaps ® (cf. e.g. Ps. Ixvi. 14). @& adds els réhos, which may. be (1) a mis- 
translated and misplaced title = ‘ To the chief musician’ (cf. Ps. liv (lv)); the rhythm of # (3: 3) would have been 
complete without anything corresponding to this clause; or (2) an intensification: ‘When I was in sore distress’ ; 
cf. 2 Chron. xii. 12, xxxi. 1; 1 Thess. ii. 16. % ‘at my end’. 

2. the alarm. 3% ‘the voice’. 4 a 

(I said). Not expressed in the MSS. of G, nor in &, but possibly lost in the course of the transmission of &. 
full of righteousness. Cf. Isa. i. 21. ‘Am full’; & ‘was full’. au 

4. The fame of the wealth and glory of the Jews, the children (v. 3) of Zion, passed from mouth to mouth till it filled 
the whole world. For 6:e5é6n (cf. 2 Macc. iv. 39), the reading of RJL&, H has, erroneously, dcéA@o., ‘may their 
wealth go forth’. The exact force of # cannot be inferred. 


5. they would... fall. mécwow (R H), wéowor (J), réowor pév (L). Perhaps, originally, méc@pev, ‘ we shall never 
Alle se pbs. xxx. 7 (6): oly : 
6. And... Gk otk ijeyxav, ‘they brought not’. Fabricius suggested that ‘sacrifices’ was to be understood as 


the object of the verb: very improbable. Ryle and James, relying on Jer. xx. 9, Job. xxxi. 23, Jer. ii. 13, x. 10, Joel 


ii. 11, suggest that the meaning may be that they did not keep their ambition under control. Saree WW» may 
point to an original Greek reading kai ov« éyvexar, ‘and they are without knowledge’ (cp. Isa. i. 2). Won Gebhardt 


suggests that #veyxav arose from misreading as wean xd an original 13°47 NPI, ‘and they were without understanding ’. 
8. the holy things. & may also, and % can only, mean ‘the sanctuary’, i.e. the Temple. 


II. 1. Addressed to God. The 3rd pers. sing. in this verse and below may refer in particular to Pompey, or, being 
used collectively, to the Roman army (cp. v. 2). 

When the sinner waxed proud (niN}2) ... he cast down, or, ‘ proudly (M38}2) the sinner . . . cast down.’ 
Cpr sik 2- : ; 

i a battering-ram. Pompey brought up battering-rams from Tyre and therewith broke down the fortified wall 
that enclosed the Temple. See Jos. Amt. xiv. 4.2; B. 1.1. 7. 3: edhe ; 

2. The writer singles out for mention not Pompey’s personal intrusion into the Holy of Holies (Jos. Azz. xiv. 4. 4, 
B.1. i. 7. 6), but the irreverent treatment of the altar in front of the Temple by the Roman soldiers. To this Josephus 
does not specifically refer ; though cp., ‘ Many of the priests, even when they saw their enemies assailing them with their 
swords in their hands... went on with their divine worship, and were slain while they were offering their drink- 

fferings and burning their incense’ (B. Z. i. 7. 5). ; ; 
. meals their pandale. They - only trampled the altar, but that even without removing their sandals (cp. 
Exod. ili. 5). ; 
3. the holy things. See i. $n. 
631 


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 2. 4-15 
4 Therefore He said: Cast them far from Me ; 


5 It was set at naught before God, 
It was utterly dishonoured ; 
6 The sons and the daughters were in grievous captivity, 
Sealed (?) (was) their neck, branded (?) (was it) among the nations. 


7 According to their sins hath He done unto them, 
For He hath left them in the hands of them that prevailed. 
8 He hath turned away His face from pitying them, 
Young and old and their children together ; 
9 For they had done evil one and all, in not hearkening. 
ro (9) And the heavens were angry, 
And the earth abhorred them ; 
tr For no man upon it had done what they did, 
12 (10) And the earth recognized all Thy righteous judgements, O God. 
13 (11) They set the sons of Jerusalem to be mocked at in return for (the) harlots in her ; 
Every wayfarer entered in in the full light of day. 
14 (12) They made mock with their transgressions, as they themselves were wont to do ; 
In the full light of day they revealed their iniquities, 
(13) And the daughters of Jerusalem were defiled in accordance with Thy judgement, 
15 Because they had defiled themselves with unnatural intercourse. 
(14) Iam pained in my bowels and my inward parts for these things. 


4. Cast them, viz. the offerings (and holy things) of v. 3. This is clearly the meaning of the unambiguous neuter 
pronoun in &, but in # the pronoun may have been masculine, and therefore ambiguous ; in that case the real 


antecedent of the pronoun may have been ‘the sons of Jerusalem ’. 


4, 5. The sense of the original in vv. 4 4, 5 a, cannot be determined; it may have differed considerably from that 
of the MSS. of & and 8, or of the conjectural emendations of 6k. Following the MSS. of &, and the punctuation 


found in them, we may render 4 4 :— 


His (i. e. God’s) glorious beauty prospered them not. 
Of this 3 is perhaps merely a loose rendering :— 


And He did not establish with them His glorious beauty. 


Hilgenfeld conjectured eddSoxd ev adrois for eiddaxey (RJ L: eiddwxey H) adrois; and this is adopted by 


von Gebhardt, who also adopts airis (M) for abrod (RJ LHS). Then 44, 5 may be rendered :— 
I have no pleasure in them (cp. Jer. xiv. 12) 


Her (Jerusalem’s, cp. vv. 20, 22, 23) glorious beauty was set at naught before God. 


The conjecture gives a rather more attractive phraseology than the text of G, but v. 44 would in that case have 
balanced v. 4a very badly in the original Hebrew; and the position of rd xdAdAos ths Od€s avr. more naturally 


corresponds to that of the obj. of the verb in 4 than to that of the subj. of the verb in v. 5. 
5. utterly. Cp.i. rn. 


6. The sons and the daughters of Jerusalem (cp. v. 3). SoJLH; but R ‘sons and daughters’, $ ‘her sons and 


her daughters’. 


6 4. The line in some way, doubtless, expressed the ignominy of the captive (v. 6a) Jews; but the meaning of Q& 
(of which % ‘and on their neck is set the sealed yoke of the peoples’, is probably a free rendering), and still more that 
of #9, is far from clear. Most probably the allusion is to the branding of slaves with the tokens of their masters. 
is true that the branding of the zecé in particular is not elsewhere mentioned, but ‘ many slave collars have been found 
in Roman cities, inscribed with the master’s name and some such addition as Tene me, guia fugto’ (Ryle and James). 
Kit, thinks the allusion may be to the custom of sealing or stamping the collar or clothing of a slave (Talmud Babli 


Shabb, 28a). For more or less different explanations see Viteau’s n. ad foc., and Biichler in /QR, xv (1903), 
Sealed. Gk. ‘with (in) a seal’. This can scarcely mean ‘ (surrounded) with a fetter’ (Wellh.). 


branded. Gk. ‘with a slave-brand’ (cp. Hesychius, s. v. €rionuov). But another meaning is possible, viz. ‘in the 


sight of’ (Kit. ? = pd N31). But év émonuo scarcely means ‘ in a public place’ (cp. xvii. 2), viz. Rome. 
= g Pp Pp Pp 32), 
7a. Ct. Ps. cii. 10.—7 6. Ct. Ps. xxxvii. 33. 
12. recognized. & % ‘will recognize’ (YAM) for Yan). Cp. viii. 8. 
13. Difficult and uncertain, but cp. viii. 9-14. 
They, viz. the heathen; soRJL&. ‘He’ (viz. God) H. 


in return for (the) harlotsin her. opvav ep avr7 should correspond to 73 mix(A), or AM. In either case 
® probably intended ‘in return for her whoredoms’ (Ezek. xxiii. 14, 18) (abstract M31 fh rather than ANi3t, 


“her harlots’), 


13 a, 14a. “ According as the Jews were wont to do, even so, by way of retribution, the Gentiles exposed to the 
world the iniquities of the Jews.’ This may correctly interpret the passage, but the punctuation of the MSS. of & 
and parallelism favour the above division into lines rather than taking ‘as they themselves were wont to do’ with 


what follows. 
14 6. In the full light of day, lit. “before the sun’. Cp. 2 Sam. xii. 11 f. 


15. with unnatural intercourse, lit. ‘with confusion of mingling’ (€v @uppe dvapiéews). The reference is probably 


to incest (viii. 10) and other foul unions. 


632 


ay 


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 2.. 16-30 


16 (15) (And yet) 1 will justify Thee, O God, in uprightness of heart, 
For in Thy judgements is Thy righteousness (displayed), O God. 
17 (16) For Thou hast rendered to the sinners according to their deeds, 
Yea according to their sins, which were very wicked. 


‘18 (17) Thou hast uncovered their sins, that Thy judgement might be manifest ; 


19 Thou hast wiped out their memorial from the earth. 
(18) God is a righteous judge, 
And He is no respecter of persons, 


zo (19) For the nations reproached Jerusalem, trampling it down ; 
_ Her beauty was dragged down from the throne of glory. 
21 (20) She girded on sackcloth instead of comely raiment, 
A rope (was) about her head instead of a crown. 


22 (21) She put off the glorious diadem which God had set upon her, 


23 In dishonour was her beauty cast upon the ground. 


24 (22) And I saw and entreated the Lord and said, 
Long enough, O Lord, has Thine hand been heavy on Israel, in bringing the nations upon (them). 
25 (23) For they have made sport unsparingly in wrath and fierce anger ; 
26 And they will make an utter end, unless Thou, O Lord, rebuke them in Thy wrath. 
27 (24) For they have done it not in zeal, but in lust of soul, 
28 Pouring out their;wrath upon us with a view to rapine. 
29 (25) Delay not, O God, to recompense them on (their) heads, 
To turn the pride of the dragon into dishonour. 


30 (26) And I had not long to wait before God showed me the insolent one 
Slain on the mountains of Egypt, 


16. I: emphatic. 

19. is no respecter of. & ‘ will be no respecter of’, treating the Hebr. impf. as fut. instead of frequentative. For 
the phrase see e. g. Deut. x. 17. 

20a6. These lines are incorrectly given in the order da in the ed. princeps and subsequent editions, including that 
of Ryle and James. 

For. The ydp, perhaps, as often in parts of the O. T. (e.g. Isaiah), had nothing corresponding to it in W. 
was dragged down. MSS. of & ‘he dragged down’; but 5 has a passive verb and, so far, supports as the true 
Greek reading von Gebhardt’s conjecture, xareomdo On for karéomacer (R), catéomace (J LH). 

24. entreated. & % ‘entreated the face of’, which is probably the same half-euphemistic, half-literal rendering of 
% (‘made sweet, or pleasant, the face of’) that occurs in 2 Kings xiii. 4, Jer. xxvi. 19; cf. Exod. xxxii. 11 (de) 
€vayTt). 

ee enough ... has Thine hand been. & lit. makes sufficient that Thy hand should be’: but the idiom 
in # was probably the same as in Deut. i. 6, ii. 3. 

O Lord. J. om. 

Israel. So R (iq\) S: other MSS. of & ‘ Jerusalem’. 

in bringing the nations upon (them), or, as in Ecclus. iii, 28 (cp. x. 13, xxv. 13 f.), év éemaywy7 (H erroneously 
dmaywyh) may = N2O2, ‘ with smiting of the nations’, i.e. God has smitten Israel by means of the nations; cp. Isa. 
Kh, 20524. 

25. they. The nations. 

fierce anger: Oupo pera pnviceas. } 

26. And they, i.e. the nations, will make an utter end of Israel. So probably ® (22) ; @ ‘And they’, i.e. 
Israel, ‘ will be made an utter end of ’ (cuvteheaOqoorrat = 12"). 

27. they. The nations. 

not in zeal to fulfil God's punitive purposes concerning Israel; cp. Isa. x. 7. | 

28. with a view to rapine. Against Pompey personally this particular charge would be unfair; when he entered 
he refrained from plundering the Temple (Jos. Ant. xiv. 4. 4); but against the nations, 1.e. the Romans, it might well 
lie (see Ryle and James ad /oc.). ae 5 ; Fe 

29. Toturn. % ‘To cast down’, & ‘To say’. The rov evmrew of & is unintelligible and probably due to a trans- 
lator’s misunderstanding; probably 70), meant to be read a> (== 7979) and construed as in Hos. iv. 7, was 


mistakenly read i> = "wd (Wellh.) ; for another suggestion, see Ryle and James. If aasoyaX Is the original 
text of S$ and not a subsequent correction of a literal rendering (;r0haa of rod eiweiv, S cannot be explained either 
by & or by such emendations as ideiv (Fabricius), or etkery or perme (Hilgenfeld) ; but Viteau proposes pimreiy. 

the dragon. Seems clearly to be ‘ the insolent one slain on the mountains of Egypt’ (v. 30), i.e. Pompey ; cp. the 
comparison of Nebuchadnezzar with a dragon in Jer. li, 34, yet see above (p. 630, n. 2). 

30. I had not long to wait before. Lit. ‘I delayed not until God’: Ey the Lord’. an 

the insolent one. @& ‘his insolence’ (jv d8pi avrou = INI or INI, which was perhaps a corruption in # of 
an original reading N37). ’ ‘ , : ; hae cord 

on the mountains of Egypt. According to Dio Cassius xlii. 3-5 Pompey was slain pds T@ Kacoig dpe ; Mons 


Cassius was near Pelusium. Possibly # had “N" (not 17), ‘beside the streams of Egypt’ (Ryle and James). 
633 


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 2. 30—3. 2 


Esteemed of less account than the least, on land and Sea ; 
31 (27) His body (, too,) borne hither and thither on the billows with much insolence, 
With none to bury (him), because He had rejected him with dishonour. 


(28) He reflected not that he was man, 
32 And reflected not on the latter end; 

33 (29) He said: I will be lord of land and sea; 
And he recognized not that it is God who is great, 
Mighty in His great strength. 

34 (30) He is king over the heavens, 
And judgeth kings and kingdoms. 

35 (31) (It is He) who setteth me up in glory, Yl Sag 
And bringeth down the proud to eternal destruction in dishonour, 
Because they knew Him not. 


36 (32) And now behold, ye princes of the earth, the judgement of the Lord, 
For a great king and righteous (is He), judging (all) that is under heaven. 
37 (33) Bless God, ye that fear the Lord with wisdom, : 
For the mercy of the Lord will be upon them that fear Him, in the Judgement ; 
38 (34) So that He will distinguish between the righteous and the sinner, 
(And) recompense the sinners for ever according to their deeds ; ' 
39 (35) And have mercy on the righteous, (delivering him) from the affliction of the sinner, 
And recompensing the sinner for what he hath done to the righteous. 
40 (36) For the Lord is good to them that call upon Him in patience, 
Doing according to His mercy to His pious ones, 
Establishing (them) at all times before Him in strength. 


41 (37) Blessed be the Lord for ever before His servants. 


Ill. A Psalm. Of Solomon. Concerning the righteous. 


3 1 Why sleepest thou, O my soul, 
And blessest not the Lord? 
2 Sing a new song, 
Unto God who is worthy to be praised. 


Esteemed of less account than the least. Held in less account than a person of the least position : so clearly 3 ; 


on & tmép €Xaxiorov (or conjecturally ehdxiorov), see Ryle and James. 


31. borne hither and thither, d.apepduevov. So RJ L (%); H ‘destroyed’ (StefOappévov). The correct text of 
RJ L(&) is further from the literal truth of Pompey’s end, as described by Plutarch (see Ryle and James), than the 


reading of H. 


31 4. After lying for some time decapitated and unburied on the shore, Pompey’s body was burnt on a pile of spars 


gathered from the beach (Plutarch). 
33. it is God who is great. God, not Pompey, is ‘ Magnus’. % ‘the Lord is God’. 
34. heavens. 3+‘and over the earth’. 
kings and kingdoms. S ‘kingdoms and princes’. 


35. bringeth down. Unless & xowpifwv translated 71D (the verb which would have been the simplest antithesis 
to v. 35 @; cp. I Sam. ii. 6-8), the sense is: God causes the proud to lie down and sleep the sleep eternal (Ps. lxxvi. 


6 (5) ; Job xiv. 12) of dishonour and destruction. ‘ 
destruction. #) perhaps (cp. Ezek. xxviii. 7 f.) had nhnY, in which case the rendering should be ‘ the pit’. 


37. in the Judgement. On the day of judgement and discrimination those that fear God will, unlike the 
wicked (Ps. i. 5), stand through the mercy of God. Such was probably the meaning of #, and perhaps of 3% (hus. 
here as in Ps.i. 5, Pesch.). G& ‘with judgement’ (DBWIDA for OBYIDD): the mercy of God will be shown by intro- 


ducing a principle of judgement or discrimination between the righteous and the unrighteous. 
40. to His pious ones. So RJ LC & rois éciou ; H ‘to them that are His’ (rots er’ adrod). 
41. before. % ‘by’. 


III. vv. 1-2, Exordium; 3-10, the character and conduct of the righteous; 11-15, the conduct and fate of the sinner : 


16, the contrasted fate of the righteous—resurrection and life eternal. 
1. Omysoul. So $; Gom. ‘my’. 


2. & % probably fail to preserve the exact form and sense of #. Note in 2a that Wandare, ‘sing’, is not the normal 
rendering of the verb 1, stands abnormally after its object and is plural (ct. sing. in v. 1, 2 ¢); in 2¢, ‘be wakeful 
against his awaking’, a safer rendering of @& than “keep watch at his watch’, is not very obviously in place between 
20 and 2 @._ Ryle and James, assuming a confusion between the Hebrew roots yi and WY, render 2¢ ‘ shout unto 
Him with a joyful noise’. Another possibility, suggested by the General Editor, may be considered : yenyopeiv in the 


LXX = 7)y 


3 SO here ypnydpyoov émi thy ypyypnaw (cp. xvi. 4) airod may represent a clause used by the translator as 


containing 7Y and a derivative from the same root; but TO) might easily arise (through the familiar confusion of 


634 


es] 


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 3, 2—4. 1 


Sing and tbe wakeful against His awakingf, 
For good is a psalm (sung) to God from a glad heart. 


3 The righteous remember the Lord at all times, 
With thanksgiving and declaration of the righteousness of the Lord’s judgements. 
4 The righteous despiseth not the chastening of the Lord ; 
His will is always before the Lord. 
5 The righteous stumbleth and holdeth the Lord righteous: 
He falleth and looketh out for what God will do to him ; 
6 He seeketh out whence his deliverance will come. 
7 (6) The steadfastness of the righteous is from God their deliverer ; 
There lodgeth not in the house of the righteous sin upon sin. 
8 (7) The righteous continually searcheth his house, 
To remove utterly (all) iniquity (done) by him in error. 
9 (8) He maketh atonement for (sins of) ignorance by fasting and afflicting his soul, 
to And the Lord counteth guiltless every pious man and his house. 


rt (9) The sinner stumbleth and curseth his life, 
: The day when he was begotten, and his mother’s travail. 
£2 (10) He addeth sins to sins, while he liveth (?) ; 
: 13. He falleth—verily grievous is his fall—and riseth no more. 
(11) The destruction of the sinner is for ever, 
14 And he shall not be remembered, when the righteous is visited. 
(12) 15 This is the portion of sinners for ever. 


16 But they that fear the Lord shall rise to life eternal, 
And their life (shall be) in the light of the Lord, and shall come to an end no more. 


IV. <A Conversation of Solomon with the Men-pleasers. 


4 : Wherefore sittest thou, O profane (man), in the council of the pious, 
Seeing that thy heart is far removed from the Lord, 


1 and 2) from 73); the original text of # may, therefore, have meant ‘and perform His service’. Perchance ‘good’ 
in v. 2d was accidentally repeated in # from the end of the line, and 2d originally ran, ‘Fora psalm (is due) to God 
from a glad heart.’ 

anew song. SoJ HS; RLC (erroneously) ‘song and praise’. 

a glad heart. So, rather than ‘a pious heart’, should dyabns (RJ S) xapdias be rendered; # 310 3b means the 
giad or merry heart ; see e.g. Isa. Ixv. 14, Judges xvi. 25, Ruth iii. 7, Eccles. ix. 7; and cp. ‘Is any merry? Let him sing 
psalms’, James v.13. The less well-supported reading, ‘the whole heart’ (L C H), is not to be preferred. 

3. remember. So, and probably rightly,  $; # (2) might also mean ‘make mention of’. ‘ 
30. Cp. iv. 9. G& is difficult; but the translation above may represent, at least approximately, the meaning of Y). 
By means of bold conjecture Ryle and James obtain better parallelism : : 
The righteous ever make mention of the Lord with praise, 

And justify the judgements of the Lord {with thanksgiving ). 

4. the chastening of. So (4D%9) probably M; G S (= 7B) ‘being chastened by’. 
His will. Apparently the meaning is: the righteous places his will at the service of God. 

5. the Lord ... God. & transposes. The first three verbs in the verse are aorists in G. 
7. steadfastness. Lit. ‘truth’. 


lodgeth. %# doubtless pr: the house of the righteous is not a khan open to all passing sins; on the contrary 
(v. 8), sins, that in spite of all his care, and unknown to him, have gained entrance, are discovered by means of 
constant and diligent search and turned out. ny : : 
8. The righteous . . . searcheth his house. = ‘He (i.e. God) searcheth the house of the righteous’. 
8-9. iniquity (done) by him in error. He maketh atonement. Less probably ‘Iniquity. With his trespass- 
offering he maketh atonement’ (Ryle and James). é 
g. MSS. read rarewaoer wvxnv, which von Gebhardt emends into tam. Yuyns. 
10. pious. % doubtless TDN. 
II. begotten, or ‘born’. ‘Stumbleth’; & aor. ' ; ; 
12. sins to sins. So Isa. xxx. 1 (&); in ® perhaps ‘sin to sin’, as in v. 7 (cp. Isa. xxx. I, 7). In other respects 
vy. 12 was perhaps a more exact antithesis to v. 7: ‘while he liveth’ (77 (ay avrov) is doubtful. 
12-13. addeth . . . falleth. @& aor., but ‘riseth’ in G& is fut. In # probably all were imperfects. 
: ily. @& ‘for’; % ‘and because’. , 
HP probably as above ; (& “And He’ (i.e. God) ‘will not remember (him’, viz. the sinner), ‘when He visits the 
righteous’, with His favour. 
V. TrtLE. Conversation, RJ LC; ‘psalm’, H. ; : 
O profane (man). Here and throughout the Psalm the sing. may refer collectively to the party opposed to 


635 


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 4. 1-15 


Provoking with transgressions the God of Israel ? 
2 Extravagant in speech, extravagant in outward seeming beyond all (men), 
Is he that is severe of speech in condemning sinners in judgement. 
3 And his hand is first upon him as (though he acted) in zeal, 
And (yet) he is himself guilty in respect of manifold sins and of wantonness. 
4 His eyes are upon every woman without distinction ; 
His tongue lieth when he maketh contract with an oath. 
5 By night and in secret he sinneth as though unseen, 
With his eyes he talketh to every woman of evil compacts. 
6 He is swift to enter every house with cheerfulness as though guileless. 


7 (6) Let God remove those that live in hypocrisy in the company of the pious, 
(Even) the life of such an one with corruption of his flesh and penury. 
8 (7) Let God reveal the deeds of the men-pleasers, 
The deeds of such an one with laughter and derision ; 
9 (8) That the pious may count righteous the judgement of their God, 
When sinners are removed from before the righteous, 
to (Even the) man-pleaser who uttereth law guilefully. 
11 (9) And their eyes (are fixed) upon any man’s house that is (still) secure, 
That they may, like (the) Serpent, destroy the wisdom of . . . with words of transgressors, 
12 (10) His words are deceitful that (he) may accomplish (his) wicked desire. 
13 He never ceaseth from scattering (families) as though (they were) orphans, 
(11) | Yea, he layeth waste a house on account of (his) lawless desire. 
14 He deceiveth with words, (saying,) There is none that seeth, or judgeth. 
15 (12) He fills one (house) with lawlessness, 
And (then) his eyes (are fixed) upon the next house, 


the psalmist, or to the leader of that party; adopting the latter view some have identified the profane man with 


Alexander Jannaeus (Wellh.), others with Aristobulus (Ryle and James). 


the council of the pious. So J 3; ‘the pious council? RL C; ‘in council’ H. The fuller and correcter phrase 
need not necessarily refer to the Sanhedrin ; ovvédprov may also stand for TD; cp. e.g. Jer.xv-17. ‘Pious’ = OPON § 


Cp. iii. Io. 
6. Cp. Isa. xxix. 13 (also Matt. xv. 8) ‘seeing that’; @& ‘and’. 
26. Cp. ‘the Sadducees . . . savage in judging (offenders) beyond all the Jews’, Jost 77. xx- Onde 
3. upon him. In carrying out the sentence on the condemned sinner ; cp. Deut. xiii. 10. 
wantonness. Cp. Matt. xxiii. 25 (R. V. ‘excess’). 
4. without distinction. 3 ‘immodestly’, 
5. of evil compacts. Or, perhaps (#), ‘of assignations for evil’. 


7. the life of such an one. Lit. “his life’; & is difficult in this verse and scarcely represents # exactly; % ‘God 
shall remove those who judge with respect of persons; but He lives with the upright in the corruption of his body and 


in the poverty (read Jhassonso for JLatm-ss) of his life’. 


8. The deeds of such an one. Lit. ‘his deeds’; cp. v. 7, also the sing. in v. 3@ (him) after the plur. ‘sinners’ 


in v. 2. 

86. May mean either that God will deride the wicked (cp. Ps. ii. 4), or expose them to the derision of men 
xliv. (xliii) 14). 

10. uttereth. i, perhaps, 73) ‘transgresseth’ (von Gebh.). 


11. The meaning seems to be: if any house still survives secure against their licentious conduct, their set purpose is, 
like the Serpent (Gen. ili), to gain their way by working on the wife with seductive speech. But the text is uncertain. 
Wellh, differently ‘ their eyes are directed to the house of a man (= Alexander Jannaeus) who understands how to 


pervert the wisdom of God (reading dyyékov = ods for anor). 


the wisdom of... The genitive in & is ‘one another’, but this yields no sense. For a@Anov Ryle and James 
conjecture \ad@r, ‘ to pervert wisdom, speaking with words,’ &c. ; the sing. part.in v. 11 4 then resumes the plur. (‘their ’) 
of v. 11a; cp. vv. 7,8. Won Gebhardt conjectures \aéy = DY, a corruption in ® for DYN, ‘the wisdom of the flaw- 


less’. For other suggestions see preceding note and Ryle and James. 
13. He never ceaseth from. So probably #; & has ‘ He ceased not, till he prevailed (in) ’. 
136-14. The aorists of & are rendered by English present tenses. 


14. Possibly once followed by v. 12, to which it would form a parallel. Verse 1 5 (if correctly interpreted) would follow 


v. 13 better than v.14. Rearranged the passage would read thus :— 
14 He deceiveth with words, (saying,) There is none that seeth or judgeth ; 
12 His words are deceitful that (he) may accomplish (his) wicked desire. 
13 He never ceaseth from scattering (families) as though (they were) orphans, 
Yea, he layeth waste a house on account of (his) lawless desire, 
15 He is sated with lawlessness therewith : 
And (then) his eyes are directed to the next house. 


15f. Obscure; but the general idea probably is that he has no sooner ruined one house than he turns his attention 


to the next, seducing its inmates to become the victims of his insatiable lust, 
15a. & ‘he is filled with (év) lawlessness in this’ (ev ravrn). 


636 


Tienes OF SOLOMON "4." r5—5:°8 


To destroy it with words that give wing to (desire). 
(13) (Yet) with all these his soul, like Sheol, is not sated. 


16 Let his portion, O Lord, be dishonoured before thee ; 
: Let him go forth groaning, and come home cursed. 
17 (15) Let his life be (spent) in anguish, and penury, and want, O Lord; 
: Let his sleep be (beset) with pains and his awaking with perplexities. 
18 (16) Let sleep be withdrawn from his eyelids at night ; : 
Let him fail dishonourably in every work of his hands. 
t9 (17) Let him come home empty-handed to his house, 
And his house be void of everything wherewith he could sate his appetite. 
20 (18) (Let) his old age (be spent) in childless loneliness until his removal (by death). 
) 


: 
: 


21 (19) Let the flesh of the men-pleasers be rent by wild beasts, 
And (let) the bones of the lawless (lie) dishonoured in the sight of the sun. 
22 (20) Let ravens peck out the eyes of the hypocrites. 
23 For they have laid waste many houses of men, in dishonour, 
And scattered (them) in (their) lust ; 
24 (21) And they have not remembered God, 
Nor feared God in all these things ; 
25 But they have provoked God’s anger and vexed Him. 
(22) May He remove them from off the earth, 
Because with deceit they beguiled the souls of the flawless. 


26 (23) Blessed are they that fear the Lord in their flawlessness ; 
27 The Lord shall deliver them from guileful men and sinners, 
And deliver us from every stumbling-block of the lawless (men). 
_ 28 (24) Let God destroy them that insolently work all unrighteousness, 
For a great and mighty judge is the Lord our God in righteousness. 


29 (28) Let Thy mercy, O Lord, be upon all them that love Thee. 


V. A Psalm. Of Solomon. 


5 1 O Lord God, I will praise Thy name with joy, 
In the midst of them that know Thy righteous judgements. 
2 For Thou art good and merciful, the refuge of the poor ; 
3. When I cry to Thee, do not silently disregard me. 
4 (3) For no man taketh spoil from a mighty man; 
5 Who, then, can take aught of all that Thou hast made, except Thou Thyself givest ? 
6 (4) For man and his portion (lie) before Thee in the balance ; 
He cannot add to, so as to enlarge, what has been prescribed by Thee. 


O God, 7 (g) when we are in distress we call upon Thee for help, 
And Thou dost not turn back our petition, for Thou art our God. 
8 (6) Cause not Thy hand to be heavy upon us, 
Lest through necessity we sin. 


N 


15d. like Sheol. SoRLJCS; Hom. Cp. Prov. XXVli. 20, Isa. v. 14. 
166. Cp. Deut. xxviii. 19, Ps. civ. 23, XK Ss 
19. could. & ‘shall’. 


20. until his removal. Or, perhaps, ‘ that (his family) may be taken away (from the earth)’, i.e. let his old age 
be at once lonely and hopeless. % renders the entire verse by what is a free and inaccurate paraphrase of Gr, ‘ And of 


his children let not one draw near him.’ 
21. rent. Lit. ‘be scattered’; # different ? 


23. many houses of men. So RJ HS; ‘houses of many men’, L C. The latter rendering may more correctly 


represent #. Yet perhaps the original text of # ran rather as follows : 
For they have laid waste houses in dishonour, 
And by their lust scattered (i.e. made homeless) many men. 
V. 4. Cp. Isa. xlix. 24 (&). 


taketh. & ‘shall take’. 
5. Who, then, can take. & ‘And who shall take’. 


6. what has been prescribed by Thee. & 10 xpiva cov, where «pia is probably = PN, intended in the sense 
which it has in Gen. xlvii. 22, Prov. xxx. 8, xxxi. 15. For the thought of the verse cp. Matt. vi. 27; for the phraseology, 


Wisd. xi. 21. : . 
7, O God. In G this goes with v. 6; in ® it probably opened v. 7. 
call. . . dost not turn back. In & the tenses are future. 


637 


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 5. 9—6. 4 
9 (7) Even though Thou restore us not, we will not keep away ; 
But unto Thee will we come. 
10 (8) For if I hunger, unto Thee will I cry, O God; 
And 7hou wilt give to me. 


11 (9) Birds and fish dost Thou nourish, 
_ In that Thou givest rain to the steppes that green grass may spring up, 
(10) (So) to prepare fodder in the steppe for every living thing ; 
12 And if they hunger, unto Thee do they lift up their face. 
13 (11) Kings and rulers and peoples You dost nourish, O God ; 
____And who is the help of the poor and needy, if not Thou, O Lord? 
14 (12) And Thou wilt hearken—for who is good and gentle but Thou ?>— 
Making glad the soul of the humble by opening Thine hand in mercy. 


15 (13) Man’s goodness is (bestowed) grudgingly and .. .; 

And if he repeat (it) without murmuring, even that is marvellous. 
16 (14) But Thy gift is great in goodness and wealth, 

And he whose hope is (set) on Thee shall have no lack of gifts. 
17 (15) Upon the whole earth is Thy mercy, O Lord, in goodness. 


~18 (16) Happy is he whom God remembereth in (granting to him) a due sufficiency ; 
tg If a man abound overmuch, he sinneth. 
20 (17) Sufficient are moderate means with righteousness, 
______And hereby the blessing of the Lord (becomes) abundance with righteousness. 
21 (18) They that fear the Lord rejoice in good (gifts), 
And Thy goodness is upon Israel in Thy kingdom. 


Blessed is the glory of the Lord, for He is our king. 


VI. Ln Hope. Of Solomon. 


6 « Happy is the man whose heart is fixed to call upon the name of the Lord ; 
2 When he remembereth the name of the Lord, he will be saved. 
3 (2) His ways are made even by the Lord, 
And the works of his hands are preserved by the Lord his God. 
4 (3) At what he sees in his bad dreams, his soul shall not be troubled : 


ga. Cp. Ps. xxx. 7, 5 ‘And turn not Thy face from us, lest we go far from Thee ’. 


11. To relieve the present awkwardness, von Gebhardt conjectured %jroiuacas, ‘thou preparest’, in place of érotwjdoat 
(& 3), ‘so to prepare’; perhaps rightly. % possibly suffered some misplacement and contamination, and read originally 


somewhat as follows: 
When Thou givest rain, the green grass springs up; 
Thou preparest provender in the steppe for every beast. 
Birds and fish Zou dost nourish, 
And if they hunger, they lift up their face to Thee. 


At present the fresh grass of the steppes, which is not the food of fish and birds, is brought into unnaturally close 


relation to them. 
12. The tenses, in && future, were doubtless in 9 imperfects with frequentative force ; cp. vv. 11 De, WROD 
14. Making glad the soul of the humble, or ‘make glad’, &c. $% ‘And his soul shall be satisfied’. 


15. grudgingly. So J (év dadot; RLC ey ped) S; the reading of H, év dita, ‘on a friend ’, arose from this by 
error. A synonymous clause followed, but has been obscured by the mistranslation of &, and subsequent mutilation (?). 
& reads, ungrammatically, kai 7 a¥pov, which is expanded by &, and, independently, by Ryle and James, into ‘ to-day 
and to-morrow’. Possibly # read M231 (whence, by confusion with 1M, G's avpuov), ‘and for a price’ (cp. 


Frankenberg). 


16. is great, &c. Lit. ‘great, with (werd) kindness, andrich’. God's gift is given with a free, ungrudging (cp. 15 a) 


kindness, and is also in itself rich and costly. 


shall have no lack of gifts. So, probably, the original text of 9 ; but, if so, IDM was miscopied DIN? 
berg). @& (cp. S) may be best rendered ‘ will not be sparing with his gifts’, See Ryle and James. 
18. God. %‘the Lord’. 


in (granting to him) a due sufficiency. Cp. e.g. Prov. xxx. 8. S$ ‘in poverty’, perhaps a paraphrase of @, 


for note ‘ poverty’ also renders 16 pérpiov in v. 20. 


206. Not very clear. Perhaps the meaning is: the moderate means given by God is equivalent to abundance, but 
an abundance that does not lead to sin (v. 19). Ryle and James render: ‘and herein is the blessing of the Lord, that 


(a man) be satisfied in righteousness.’ 


VI. 3. made even. Cp. Ps. v. 8; or, ‘established *, Cp: P'S. xxxvil. ‘23. 
36. the Lord. Som. 
638 


Tike PSALMS OF SOLOMON 6. 5—7. 9 


5 _ When he passes through rivers and the tossing of the seas, he shall not be dismayed. 
6 (4) He ariseth from his sleep, and blesseth the name of the Lord: 
7 When his heart is at peace, he singeth to the name of his God, 
(5) And he entreateth the Lord for all his house. 
8 And the Lord heareth the prayer of every one that feareth God, 
(6) And every request of the soul that hopes for Him doth the Lord accomplish. 


9 Blessed is the Lord, who showeth mercy to those who love Him in sincerity. 


VII. Of Solomon. Of turning. 


7 1 Make not Thy dwelling afar from us, O God; 

Lest they assail us that hate us without cause. 

2 For Thou hast rejected them, O God ; 
Let not their foot trample upon Thy holy inheritance. 

3 Chasten us Thyself in Thy good pleasure ; 
But give (us) not up to the nations; 

4 For, if Thou sendest pestilence, 
Thou Thyself givest it charge concerning us ; 

: (5) For Thou art merciful, 

And wilt not be angry to the point of consuming us. 


5 (6) While Thy name dwelleth in our midst, we shall find mercy ; 
6 And the nations shall not prevail against us. 
(7) For Thou art our shield, 
7 And when we call upon Thee, Thou hearkenest to us; 
8 For Thou wilt pity the seed of Israel for ever 
And Thou wilt not reject (them) : 
(9) But we (shall be) under Thy yoke for ever, 
And (under) the rod of Thy chastening. 
9 (10) Thou wilt establish us in the time that Thou helpest us, 


Showing mercy to the house of Jacob on the day wherein Thou didst promise (to help them). 


7. When his heart is at peace, lit. ‘in the stability (or ‘prosperity’, cp. iv. 17) of his heart’. 


125 mbwa ; cp. Nowa, Ps. xxx. 7 (6). 
his God. 5% ‘the Lord’. 
7 6. This line was perhaps originally preceded by a parallel line. 
he entreateth. Cp. ii. 24. 
a 8. God. % ‘him’. am : 
8, 9. The lines of v. 8 are obvious parallels, and should not be placed in separate distichs (as by Kit.). 


an isolated stichos, such as occurs at the end of other Psalms; see ii. 41, Iv. 29, Vv. 22, Ix. 20, x. 9, Xl-9 C, XVIl. 51 C: 


Cp. the rather different conclusions in the canonical Psalms, xli. 13, Ixxxix. 52, CXxv. 5 ¢, Cxxviii. 6 4, and the mobo 
that concludes several Psalms. 


VII. TitLe. Of turning. The title may indicate that the subject of the Psalm is the restoration of the people by 
God to prosperity (cp. v. 9). Less probably the word expresses the turning of the people in repentance to God. 
LarCie vz: ©. : ai ; 
1d. they ... that hate us without cause. In view of line a, and vv. 34,64, it is probable that foreigners 
are intended (cp. Lam. iii. 52). In another connexion the words might denote a Jewish party, as they perhaps do in 
Ps. xxxv. 19, lxix. 5. 
2. For. The force of was, perhaps ‘nay, but’. __ 
Let not their foot. S$ ‘inorder thattheirfoot mightnot’., = | ik: 
trample upon. Used of the profane intrusion of foreign soldiery in ii. 2; of the irreverent approach of Jewish 
hippers in Isa. i. 12. : ; ; 
Le ie the argument is: We have sinned and deserve chastisement (cp. v. 8d); but let us be chastised directly by 
God, who even in wrath remembers mercy (v. 5, cp. ii. 24-7), not by pitiless men. Cp. 2 Sam. xxiv. 13-15, also 
‘4 Esdras v. 30, Ecclus. ii. 18. ; 
j 4. pestilence. Gz $ ‘death’; but Odvaros here, as in 2 Sam. xxiv. 13-15, probably rendered "37, ‘ pestilence’. 
6. the nations. So $; & ‘nation’. A, ie aa 
our shield. & lit. “he who holds a shield over us’ ; but in O.T. urepagmorns 1S generally = j39 ‘shield’, or Nyd 
3 > & here ‘ our strength’ (cp. Ps. xxvii. 1, Pesch.). I , 
a ee aiencwe call . » Then hearkenest. @& “And we shall call . . . and Thou wilt hearken’. 
8c, d. The prayer of v. 3 will have been granted. 


639 


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 8. 1-15. 


VIII. Of Solomon. Of the chief Musician. 


8 x Distress and the sound of war hath my ear heard, 
The sound of a trumpet announcing slaughter and calamity, 
2 The sound of much people as of an exceeding high wind, 
As a tempest with mighty fire sweeping through the Negeb, 
3 And I said in my heart, Surely (?) God judgeth us ; 
4 A sound I hear (moving) towards Jerusalem, the holy city. 
5 My loins were broken at what I heard, (5) my knees tottered ; 
6 My heart was afraid, my bones were dismayed like flax. 
7 (6) I said: They establish their ways in righteousness. 


(7) I thought upon the judgements of God since the creation of heaven and earth ; 
I held God righteous in His judgements which have been from of old. 
8 God laid bare their sins in the full light of day ; 
All the earth came to know the righteous judgements of God. 
9 In secret places underground their iniquities (were committed) to provoke (Him) to anger ; 
10 They wrought confusion, son with mother and father with daughter ; 
11 (10) They committed adultery, every man with his neighbour’s wife. 
They concluded covenants with one another with an oath touching these things ; 
12 (11) They plundered the sanctuary of God, as though there was no avenger. 
13 (12) They trode the altar of the Lord, (coming straight) from all manner of uncleanness ; 
And with menstrual blood they defiled the sacrifices, as (though these were) common flesh. 
14 (13) They left no sin undone, wherein they surpassed not the heathen. 


VIII. TiTLe, Of the chief Musician. & cis vikos, ‘unto victory’; but in Theodotion’s version of Ps. xii. 1, 


Xlil. I, e/s vixos is the rendering of ny, ‘ Of (or to) the chief Musician.’ 

Tia Cpwin 2t 

14, announcing. nyovons = YYOwID. Cp. Sir. xlv. 9. ; : ; 

2, the Negeb, i.e. the wilderness to the south of Judah. So probably here, as in Isa. xxi. 1; @& in both passages 
has the more general ‘ (the) wilderness’. 

3. inmy heart. & 3 ‘to my heart’, 

Surely. & % ‘where, then’ (will God, &c.) ; rod should imply in 9 75°8 or 738, but neither of these words in 

such a context would mean ‘surely’, Possibly 9 was already corrupt. An assertive particle would be suitable; but, 
since the dominant rhythm of the Hebrew poem seems to have been 3: 2, rod dpa should rather correspond to the 


corruption of some word that belonged to the first half of the verse, perchance to ° 125 “S, “Woe to us! for.’ 
Cprescjiere vis. 

judgeth. & ‘will judge’. , , 

us. G&S ‘him’ # would have been ambiguous, permitting the different vocalizations, DEL and 33NBY, 

4. hear. G& ‘heard’. 

(moving) towards. is (‘Iepovoadnp mod), RL C3; ev (‘Iepovoadn rod) H; & ‘in (Jerusalem) ’. 

If the text of & in v. 3 f. represents the meaning of the original, the point of the verse is that the poet is convinced 
that God will judge the hostile people (v. 1 f), but is at first uncertain where: ‘I said in my heart, Where then will 
God judge him?’ (v. 3). He then hears the sound of judgement upon ‘him’, i.e. the enemy, in Jerusalem. But in this 
case the distress at the news described in v. 4 is difficult to account for, though it is natural enough, if the poet sees in 
the hosts (v. 1 f.) advancing on (v. 4) Jerusalem the instruments of God’s judgement on ‘us’, i.e. Jerusalem. 

a sound, or ‘a voice’ (and so in v. rf.). 

5. at what I heard, lit. ‘at hearing’; but cp. Ezek, xxi. 11 (6), Isa. xxi. 3. 

tottered. Isa. xxxv. 3. 

6. Rhythm suggests that the simile may have stood in the first part of the verse ; perchance €o876n is paraphrastic, 
and the verse originally ran somewhat as follows: ‘My heart trembled (cp. Isa. vii. 2) like flax, my bones were 
dismayed ’ (Ps. vi. 3). 

7. The psalmist’s first thought that Jerusalem is righteous (cp. i. 3), which created his astonishment and distress 
(vv. 5, 6) at the approach of disaster (v. 1 f.), is corrected by God’s laying bare the secret sins of the people (vv. 8 ff.). 
Perhaps the thought has been obscured by the loss of more than half a distich. According to the punctuation and 
accentuation of the MSS. of &, we should render: ‘And I said to those that establish, &c. Sas above. — 

8. in the full light of day. ii. 13n. 

10. They wrought confusion. Cp. ii. 15 n. 

12. the sanctuary. i. 8n. : 

_as though there was no avenger. (& lit. ‘there not being an inheritor delivering’. % ‘as if there were none 
to inherit and deliver’. %9 probably as above. The apparent dominance of the 3:2 rhythm favours Ryle and 
James’ conjecture that ® read 5x3 PS). 

13. altar. % ‘temple’. 

136. Having come in contact with women at a time when they are ritually unclean, and thereby themselves 
contracted uncleanness, they do not wait to undergo the necessary purification, but eat the sacrificial flesh as though 
it were not sacred, but mere common flesh that could be eaten whether one was clean or unclean. See Lev. xii. 1-8, 
xV. 19-33 ; Ezek. xviii. 6; Lev. xv. 31; Deut. xii. 15. 


640 


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 8. 15-37 


15 (14) Therefore God mingled for them a spirit of wandering ; 
And gave them to drink a cup of undiluted wine, that they might become drunken. 
16 (15) He brought him that is from the end of the earth, that smiteth mightily ; 
17 He decreed (?) war against Jerusalem, and against her land. 
18 (16) The princes of the land went to meet him with joy: they said unto him: 
Blessed be thy way! Come ye, enter ye in with peace. 
19 (17) They made the rough ways even, before his entering in; 
They opened the gates to Jerusalem, they crowned its walls. 


20 (18) As a father (entereth) the house of his sons, (so) he entered (Jerusalem) in peace ; 
He established his feet (there) in great safety. 
21 (19) He captured her fortresses and the wall of Jerusalem ; 
22 For God Himself led him in safety, while they wandered. 
23 (20) He destroyed their princes and every one wise in counsel ; 
He poured out the blood of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, like the water of uncleanness. 
24 (21) He led away their sons and daughters, whom they had begotten in defilement. 


26 They defiled Jerusalem and the things that had been hallowed to the name of God. 

27 (23) (But) God hath shown Himself righteous in His judgements upon the nations of the earth ; 
28 And the pious (servants) of God are like innocent lambs in their midst. 

29 (24) Worthy to be praised is the Lord that judgeth the whole earth in His righteousness. 


( 
25 (22) They did according to their uncleanness, even as their fathers (had done): 
7 ( 


30 (25) Behold, now, O God, Thou hast shown us Thy judgement in Thy righteousness ; 
31 Our eyes have seen Thy judgements, O God. 
(26) We have justified Thy name that is honoured for ever ; 
32 For Thou art the God of righteousness, judging Israel with chastening. 


33 (27) Turn, O God, Thy mercy upon us, and have pity upon _us ; 
34 (28) Gather together the dispersed of Israel, with mercy and goodness ; 
35 For Thy faithfulness is with us. 
(29) And (though) we have stiffened our neck, yet Thou art our chastener ; 


36 (30) Overlook us not, O our God, lest the nations swallow us up, as though there were none to deliver. 


37 (31) But Thou art our God from the beginning, 
And upon Thee is our hope (set), O Lord ; 


15. God, by way of punishment, deprived the people of all sense and capability. Cp. Isa. xix. 14. 
16. Cp. Isa. xli. 25, xlvi. 11; Jer. vi. 23; Isa. xiv. 19. 
17. decreed. , perhaps, ‘he prepared’ (9); G@S=j'. See Ryle and James. 

and against. So S$; & omits ‘against’. 


18 ff. Cp. Jos. Azz. xiv. 3 (Pompey on his way from Damascus met by ambassadors of Aristobulus, bearing a rich 
present). Others have compared Azz, xii. 5. 3 (Antiochus Epiphanes captures Jerusalem without fighting, his party 


within the city opening the gates to him). 
18. blessed, lit. ‘desired’; Jer. xx. 14, and &. 


19. The rough tracks of Judah are made easy before Jewish territory is entered by the great foreigner ; so, too, ‘the 
gates to (emt) Jerusalem ’, i. e. the passes, &c., commanding the approaches to the capital, rather than the city gates of 
Jerusalem, are flung open to give him an unimpeded approach. This may be a poetical account of the circumstances 
described by Jos. Awd. xiv. 3. 4: Pompey came to Coreae, which is the first place in Judaea (apx7 THs “Iovdatas), on the 
journey from the north to Jerusalem ; subsequently Aristobulus complied with Pompey’s demand that the fortresses 


(on the way to Jerusalem) should be delivered up to him. : 
his entering in. SoRJ LS; H ‘their entering in. 


21. her, i.e. Jerusalem’s. This may have been a mere anticipative suffix in ® (cp. S$), in which case substitute ‘ the’ 


in English. Or the line may have suffered some corruption. 


22. while they wandered incapable of planning or achieving anything for their safety ; cp. v. 15. The allusion 
in v. 21 seems to be to Pompey’s forcible occupation of the Temple (cp. il. 1); the ‘wandering’ may include a reference 
to the divided counsels of the Jews. The party opposed to Aristobulus admitted Pompey to the city and the king’s 
palace, but the party of Aristobulus entrenched themselves in the Temple, from which they had to be expelled by 


force (Jos. At. xiv. 4. 2). 


i Ys airl 0 modépou). Jos. Ant. xiv. 4. 4. 
“After the capture of the Temple Pompey executed the ringleaders (rods airious Tov Tmohep 
e b. Twelve Shaan’ Jews fell during the assault on and capture of the city (¢d.), many, however, not at the hands 


of the Romans, but of their fellow countrymen (Jos. 3. Z. i. 7. 5) 
water of uncleanness. Cp. Num. xix. 


24. Josephus (Azz. xiv. 4. 5) alludes in particular to the sons and daughters of Aristobulus being taken captive 


Rome. Z 
poe Behold, now. So probably #; see 2 Sam. vil. 2, %® and &. 


Our: RJ LCS; H ‘their’. 


1105-2 


641 


NZ 


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 8, 38~—9. 17 


38 (32) And we will not depart from Thee, 
For good are Thy judgements upon us, 

39 (33) Ours and our children’s be Thy good pleasure for ever: 
O Lord our Saviour, we shall never more be moved. ay i 

40 (34) The Lord is worthy to be praised for His judgements with the mouth of His pious ones; 
And blessed be Israel of the Lord for ever. 


IX. Of Solomon. For rebukes 


9 1 When Israel was led away captive into a strange land, 
When they fell away from the Lord-who redeemed them, 
2 They were cast away from the inheritance, which the Lord had given them. 
(2) Among every nation (were) the dispersed of Israel according to the word of God, 
3 hat Thou mightest be justified, O God, in Thy righteousness by reason of our transgressions : 
4 _ For Thou art a just judge over all the peoples of the earth. 
5 (3) For from Thy knowledge none that doeth unjustly is hidden, 
6 And the righteous deeds of Thy pious ones (are) before Thee, O Lord; 
Where, then, can a man hide himself from Thy knowledge, O God? 
7 (4) Our works are subject to our own choice and power i 
To do right or wrong in the works of our hands ; 
g And in Thy righteousness Thou visitest the sons of men. 
9 (5) He that doeth righteousness layeth up life for himself with the Lord ; 
And he that doeth wrongly forfeits his life to destruction ; 
1o__ For the judgements of the Lord are (given) in righteousness to (every) man and (his) house. 
11 (6) Unto whom art Thou good, O God, except to them that call upon the Lord ? 
12 Hecleanseth from sins a soul when it maketh confession, when it maketh acknowledgement ; 
13 For shame is upon us and upon our faces on account of all these things. 
14 (7) And to whom doth He forgive sins, except to them that have sinned ? 
15 Lhou blessest the righteous, and dost not reprove them for the sins that they have committed : 
And Thy goodness is upon them that sin, when they repent. 
16 (8) And, now, Thou art our God, and we the people whom Thou hast loved: 
Behold and show pity, O God of Israel, for we are Thine ; 
And remove not Thy mercy from us, lest they assail us. 
17 (9) For Thou didst choose the seed of Abraham before all the nations, 


IX. 1. Israel. J ‘ Jerusalem’. 

2, the Lord. 4 “God. 

Among every nation. Taken by Ryle and James with ‘they were cast away’ in the previous line. Cp. 
Wentsives 7. 
the dispersed. & ‘the dispersion’ ; cp. viii. 34. 

5. is. G ‘shall be’. The tenses of vv. 4-6 must be the same, God is a just judge because He knows and takes 
account of all. 

6. (are) before Thee. A synonym for ‘ Thou knowest’. Cp. Psi li. 5 (3). 

can. @ ‘shall’. 

7. subject to our own choice and power, lit. ‘in the choice and power of our soul’. Ryle and James (p. 96) 
discuss at length an alternative rendering and interpretation : Our deeds are by the choice (of God), and (at 
the same time) we have power to do rightly or wrongly ; but apparently the rhythmical structure of the original would 
not have admitted this alternative. 

8. God impartially judges the way in which men exercise their free-will (v. 7), and by His law of life (v. 9) rewards 
them accordingly. 

10. (every), (his). These words are expressed in &, but not in ék. 

11, 12, The exact line of thought and some of the details are uncertain. God is kind only to those who call upon 
Him ; to those who call upon Him in prayer for forgiveness He shows His kindness (cp. Ps. li. 3 f. (1 f.) ) by forgiving 
eee a : ks who here speak may rely on forgiveness, for the shame of which they speak is a form of confession 

so Kit., but ?). 

1. art Thou (& ‘wilt Thou be’) good,O God. &% ‘is God good’ (ohpo). Originally, it is probable, vv, 10-15 were 


either in their entirety addressed to God, or a statement about Him. Von Gebhardt conjecturally restores the 2nd 
person in vv. 12 and 14. 


12. cleanseth. (& ‘will cleanse’. 


from sins, Cp. x. 1; @& ‘in sins’; perhaps in consequence of reading a Hebr. 9 as 2 (a frequent error). 
S ‘the sins of’, ‘ , 


when it maketh acknowledgement. $& omit; perhaps a doublet in &&. 
14. doth. G ‘will’, 


15. reprove. So % certainly, and apparently the «dévve7 of & t bei imi 
ete Sas y; pp y evOuveis must be interpreted similarly. See Ryle and James. 


642 


18 


19 (10) 


10: 


2 


3 
4 

(4) 

5 

6 (5) 
7 (6) 


8 (7) 


ll: 


2 


3 (2) 


: isto lMo OF SOLOMON 9. 17—1Ts 3 


And didst set Thy name upon us, O Lord, 
And Thou wilt not reject (us) for ever. 
Thou madest a covenant with our fathers concerning us ; 
And we hope in Thee, when our soul turneth (unto Thee). 
The mercy of the Lord be upon the house of Israel for ever and ever. 


X. A Hymn. Of Solomon. 


Happy is the man whom the Lord remembereth with reproving, 
And whom He restraineth from the way of evil with strokes, 
That he may be cleansed from sin, that it may not be multiplied. 
He that maketh ready his back for strokes shall be cleansed, 
For the Lord is good to them that endure chastening. 
For He maketh straight the ways of the righteous, 
And doth not pervert (them) by His chastening. 
And the mercy of the Lord (is) upon them that love Him in truth, 
And the Lord remembereth His servants in mercy. 
For the testimony (is) in the law of the eternal covenant, 
The testimony of the Lord (is) on the ways of men in (His) visitation. 
Just and kind is our Lord in His judgements for ever, 
And Israel shall praise the name of the Lord in gladness. 
And the pious shall give thanks in the assembly of the people ; 
And on the poor shall God have mercy in the gladness (?) of Israel ; 
For good and merciful is God for ever, 
And the assemblies of Israel shall glorify the name of the Lord. 


The salvation of the Lord be upon the house of Israel unto everlasting gladness ! 


XI. Of Solomon. Unto expectation. 


Blow ye in Zion on the trumpet to summon (the) saints, 
Cause ye to be heard in Jerusalem the voice of him that bringeth good tidings ; 
For God hath had pity on Israel in visiting them. 

Stand on the height, O Jerusalem, and behold thy children, 
From the East and the West, gathered together by the Lord ; 


18. Thou wilt not reject. So, by conjecture, von Gebhardt ; cp. vii. 8. Ryle and James, by conjecture, ‘ Thou 
wilt abide (among us) for ever.’ & ‘ Thou wilt not cease’. 


yx tire, A iymoa JL € Hs ‘In hymns” R- ; 
1. whom He restraineth. So S, and so, perhaps, #, though S may be merely a free rendering of éxodvén, which 
Fritzsche tentatively suggested was the original text of &; all codices of & read éxukdo6n, which Ryle and James 
render, on the authority of Exod. xiii. 18, Deut. xxxii. 12. & ‘and he is fenced about’. 
That he may be cleansed. %, perhaps, ‘and whom He cleanseth’; cp. ix. 12. | 
3. ‘For the way of the righteous is straight, and His chastening doth not pervert it’. 
maketh. & ‘will make’. 
doth not pervert. & ‘will not pervert’. 
4. remembereth. G ‘ will remember’. ; : ET 5 igh } ‘ 
5. The witness to God’s mercy is to be found written in the Law, and constantly in His visitations of men in their 
daily lives (or, ways) ; such may be the meaning of the verse. : 
6. kind. (& écvs; but this probably rendered DN, as in Ps. cxlv. (cxliv.) 17. % ‘upright’. 
our Lord. S% ‘our God’. 
in His judgements. 5% ‘in all His judgements’. 
forever. 5% omits. 
the Lord. J + ‘for ever’. 


. God. & ‘the Lord’. 
§ the gladness (?) of Israel. A term for the Messianic age? Cp. Ryle and James. Or does ‘gladness’ conceal 


i i i igi j d ‘ God’ the 
some term more parallel to ‘assembly’ in the previous line? and was ‘ the poor’ originally the subject, an : 
object of a verb One by éAefjoe? Kit. renders the line, ‘ Because God has pity on the poor, to the joy of Israel. 

8. The salvation of the Lord be upon, or, rather, in view of the position of rod Kupiov, ‘ Unto the Lord belongeth 


the salvation (to be wrought for).’ 
XI. For the relation of this Psalm to Baruch iv, 36-v. 9, and of both passages to Isa. xl-Ixvi, see Ryle and James, 


ii ff.; but al bove, p. 628. 

PEP ised se paalii. 1. the exact form of # here cannot be determined ; fosszély the last half of the line ran, ‘the 
holy trumpet of Jubilee’ (Ryle and James). ’ 
2, Cause ye to be heard. & 5 ‘proclaim’. 


643 Te2 


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON Lil 4-127 7 


4 (3) From the North they come in the gladness of their God, 
From the isles afar off God hath gathered them. 
5 (4) High mountains hath He abased into a plain for them ; 
6 The hills fled at their entrance. 
(5) The woods gave them shelter as they passed by; 
7 Every sweet-smelling tree God caused to spring up for them, | 
(6) That Israel might pass by in the visitation of the glory of their God. 
8 (7) Put on, O Jerusalem, thy glorious garments ; 
Make ready thy holy robe ; 
For God hath spoken good concerning Israel, for ever and ever. 
9 (8) Let the Lord do what He hath spoken concerning Israel and Jerusalem ; 
Let the Lord raise up Israel by His glorious name. 


(9) The mercy of the Lord be upon Israel for ever and ever. 


XII. Of Solomon. Against the tongue of transgressors. 


12:10 Lord, deliver my soul from (the) lawless and wicked man, : 
From the tongue that is lawless and slanderous, and speaketh lies and deceit. 
2 Manifoldly twisted (?) are the words of the tongue of the wicked man, 
Even as .. . a fire that burneth up . . . 
3... to fill houses with a lying tongue, 
To cut down the trees of gladness . . . 
4 To involve households in warfare by means of slanderous lips. 


(4) May God remove far from the innocent the lips of transgressors by (bringing them to) want 
And may the bones of slanderers be scattered (far) away from them that fear the Lord ! 
5 In flaming fire perish the slanderous tongue (far) away from the pious ! 
6 (5) May the Lord preserve the quiet soul that hateth the unrighteous ; 
And may the Lord establish the man that followeth peace at home. 
7 (6) The salvation of the Lord be upon Israel His servant for ever ; 


6. The woods. S ‘the cedar’. 


XII. TITLE. Against: G ey. Perchance we have here another case of the Gk, 
1, misread 3; in that case the title of this psalm was doubtless taken from the opening words of the second line. 
2. Text and meaning of & are uncertain and obscure, and it is impossible to determine the original form of ¥. 
Manifoldly twisted (?), lit. ‘in manifoldness (cf. iv. 3) of turning’, or ‘ twisting’, SoRJ ( 
virtually LC (ev wr. rpopijs). H ev roujoet dvaorpodis (‘for the accomplishment of frowar 
of this. 

Even as...a fire. In so far at least as the words omitted in the translation above ar 
tionable whether any of the readings or conj 
which is substantially supported by &, reads, 
‘Even as among a people a fire that burneth up its beauty.’ H reads aomep ev do rd 
as on a threshing-floor a fire that burneth up its stubble.’ See, further, von Gebhardt’s discu 
pp. 78 ff. Ifthe ‘twisting’ of v. 2 a can be relied on, the point of the comparison should be t 
of the wicked is as full of twists and incalculable turns (cf. Isa. ix. 17 (18), with n. in Zt. Crit 


ey representing an original 


év moukthia orpopys) and 
dness’) is obviously a corruption 


€ concerned, it is very ques- 
ectures preserve or recover the sense of the original. The text of RAIMI: 


domep ev Nad rip dvdmrov Kaddoviyv adtod. This may be literally rendered, 
p avdarrov Kaddunv avtovd, ‘Even 
ssion and suggestions, 
hat the guileful speech 


. Comm.) as the volume 
of smoke with which fire ascends when it is blown about by the wind. 


3. This verse also must have suffered from corruption of the Greek text or of the Hebrew 
both; but, in general, cf. iv. 11-15. The verbs in the three lines are ambiguous in & : 
they may be either optatives or infinitives ; the position of the verb in the first line ra 
were infinitives. In that case the opening clause of the verse should lead up to an infin 
may have stood something like ‘ His (or, ‘the transgressor’s ’) delight is’ 
is, ‘ His dwelling-place’ or ‘ sojourning’ (is, &c.), which yields no sense 
avrod is an unfortunate rendering, in itself perfectly possible, 
questionable whether ‘ His terror (consists in filling) ’, &c., woul 
and James connect the first clause of v. 3 with wv. 2, 


and render the last part of v, 2, ‘Even as 
floor that burneth up the straw thereof, (so is) his soj i 


, and implies an improbable rhythmical structure of #, 
to fill. SoG S. Hilgenfeld al., by conjecture, ‘to set fire to’. 


the trees of gladness. Figurative for the saints? Cf. xiv. 2. 
the entire line may be literally rendered, ‘to cut off the trees of gladness 
or ‘the trees of wicked inflammatory joy’ (JH). $ renders, ‘ For He ha 
flame of the transgressor’. By conjectural emendation of & Ryle and 


text, or mistranslation, or 
; apart from the accentuation 
ther suggests that in 9 they 
itive ; in the original text these 
, or ‘ His heart is set’. G, literally rendered, 
- It is a clever suggestion that 1) TWapotkta 
but in this passage impossible, of VND; yet it is 
d be very naturally expressed in # by 30. Ryle 


fire in a threshing- 
journing (among men) that he may set fire to houses,’ Seis shut 


The clause omitted above is very obscure ; 
which setteth on fire transgressors’ (R LC), 
th cut down the trees of His delight with the 


James obtain for the last clause (omitted in 
the translation above), ‘with the flame of (his) wicked tongue’. : 


4. households. & & ‘lawless households ’ 
probably a dittograph from the previous line. If the adj 


: ective belongs to t 
slanderer will not scruple to set those of his own party b 


y the ears’. 
644 


; but the position of the adjective differs in different MSS., and it is 
he original text the meaning is that ‘the 


TESTE SALMS OF SOLOMON 12..7—14 3 


"4 And let the sinners perish together at the presence of the Lord ; 
But let the Lord’s pious ones inherit the promises of the Lord. 


XIII. Of Solomon. A Psalm. Comfort for the righteous. 


13 1 The right hand of the Lord hath covered me; 
The right hand of the Lord hath spared us. 
2 The arm of the Lord hath saved us from the sword that passed through, 
From famine and the death of sinners. 
3 Noisome beasts ran upon them: 
With their teeth they tore their flesh, 
And with their molars crushed their bones. 
(4) But from all these things the Lord delivered us. 
4 (5) The righteous was troubled on account of his errors, 
Lest he should be taken away along with the sinners ; 
5 (6) For terrible is the overthrow of the sinner ; 
But not one of all these things toucheth the righteous. 
(7) For not alike are the chastening of the righteous (for sins done) in ignorance, 
And the overthrow of the sinners. 
» (8) Secretly (?) is the righteous chastened, 
Lest the sinner rejoice over the righteous. 
8 (9) For He correcteth the righteous as a beloved son, 
And his chastisement is as that of a firstborn. 
g 10) For the Lord spareth His pious ones, 
And blotteth out their errors by His chastening. 
(11) For the life of the righteous shall be for ever ; 
ro But sinners shall be taken away into destruction, 
And their memorial shall be found no more. 
11 (12) But upon the pious is the mercy of the Lord, 
And upon them that fear Him His mercy. 


XIV. A Aymn. Of Solomon. 


14 «x Faithful is the Lord to them that love Him in truth, 
To them that endure His chastening, 
(2) To them that walk in the righteousness of His commandments, 
In the law which He commanded us that we might live. 
2 (5) The pious of the Lord shall live by it for ever ; 
The Paradise of the Lord, the trees of life, are His pious ones. 
3 (4) Their planting is rooted for ever ; 
They shall not be plucked up all the days of heaven: 
(5) For the portion and the inheritance of God is Israel. 


Siok. me. «3 ‘us’. 
2. us. % ‘me’. 
that passed through: sc. the land. Cp. Ezek. xiv. 17, Lev. xxvi. 6. : : 
the death of sinners. From premature (Ps. lv. 24 (23) or violent death, or death beyond which lies no eternal 
life (cf. ix), i.e. from such deaths as sinners die. Cp, ‘ the death of the righteous’, Num. xxii. Io. Or, possibly, 
&& is due to a wrong division of #, which may have run, ‘from famine and pestilence (see vii. 4n.) ; as for sinners, 
noisome beasts’, &c. In that case the passage refers to the four plagues of Ezek. xiv, 21. ; ow he = 
4. The righteous. A conjectural substitute, which the context demands (Wellh., von Gebh., Kit.) for ‘the impious’, 
which is the reading of all MSS. of G@ and S. For a defence of the text of @& see Ryle and James. 
errors. Cf. v.96; iii. 8; Ps. xix. 13 (12). 
5. toucheth. a ae touch o ‘i 5 ae Bere 
. Secretly, or aringly’. meaning is uncertain ; see Ryle and James. ; 
f Soerecteth. ee an cocet >, God Coens the righteous as a father corrects his beloved and first-born son. 
g. The tenses in G& are future. 
it. upon them... His mercy. 3% ‘ He will cherish’. 


XIV. 1d. which JLC; ‘as’ H; omit R. Cp. 5 ‘ He has given us the law for our life’. 
that we might live, lit. ‘ mare our life’. 

2. by it, viz. the law; or, ‘in Him’. 

sie ail the days of heaven. A synonym for ‘for ever’. Cp. Ps. 1xxxix. 30, Job xiv. 12. 


645 


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 14. 4-—16. 2 


4 (6) But not so are the sinners and transgressors, ae inl 
Who love (the brief) day (spent) in companionship with their sin ; 
(7) Their delight is in fleeting corruption, 
5 And they remember not God. 
(8) For the ways of men are known before Him at all times, 
And He knoweth the secrets of the heart before they come to pass. 
6 (9) Therefore their inheritance is Sheol and darkness and destruction, — 
And they shall not be found in the day when the righteous obtain mercy ; 
7 10) But the pious of the Lord shall inherit life in gladness. 


XV. A Psalm. Of Solomon. With a Song. 


15 x When I was in distress I called upon the name of the Lord, 
I hoped for the help of the God of Jacob and was saved ; 
2 For the hope and refuge of the poor art Thou, O God. ; 
3 (2) For who, O God, is strong except to give thanks unto Thee in truth? 
4 And wherein is a man powerful except in giving thanks to Thy name? 
5 (3) A new psalm with song in gladness of heart, 
The fruit of the lips with the well-tuned instrument of the tongue, 
The firstfruits of the lips from a pious and righteous heart— 
6 (4) He that offereth these things shall never be shaken by evil ; 
The flame of fire and the wrath against the unrighteous shall not touch him, 
7 (5) When it goeth forth from the face of the Lord against sinners, 
To destroy all the substance of sinners, 
8 (6) For the mark of God is upon the righteous that they may be saved. 


(7) Famine and sword and pestilence (shall be) far from the righteous, 
9 _ For they shall flee away from the pious as men pursued in war; 
(8) But they shall pursue sinners and overtake (them), 
And they that do lawlessness shall not escape the judgement of God ; 
(9) As by enemies experienced (in war) shall they be overtaken, 
to For the mark of destruction is upon their forehead. 
rz (10) And the inheritance of sinners is destruction and darkness, 
And their iniquities shall pursue them unto Sheol beneath. 
12 (11) Their inheritance shall not be found of their children, 
13 For sins shall lay waste the houses of sinners. 
(12) And sinners shall perish for ever in the day of the Lord’s judgement, 
14 When God visiteth the earth with His judgement. 
15 (13) But they that fear the Lord shall find mercy therein, 
And shall live by the compassion of their God ; 
But sinners shall perish for ever. 


XVI. A Hymn. Of Solomon. For FHlelp to the Pious. 


16 1 When my soul slumbered (being afar) from the Lord, I had all but slipped down to the pit 
When (I was) far from God, 2 my soul had been wellnigh poured out unto death, 


4. fleeting, lit. ‘littleness of’. 


XV. TITLE. Witha Song. Cp. v. 3, and see xii, title. 
14. & ‘And for my help I called to the God of Jacob’. - 


5. Anew psalm. SoJRLS&; H ‘a psalm and praise’. Cp. iii. rn. 
6. offereth, lit. ‘ doeth’. 


these things. Resumptive of v. 5. 
8. pestilence. G& ‘death’; see vii. 4 note. 
_ 9a. they. The plagues of v. 84; and so in v. 9d. 
aS men pursued in war. Such (cp. 9d) was probably the meaning of the original. 
are duoxdpevor (J ; -ov RL C H) dd Xrpod (RJ: Aqwotd LC H); but they yield no tolerable 
of the conjecture here adopted see Ryle and James and von Gebhardt. &, cur 


96, they, i.e. the plagues mentioned in v. 86; soR&; but inJLCH ‘it 
sense of the next line. 


13. sins. S% ‘their sins’. 
14. H + ‘to recompense sinners unto everlasting’; cp. ii. 38. 
15 ¢. H omits, 
XVI. TITLE. to the Pious. H omit. ‘ 
1-3. The text is not improbably over-full, and the punctuation is uncertain. 
to the pit. The translation rests on the supposition that (1) xarapOopa J CH & was the original text of G; 
646 


2 


The actual readings of & 
sense, For different forms 
iously, ‘as death flees from life. 

’, anticipating the summarizing singular 


THE PSALMS. OF SOLOMON. 16. 2—17. 3 


(I had been) nigh unto the gates of Sheol with the sinner, 3 when my soul departed from the Lord 
God of Israel— 


Had not the Lord helped me with His everlasting mercy. 


4 He pricked me, as -a-horse is pricked, that I might serve Him, 
My saviour and helper at all times saved me. 
5 I will give thanks unto Thee, O God, for Thou hast helped me to (my) salvation ; 
And hast not counted me with sinners to (my) destruction. 
6 Remove not Thy mercy from me, O God, _ . 
_Nor Thy memorial from my heart until I die. 

‘7 Rule’me, O God, (keeping me back) from wicked sin, X 

And from every wicked woman that causeth the simple to stumble. 

g And let not the beauty of a lawless woman beguile me, 

Nor any one that is subject to (?) unprofitable sin. 


9 Establish the works of my hands before Thee, 
And preserve my goings in the remembrance of Thee. 
1o Protect my tongue and my lips with words of truth; 
Anger and unreasoning wrath put far from me. 
1x Murmuring, and impatience in affliction, remove far from me, 
When, if I sin, Thou chastenest me that I may return (unto Thee). 
12 But with goodwill and cheerfulness support my soul; 
When Thou strengthenest my soul, what is given (to me) will be sufficient for me. 
13 For if Zou givest not strength, 
Who can endure chastisement with poverty? 
14 When a man is rebuked by means of his corruption, 
Thy testing (of him) is in his flesh and in the affliction of poverty. 
15 If the righteous endureth in all these (trials), he shall receive mercy from the Lord. 


XVII. A Psalm. Of Solomon. With Song. Of the King. 


17 1 O Lord, Thou art our King for ever and ever, 
For in Thee, O God, doth our soul glory. 
2 How long are the days of man’s life upon the earth? 
As are his days, so is the hope (set) upon him. 
3 But we hope in God, our deliverer 5) 


(2) that dvov is due to a misplaced gloss or a corrupt dittograph in ® (nnw nwa for NNW3); and (3) that carafOopa, 
as in Ps. xlix. 9, and as more frequently duapOopa, was a misrendering of NNW, ‘pit’. The actual readings of the MSS. 
are ‘in corruption of sleep’ (J C H), (in) ‘sleep of corruption’ (%, which perchance represents the order of the two 
words in the original text of &&), and ‘in heaviness (karapopa) of sleep’ (R L). 

When (I was) far, 7@ paxpdv. & lacks the év and the pronoun which should normally be present, if the sense 
implied by the translation was intended. >; but this is inconclusive as to the reading of &. Von Gebhardt for 
Umvov T® conjectures tmvovTa = émvotvrev ; then render ‘ (sunk) in the heaviness of them that sleep afar’ from God’. 

3. Lord God. % om. ‘ Lord’ 


4. as a horse is pricked. Lit. ‘like the goad of a horse’; as xévtpov irmov, perhaps in # simply {2773 ‘as with 
a goad’. ; 

that I might serve Him. & émi ry ypnyépnow airov, which Ryle and James render ‘that I might watch unto 
him’. # perhaps may? ; cp. iil. 2 note. : ale ea : 

8. Nor any one. @& ‘nor of any thing’ (or ‘of any one’). The translation subject to’ presupposes a very ques- 
tionable construction in &. Ryle and James conjecture may TO ovykelpevov for marrés Uroxeypévov,and render ‘ Nor aught 
that consisteth in sinful vanity’. % ‘Nor any sin that is’, which seems to be a paraphrase of Gr. ED 

9. before Thee. 5 = évamuoy cov, which is probably the original whence the readings év tare cou (J). and év rom@ 
cov (all other MSS. of &) arose. Renderings of conjectural emendations that have been suggested are, ‘in thy fear’, 
‘in thy word’. igh ae f 

14. The sense is obscure. ‘A man’; @& ‘a soul’. ‘Corruption’; Cp. XIv. 4. | 

15. Or, ‘If the righteous endureth, in the midst of these trials he shall receive,’ &c. 


VII. TiTLe. Cp. xv. I. oe re et 3 
5 ad ever, For in Thee ... doth. Or, perhaps, reading kat ere for kai ére Ste, ‘And yet (cp. Ps. xlii. 6, 11) in 
Thee ... shall.’ 4 en alas? 
: re the days. and what is the time. ; ’ ; ; 
: ene. Gs his hope », Transitory as is man’s life, so transitory 1s the hope which one man places in another ; 
but (v. 3) the hope placed in God is eternal. _ 
3. Mercy for Israel ; judgement for the nations. 
hope. So J; al. ‘ will hope’. 
647 


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 17. 3-16 


For the might of our God is for ever with mercy, en Re 
4 And the kingdom of our God is for ever over the nations in judgement. 


5 (4) Thou, O Lord, didst choose David (to be) king over Israel, 
And swaredst to him touching his seed that never should his kingdom fail before Thee. 
6 (5) But, for our sins, sinners rose up against us; 
They assailed-us and thrust us out ; ; F : 
What Thou hadst not promised to them, they took away (from us) with violence. 
7 They in no wise glorified Thy honourable name; 
(6) They set a (worldly) monarchy in place of (that which was) their excellency ; 
8 They laid waste the throne of David in tumultuous arrogance. 


(7) But Thou, O God, didst cast them down, and remove their seed from the earth, 
9 In that there rose up against them a man that was alien to our race. 

ro (8) According to their sins didst Thou recompense them, O God; 
So that it befell them according to their deeds. 

11 (9) God showed them no pity ; 
He sought out their seed and let not one of them go free. 

12 (ro) Faithful is the Lord in all His judgements 

Which He doeth upon the earth. 


13 (11) The lawless one laid waste our land so that none inhabited it, 
They destroyed young and old and their children together. 
14 (12) In the heat of His anger He sent them away even unto the west, 
And (He exposed) the rulers of the land unsparingly to derision. 
15 (13) Being an alien the enemy acted proudly, 
And his heart was alien from our God. 
16 (14) And all . . . Jerusalem, 
As also the nations . . . 


6. sinners. Jews, not foreigners (cp. v. 9). The Hasmonaeans are probably intended ; the first pers. plur. then 
refers to the Pharisees, or (Ryle and James) the priests. Frankenberg explains the verse of the Babylonian assault on 


Jerusalem, &c., treating ‘us’ as equivalent to ‘our fathers ’. 


What ...tothem. &‘towhom’. ® (ond +++ WN) would admit of either rendering. The allusion appears 
to be to the assumption of the royal dignity by the non-Davidic Aristobulus I and later Hasmonaeans, and of the 


high-priestly dignity by these same persons, though they did not belong to the high-priestly lines. 


7. in no wise glorified. Lit. ‘they glorified not with (év) glory’; for the construction representing probably the 
Hebrew infin. abs., cp. i. 8. In spite of the punctuation of the Greek MSS., ‘in glory’ is better taken with v. 7a (so 


clearly 3) than with v. 7 4. 


7 6. They preferred to use the title, and enjoy the position, of kings, than to recognize the sovereignty of God which 
was the true ‘excellency’ of the Jews. But this meaning is by no means certain; assuming that dri may = 3 or jd, 


others render ‘they set up a monarchy’, i.e. made themselves kings, ‘in their pride.’ 


8 6-12. In vv, 84, Ioa, 11a, the verbs in Greek are in the future tense ; they represent Hebrew imperfects referring 


to the past. 


8. in tumultuous arrogance. So H and perhaps #}. RJ L (cp. 8) ‘in pride of price’, which seems senseless. 
84. from the earth, or, IN being ambiguous, ‘from the land’ (cp. v. 30), a specific allusion to Pompey’s carrying 


captive to Rome Aristobulus and his children (see v. 14, note). 
g. aman that was alien. Pompey. 
lo. Sothat. #? ‘And’. 


11. Obviously through dittography, there stand in J L H at the beginning of this verse, as well as at the end of v. 10, 


the words ‘according to their deeds’. In SR the words are absent from @. It. 


The verbs throughout the verse are in $ 2nd pers. sing. imperative (or imperfect with imperative force). In H 


the negative in v. 11 a has been lost. 

13. The lawless one. So RJ LS; H ‘the tempest’. The sing. (ct. v. 20) throughout vv. 1 
is used collectively of the enemy (cp. v. 15) or specifically of their leader (Pompey). Whether the chan 
(of the enemies distributively) in v. 13 4 (S$ and all MSS. of &) is original may be doubted. 


3-16 (except in 13 4) 
ge to the plur. 


14. the heat of His anger. G& ‘ the wrath of His beauty’; % ‘the beauty of His wrath’. An original 15X, or (Ryle 


and James) YSN, was probably misread YD’. The pronouns probably refer to God. 
F ee the wen Pompey carried Aristobulus and his children captive to Rome (Jos. Azz. xiv. 4. 5, 
Flot hs Gps. (6). 
15. Being an alien, ¢v d\Xorpidryts perhaps = "1323, which might be an error for 9322 ‘like an alien’. 
acted proudly. Cp. Ps. xxxi. 24 (23)3 
And his heart, or, rather, “seeing that his heart’, if, as Ryle and James su 


ggest, v.15 0 is not a simple parallel 


to 15 a, but an explanation that proud doing was due to the excusable ignorance (in a foreigner) of the true God. 


16. Very uncertain. According to the text of & the verse continues the description of wh 
Jerusalem : ‘all things whatsoever he did in Jerusalem, (he did) as also the nations (do 
the description continued in v. 17 of the evil conduct of the Jews : ‘And every thing 


648 


at the enemy did (émoinoev) in 
o).” According to & it rather opens 
did Jerusalem, as also the peoples do 


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 17. 17-30 


17 (15) And the children of the covenant in the midst of the mingled peoples . . . 
There was not among them one that wrought in the midst of Jerusalem mercy and truth. 
18 (16) They that loved the synagogues of the pious fled from them, 
As sparrows that fly from their nest. 
j19 (17) They wandered in deserts that their lives might be saved from harm, 
And precious in the eyes of them that lived abroad was any that escaped alive from them. 
20 (18) Over the whole earth were they scattered by lawless (men). 
21 (19) For the heavens withheld the rain from dropping upon the earth, 


ce were stopped (that sprang) perennial(ly) out of the deeps, (that ran down) from lofty moun- 
ains. 


For there was none among them that wrought righteousness and justice ; 
(20) _ From the chief of them to the least (of them) all were sinful ; 
22 The king was a transgressor, and the judge disobedient, and the people sinful. 


23 (21) Behold, O Lord, and raise up unto them their king, the son of David, 
At the time in the which Thou seest, O God, that he may reign over Israel Thy servant. 
24 (22) And gird him with strength, that he may shatter unrighteous rulers, 
25 _ And that he may purge Jerusalem from nations that trample (her) down to destruction. 
(23) Wisely, righteously 26 he shall thrust out sinners from (the) inheritance, 
He shall destroy the pride of the sinner as a potter’s vessel.” 
(24) With a rod of iron he shall break in pieces all their substance, 
27 He shall destroy the godless nations with the word of his mouth ; 
(25) At his rebuke nations shall flee before him, 
And he shall reprove sinners for the thoughts of their heart. 


28 (26) And he shall gather together a holy people, whom he shall lead in righteousness, 
; And he shall judge the tribes of the people that has been sanctified by the Lord his God. 
29 (27) And he shall not suffer unrighteousness to lodge any more in their midst, 
Nor shall there dwell with them any man that knoweth wickedness, 
30 ~=6©For he shall know them, that they are al! sons of their God. 





in their cities to their gods.’ Literally rendered the text of J LH runs, ‘ And all things whatsoever he did in Jerusalem, 
as also the nations in the cities to their gods’; from this S seems to be derived through haplography of év (¢moinoev 
for émoinoev év). The alternative that S represents the original text of G& and that J L H is due to dittography of év 
might be considered, if it was not probable that the rois Oeois of J L H 5 was a mere substitute for the unintelligible, 
but probably earlier, reading of R—rovs 6covs. Similarly, ‘their cities’ (4) is probably a mere amplification of ‘the 
cities’ (G). For év rais 7édeou rods Oeovs von Gebhardt conjectures as the original reading of & év rais médeor 10d aOEvous, 
understanding ‘in the cities of their might’ to mean in the other cities besides Jerusalem which they had conquered. 
But this, if it were in other respects more acceptable, would still leave v. 16 6 suspiciously elliptical. This ellipsis, 
and the probability that the reading ‘the cities’ (@) is prior to ‘their cities’ (4), and rovs Geovs to rois Bevis, deprives 
Frankenberg’s argument that the allusion is not to Pompey but to Antiochus Epiphanes (1 Macc. 1. 44 ff., 54 ff. ; 
2 Macc. vi. 102) of much of its plausibility. What may have been meant, or alluded to, by # remains very uncertain. 

17a. the children of the covenant, i.e. the Jews (cp. Ezek. xxx. 5, Acts iii. 25). ‘The mingled peoples,’ 
apparently here the Gentiles ; fer 3) implied by cuppixray see Neh. xiil. 3, Jer. xxv. 20, 1. 37, Ezek. xxx. 5. What was 
meant by érexparotoay aitéy (not translated above), or the Hebrew underlying it, is uncertain; is it that the Jews 
‘surpassed’ (0 1ptM) the heathen in wickedness (cp. i. 8), or “attached themselves (2 1P'tNN) to them’? & would 
most naturally mean ‘ ruled them’ (cp. xvi. 7), or ‘gained the mastery over them’. 

18. that fly. 4& ‘fled’. i 

19. To the sympathetic eyes of the Jews of the Dispersion, who are here termed maporxia as temporary residents 
(abroad), it seemed a rare thing for one of /aszdim to escape alive from the faithless and merciless Jews of Jerusalem. 

21. For. If the conjunction is correct—we might rather expect ‘therefore’ (S)—the argument implied rather than 
expressed is: The disloyal sons of the covenant by their sins brought about a drought (cp. il. 10), and this in turn 
caused the pious to wander far and wide. 

21 6. Probably enough, the exact form of the original is not preserved here. 

atd. to the least of them. So %; & ‘and of the least people’ (7) misread DY)). 


all were sinful. @& ‘in every sin’ (NON bon (cp. Ps. xiv. 3) misread NON $53 ?). 

23. seest. So RJ LS; ‘knowest’, HV. Von Gebhardt conjectures ‘ chosest’. 

25. And that he may purge. So %; cp. v. 33. && ‘purge’, as though addressed to God. 
trample (her) down. Cp. ii. 2. ; t ; 
Wisely, righteously. According to the punctuation of J these words should go with v. 25. = omits them. 

26, 27. In & the verbs are either certainly infinitive (v. 27 4) or ambiguous, 1.e. optative or infinitive (according to 
the accentuation). It is possible that in # these verses were entirely dependent on v. 24: ‘Gird him . . . that he 
may thrust out . . . destroy . . . break in pieces,’ &c. More probably the tenses of # were, as in vv. 29 ff. (cp. &), 
imperfects intended in a simple indicative future sense. § continues the subordination of the tenses into v. 28, though, 
on the other hand, ‘shall flee’, clearly infinitive in &, is clearly imperfect in 3. 

28. whom he shall lead in. & ‘ who shall make their boast of’. 

30. their. Som. InJ LH atroy precedes, in R it follows eiow. 


649 


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON-17. 30-46 


(28) And he shall divide them according to their tribes upon the land, 
31 And neither sojourner nor alien shall sojourn with them any more. 
(29) He shall judge peoples and nations in the wisdom of his righteousness. Se/ah. 


32 (30) And he shall have the heathen nations to serve him under his yoke ; 
And he shall glorify the Lord in a place to be seen of (?) all the earth ; 
33 _ And he shall purge Jerusalem, making it holy as of old: 
34 (31) So that nations shall come from the ends of the earth to see his glory, 
Bringing as gifts her sons who had fainted, F 
35 And to see the glory of the Lord, wherewith God hath glorified her. 
(32) And he (shall be) a righteous king, taught of God, over them, 
36 And there shall be no unrighteousness in his days in their midst, 
For all shall be holy and their king the anointed of the Lord. 
37 (33) For he shall not put his trust in horse and rider and bow, 
Nor shall he multiply for himself gold and silver for war, 
Nor shall he gather confidence from (?) a multitude (?) for the day of battle. 
| 38 (34) The Lord Himself is his king, the hope of him that is mighty through (his) hope in God. 


( ) All nations (shall be) in fear before him, 
39 (35) For he will smite the earth with the word of his mouth for ever. 
40 He will bless the people of the Lord with wisdom and gladness, 
41 (36) And he himself (will be) pure from sin, so that he may rule/a great people. 
He will rebuke rulers, and remove sinners by the might of his word ; 
42 (37) And (relying) upon his God, throughout his days he will not stumble ; 
For God will make him mighty by means of (His) holy spirit, 
And wise by means of the spirit of understanding, with strength and righteousness. 
43 (38) And the blessing of the Lord (will be) with him: he will be strong and stumble not; 
44 (39) _ His hope (will be) in the Lord: who then can prevail against him ? 
(40) (He will be) mighty in his works, and strong in the fear of God, 
45 (He will be) shepherding the flock of the Lord faithfully and righteously, 
And will suffer none among them to stumble in their pasture. 
46 (41) He will lead them all aright, erirearcaer 
And there will be no pride among thém that any among them should be oppressed. 


32, in a place to be seen of. So Ryle and James render éy enone (Cp. ii. 6 n.), seeing in the lines an allusion 
to the miraculously exalted and consequently conspicuous Zion of the Messianic age (Isa. ii. 2). Kit. here, as in ii. 6, 


takes év em. to be a rendering of 2 [33, and renders ‘openly before’. In Sv. 32 6 reads ‘and they (i.e. the nations) 
shall praise (= glorify) the Lord openly in all the earth’. 
34, 35a. Very probably the original form of this tristich (originally a distich ?) is not correctly preserved. ‘His 
glory’, i.e. the glory of the Messianic king ; ‘her sons’, i.e. the exiled inhabitants of Jerusalem. 
34. So that nations shall come. SoRHS; JL‘ Come, ye nations’; #)? ‘nations shall come’. 
fainted. 3% ‘been scattered from her’. 


35. Perhaps ® read simply, ‘And he (shall be) a righteous king taught of God % ornds being dittographed and then 
read incorrectly OWN = pmby, ‘over them.’ 

36. the anointed of the Lord (cp. xviii. 6). %@& ‘the anointed, the Lord’ (= Christ the Lord, Luke ii. II). 
G& Xpiords xiptos = Y AN NW (or IN Mw), the normal rendering of which would be Xpucrés kupiov; for-the 
X. kupios of E (S) see Lam. iv. 20. 

37 ¢. Obscure. % employs the same verbal phrase here as in 37a; if by accident % so far returns to the original, it 
is difficult to account for the variation in &. Further, if rodXois is the objective of the verbal phrase, we might expect 
it to be preceded by a preposition, and if instrumental by ¢v. Ryle and James conjecture mAolos for moAXois, and render 
‘nor by ships shall he gather confidence’, &c. 

38a. Doubtless this line, together perhaps with v. 37 ¢ in an earlier uncorrupted form, contained the antithesis to 
vv. 37 a,6: Not in weapons and material resources, but in God does he put his trust. Whether the strangely expressed 
eae i ae all closely reproduces the original, or whether the Lord was here described as the king’s King, must remain 
very doubtful. 

38 6. The words «at éejoes, left untranslated above, are probably due to some corruption, whether in or G. ‘He 
shall have mercy upon all the nations (that come) before him in fear’ (Ryle and James) is a bad introduction to v. 39. 
kai edejoe . . . €v bd8@ May represent some such phrase as ‘he shall set trembling’; or cai €Aejoee may belong to the 
preceding corrupt line, and év @é8@ = IN. | 

39. Cp. Isa. xi. 4. Note also the influence of Isa. xi. 3f. on the following lines. 

41. He will rebuke ... and remove. ¢& ‘that he may’, &c. 

¢ ’ y c >; = ’ > t ry 

wee ee ee e.g. Ps. ix. 3, or Ps, xxvi. (xxv.) 1. @& “be weak Sepia = Sw) 3 SO UV. 43, 45. 

426,c. by means of, cr ‘in’, 

43. he will be strong. & ev ici, ‘in strength’ (= 1Y3 erroneously read for 1° ). 

46. aright. Lit. ‘in equalness’; so RJ Lmarg.; ‘in holiness’, L (text) H. 


650 


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 17. 47—18. i1 


47 (42) This (will be) the majesty of the king of Israel whom God knoweth ; 
He will raise him up over the house of Israel to correct_him, 
48 (43) His words (shall be) more refined than costly gold, the choicest ; 
In the assemblies he will judge the peoples, the tribes of the sanctified. 
49 His words (shall be) like the words of the holy ones in the midst of sanctified peoples. 
50 Blessed be they that shall be in those days, 


In that they shall see the good fortune of Israel which God shall bring to pass in the gathering) 


together of the tribes. 
51 May the Lord hasten His mercy upon Israel! 
May He deliver us from the uncleanness of unholy enemies ! 


The Lord Himself is our king for ever and ever. 


XVIII. A Psalm. Of Solomon. Again of the Anointed of the Lord. 


18 x Lord, Thy mercy is over the works of Thy hands for ever ; 
Thy goodness is over Israel with a rich gift. 
2 Thine eyes look upon them, so that none of them suffers want ; 
3 Thine ears listen to the hopeful prayer of the poor. 
(3) Thy judgements (are executed) upon the whole earth in mercy ; 
4 And Thy love (is) toward the seed of Abraham, the children of Israel. 
(4) Thy chastisement is upon us as (upon) a first-born, only-begotten son, 
4 s To turn back the obedient soul from folly (that is wrought) in ignorance. 
6 (5) May God cleanse Israel against the day of mercy and blessing, 
Against the day of choice when He bringeth back His anointed. 


7 (6) Blessed shall they be that shall be in those days, 
In that they shall see the goodness of the Lord which He shall perform for the generation that is 
to come, 
8 (7) Under the rod of chastening of the Lord’s anointed in the fear of his God, 
In the spirit of wisdom and righteousness and strength ; 
9 (8) That he may direct (every) man in the works of righteousness by the fear of God, 
That he may establish them all before the Lord, 


me (9) A good generation (living) in the fear of God in the days of mercy. Selah. 





11 (10) Great is our God and glorious, dwelling in the highest. 


47. whom. @& ‘which’, wrongly referring the relative (WN) to ‘ majesty’ and not to ‘king 23 
knoweth. & ‘knew’. 
He will. & ‘to’. 
48. costly gold, the choicest. #) probably read ‘ fine gold’ simply. ; 
In the assemblies. *Ev cvvaywyais, possibly an error (MY2 for MY2) for ‘by means of the Testimony 1) iseoee 
Law. 
49. the holy ones. The angels; cp. Ps. Ixxxix. 6, Job v. I. : 
50. Cp. xviil. 6. ‘ The good fertune of Israel,’ cp. Ps. cxxviii. 5. Instead of ‘ Israel’ J reads ‘Jerusalem’. 


51. May He deliver. & ‘ He will deliver’; but in # the tenses in the parallel lines doubtless had the same force. 


XVIII. TITLE. Again of. So RJ; LH read ‘upon’. 
2. upon them, i.e. ‘the works of Thy hands’. 
so that... suffers. G ‘and... will suffer’. 
suffers want, or ‘is lacking’. led 
the hopeful prayer of the poor, or ‘the prayer of the poor who hopeth (in Thee)’. he 
6. the day of mercy and (lit. ‘in’) blessing is the day when God shows mercy to and blesses Israel ; it is also 
the day of His choosing or determining upon the appearance of the Messiah (cp. xvi. 23). The term dvagis here used, if 
we might press the force of the Greek, would imply a ‘bringing again’ or ‘bringing up’ of a pre-existing Messiah 
(cp. Ryle and James) ; yet it must remain very doubtful whether the original really expressed this idea here. : 
8. Loose and awkward; but apparently the meaning is the generation that is to come and will live under the dis- 
cipline (cp. vii. 8) of the Messiah. We., assuming that imé is a rendering of a misunderstood NNN which should have 
been rendered dvzi, understands Lage to hey Instead ee ie rod of chastening (there shall be) the Lord’s Anointed’. 
he spirit of wisdom and. ‘wisdom of spirit and of’. ae 
ia : marked change of subject, and perhaps originally a distinct Psalm (Ryle and James). The abrupt- 
ness of the conclusion, the incompleteness of the treatment, and the absence of any doxology suggest that the conclusion 
of the Psalm has been lost. 
651 


‘i 


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 18. 12-14 


12 (It is He) who hath established in (their) courses the lights (of heaven) for determining seasons from 
year to year, 

And they have not turned aside from the way which He appointed them. 

13 (11) In the fear of God (they pursue) their path every day, 
From the day God created them and for evermore. 

14 (12) And they have erred not since the day He created them. 
Since the generations of old they have not withdrawn from their path, 
Unless God commanded them (so to do) by the command of His servants. 


12. for determining seasons, &c. Lit. ‘for times of hours from days to days’. 
14. by the command of His servants. Cp. Jer. x. 12-14, Isa. xxxviii. I-10. 


652 


THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 


INTRODUCTION 
§1. SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE BCOK. 


Tur Fourth Book of Maccabees is couched in the form of a discourse or treatise, taking for its 
subject the power of 6 eiceBijs oyiopds, the Inspired Reason, to control the passions. It has been 
suggested by Freudenthal that the work may be a specimen of synagogue preaching, and Ewald 
appears to agree with him in this, but other commentators reply that in the Diaspora the regular 
synagogue practice was always to take a passage from the Bible as a text for the sermon. Now 
Fourth Maccabees has no text, and the rules of Jewish services are seldom departed from, so it is 
probable that this work was given as a lecture rather than a sermon. But the best authorities 
doubt whether we know enough about Judaeo-Hellenistic practice nearly two thousand years ago to 
justify a positive conclusion about the matter. At all events the author of this work, be it lecture 
or sermon, is unquestionably an orthodox Jew, and his object is to fire the hearts of his co-religionists 
with such an enthusiastic devotion to their faith that they will be ready to face the last extremity 
of suffering in its behalf. A student of Greek philosophy himself, speaking to people who were 
evidently familiar with its terminology, he enlists the Stoic virtues in the cause of Jewish orthodoxy. 
Adopting the Stoic definition of the four cardinal virtues, judgement and justice, and courage and 
temperance, he insists that these are best attained by men being born and brought up under the 
Law of Moses. He leaves on one side the discussion of the methods by which Greek philosophy 
proposed to attain virtue. He has naturally no inspired anticipation of the Christian doctrine of 
God’s grace whereby sinners may be led into the way of truth ; for we shall find reason to think that 
he wrote before any such thing as a Christian document had even come into existence. But he 
not only adopts the Stoic virtues, he also takes the Stoic view of sin, that to offend in one point is to 
be guilty of all, when he makes his protomartyr, Eleazar, say, * Think it not then a small sin for us 
to eat the unclean thing ; for the transgression of the Law, be it in small things or in great, is equally 
heinous.’ Yet his acceptance of the Stoic position is not indiscriminating, as, although he uses their . 
philosophical definition of the virtues, he refrains from specifically adopting their classification of the 
primary passions under the four heads of delight, grief, pain, and fear. The Stoics held that the 
passions were not grounded in nature but were due to wrong thinking, and could and should be 
extirpated. The author, on the contrary, holds that the passions were implanted in man by God and 
are not to be extirpated but controlled. ‘ Reason’, he says, ‘is not the extirpator of the passions, 
but their antagonist.’ And this power of Reason he illustrates, not, as his Stoic friends would have 
done, from Greek sources, but from the Jews’ own Bible story, from the lives of Joseph and Jacob, 
of Moses and David. Then he passes to the subject of the terrible tyrant of Syria, Antiochus, whom 
some styled Epiphanes, The Brilliant, and some Epimanes, The Madman, and describes his odious 
oppressions: and so comes presently to the martyrs, Eleazar, and the Seven Brethren, and the 
Mother. He relates their defiance of the tyrant and enlarges on their sufferings with an even 
greater wealth of dreadful detail than the writer of Second Maccabees, whether the additions are 
due to his own invention or are drawn from a common original, the lost work of Jason of Cyrene. 
He recounts insistently the martyrs’ triumphant victory over their sufferings, won by the aid of their 
Reason, their unconquerable fidelity to the Law of Moses, and their assured hope of a blessed 
immortality in the company of the patriarchs. That immortality is their reward in heaven, while 
they enjoy on earth the honour of being held the saviours of their country, which noble title 
he would inscribe as their epitaph. His impassioned eulogy is intended to rouse the patriotic 
and religious feelings of his audience to the highest pitch and harden them to the point of following 
so glorious an example. If I were asked to suggest the most probable reason why this book was 
written I should incline to the opinion that it was in consequence of the deification of the Roman 
Emperors. It is true that that deification (which involved nothing particularly startling to the pagan 
world) was not taken very seriously by Augustus and Tiberius, and in consequence did not become 
a really crucial question with the Jews until the accession of Caligula, whom we might well call the 
Second Brilliant Madman. Mad he was and did verily take himself for a god and demand to be 


653 


THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 


worshipped as such, and then all the horrors of the persecution of Epiphanes were repeated in Egypt 
on the bodies of the wretched Jews, the defiling and torture of their persons, the plunder of their 
holy things, and the erection of statues of the deified Emperor in their desecrated ey ae ee 
But though this persecution did not take place till A. D. 38-39, the future instrument through whic 
Caligula’s madness was to work, namely the base passions of the dregs of the Egyptian, and especially 
the Alexandrian, populace, had become plainly visible long before. Every far-sighted man, such as 
the author of this book must have been, could not but recognize, even during the more clement days 
of Augustus and Tiberius, that as soon as ever Jews were required to offer public sacrifice at the 
imperial altars an impossible test would be imposed. Every true Jew knew that he must refuse, and 
it was not hard to foresee what would happen then, when once the passions of the vilest mob in the 
world were let loose. To meet and endure the coming persecution the sons of Israel would need all 
their courage, and how better could the Jewish-Hellenic philosopher steel the hearts of his brethren 
than by holding up to them the self-abnegating virtues of Stoicism and the sublime heroism of the 
Maccabean martyrs? 
6:2.) lini. 


The oldest form of title is simply MaxxaBatwv &, under which it is found in three of the great 
uncial MSS., the Alexandrinus, the Sinaiticus, and the Venetus. But the book having been 
attributed to the Jewish historian Flavius Josephus, it also appears among his works with a title 
derived from the subject-matter, wep! adroxpdropos Aoytovo8, On the Supremacy of Reason, and it 
is thus cited by Eusebius and Jerome. Another form of this title is mEpl cdppovos Adyou, which 
appears in some editions of Josephus; and the former of the two is generally rendered in the 
Latin versions by de imperatrice ratione, or else by de dominatu or de emperio rationis. Lastly, 
there is a third form of title, Iwcizmov eis rods MaxkaBatovs BiBdlov, or eis Tovs MakxaBatovs Adyos. 


§§ 3-4. THE MSS. AND THE ANCIENT VERSIONS. 


The book is found, as already mentioned, in three great uncials, A, 8, and V, but is unfortunately 
absent from the Codex Vaticanus. It was early translated into Syriac, and in 1895 Dr. Barnes 
brought out through the Cambridge Press a Syriac text prepared by the late Professor R. L. Bensly 
from a collation of nine MSS., of which he gives a description. The Syriac version was faithful 
enough to be of value for textual criticism, and Bensly found that as a rule it supports N rather 
than A. Dr. Barnes, who edited Bensly’s notes, gives a list of some two hundred passages where 
the readings in the Syriac and the Greek MSS. are compared. As regards other ancient versions, 
‘Nothing is known’, says Dr. Torrey, writing in the Azcyclopaedia Biblica, ‘ of any old Latin 
version of Fourth Maccabees, or even of the sources used by Erasmus in making his Latin 
“paraphrase” which differs so widely from the Greek text’ The book is not in the Vulgate, 
and accordingly is absent from the Apocrypha of the Roman Bible and from our own. 


§ 5. DATE, 


The date of the original text is uncertain, but the author could never have spoken as he does of 
the Temple service had he been writing after the fall of Jerusalem in a. p. 70. Also, if the date ot 
the book had been as late as the close of the first century A.D.,its orthodox Judaism would probably 
have interfered with its acceptance among Christians, an acceptance which nevertheless it obtained. 
And if it was addressed, as it probably was, to an Alexandrian audience we must look at least thirty 
years further back than A.D. 70, for the author could not have spoken as he does to Alexandrian 
Jews after the occurrence of the Caligulan persecution, which took place in A.D. 38-39. This last 
date then becomes the inferior limit. Perhaps the superior limit may be taken as 63 B.C., when the 
High Priesthood passed from the Hasmonean House. For the author is at pains to explain that in 
the days of King Seleucus IV (175 B.C.) the High Priest, Onias, held that office for life, a tenure 
which ceased after the fall of the Hasmonean dynasty’(Grimm). The date then probably falls 
between B.C. 63 and a.p. 38 or, roughly speaking, within two generations before or one generation 
after the Christian era. 


§ 6. INTEGRITY. 


The book is of the nature of a sermon, whether actually delivered in a synagogue or not, and as 

a moral discourse it is thoroughly homogeneous. It opens with the philosophical discussion of the 

supremacy of Reason, and then illustrates the subject with a series of examples drawn from the 

constancy of the nine martyrs under their tortures. The point sought to be proved is repeated with 

an insistence that becomes rather tedious to modern ears, a matter in which, perhaps, we are less 
654 


INTRODUCTION 


tolerant than the ancients. The details, too, of the successive tortures are elaborated in a way that 
shocks modern taste. We must consider, however, that very few among us to-day have either 
seen torture inflicted with our own eyes or dreaded to feel it in our own persons. We only know 
of it by reading of such horrors in other parts of the globe or in the history of the past. The 
author of Fourth Maccabees was addressing an audience to whom the sight of tortured men was 
as much a matter of course as the butcher's shambles to us, and accordingly his treatment of 
this part of the subject is quite in keeping with his time and place. Though a Jew, and a highly 
orthodox Jew, he is completely master of the Greek language, which he writes with ease; his 
vocabulary is large, and he handles the idioms with variety and flexibility ; his style is so ornate 
and copious that I am tempted to call it over-decorated. There is no sign of the Midrash 
method of treatment in his work, no reciting of scattered texts with disconnected expositions 
attached thereto. He keeps his main point before him, in good Greek form, illustrating it freely 
and well not only from the story of the martyrs but also from the heroes of old. The nearest 
he comes to writing in a Hebrew style is at the end, where he puts into the mouth of the Mother 
what may be described as a roll-call of Old Testament worthies. But as a Jew speaking to Jews 
nothing could be more natural or more effective than this Hebraic finale. Accordingly I see no reason 
why we should look in this last chapter for traces of another hand, though certain commentators 
have thought that the book originally ended at xviii. 2 with the words ‘O Israelites, children born of 
the seed of Abraham, obey this Law, and be righteous in all ways, recognizing that Inspired Reason 
is lord over the passions’. It is true that this close makes a neat Euclidean Q.E.D. to the demon- 
stration of his proposition as enunciated at the beginning, namely that the Inspired Reason is 
supreme ruler over the passions. But considered as a peroration, from the rhetorical point of view, 
it is nothing less than an absolute bathos after the striking passage just before where he gives the 
epitaph that he would like to write for the martyrs. The main argument for the conjectural placing 
of the original conclusion at this point is that the Mother’s account of her early life, which occupies 
fourteen verses immediately after it, is of the nature of a digression. So it is, but the reason is not 
far to seek. The author, through the main part of the book, has dealt chiefly with men and the 
manly virtues, courage in particular. He gives the heroine of his story, the Mother, due praise for 
this virtue, but he also desires to insert in his work a fit encomium on the domestic virtues which as 
a Jew he considers to be most important for the women of his race. Courage he has already praised ; 
now he lays stress on the woman’s more commonplace duty of stopping at home and attending to 
the house, of her father first and later of her husband. Above all, she must be very careful to run no 
risk of contamination by any deceiver, be he man or be he devil, inside or outside the house. So he 
makes the Mother say with pride in this last chapter, ‘I kept guard over the rib that was builded 
into Eve. Like Eve she was to be a helpmeet for man, but she was not, like Eve, to dally with the 
false beguiling serpent. Clearly the writer was determined to get in his point about female virtue, 
and he does it. Of course it is a digression even here, but if we look back to where he has the Mother 
in the front of the scene during the previous chapters there is no place where these verses would not 
have been ten times more out of keeping. He had far too much literary skill to spoil his effect by 
putting the passage in the wrong place, and he reserved this piece about her early days till he could 
use it as a relief to the tension of the tortures, and so lead up to the final roll-call of the heroes. 
He throws a true and honourable light on the religious influence of the Jewess in her home when he 
depicts her as recalling to her sons’ minds the words of their dead father and his manner of holding 
up the great men of old to their admiration. His setting of the passage in her mouth is far more 
effective than if the author himself called the roll in his own person. For myself I am inclined 
to distrust those confident critics who on the evidence of style say dogmatically ‘the author wrote 
this, the author did not write that’. Even the great Bentley himself, a critic whose shield (were 
he alive) few knights of the pen would dare to touch by way of challenge, succeeded in persuading 
himself that Milton never closed the last book of Paradise Lost with such a distich as: 
‘They hand in hand, with wandering steps and slow, 
Through Eden took their solitary way.’ onl alee 
No, these lines had been corrupted by the ‘editor’ whom Bentley’s own imagination invented to 
account for the faults he discovered in Milton. And this is what he offered as a substitute: 
‘Then, hand in hand, with social steps their way 
Through Eden took with heavenly comfort cheer’d.’ 

Where Bentley could so stumble which of us shall stand upright? The style of Fourth Maccabees 
shows no more variation than naturally follows on the changes from one branch of the subject 
- to another. All through the author writes the vigorous, free, idiomatic Greek of one to whom 
it was a native language, so that we might say of him, as of the Jew whom Aristotle is represented 
as meeting in Asia, that he was ‘EAAnvixds od TH dvadékT@ pdvov GAA Kal TH Wox7- He likes to coin 


655, 


THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 


new words of the right Greek stamp. For instance, in the first sentence of his treatise he states that 
the question he will discuss is whether Inspired Reason is really atrodéomoros taév 7adav, autocratic 
over the passions, where the word adrodécmoros is apparently a dma€ Aeyduevoy of his own minting. 
Later on he uses in the same sense the much commoner word avrokparwp, and we can even find 
his very phrase avroxpatwp Aoyiouds in Thucydides, though the historian uses it in quite another 
sense, to mean ‘an arbitrary decision’. The author of Fourth Maccabees chooses abtodéaroros not 
in order to avoid confusion with Thucydides’ phrase but to strike the key-note of originality and 
intensity: he would have you note from the outset that he is an undoubted autocrat of language. 
So Ruskin in the first sentence of The Seven Lamps of Architecture uses the rare Miltonic 
‘resplendence’ where another man would have chosen some more ordinary term. But Ruskin 
meant his work to be resplendent, and strikes the note of brilliancy at once. Not a few more of 


these vigorous compounds does the author coin: é@vdémAnOos = ‘the nation-mass $ enraprtop = “the 
mother of seven children’, koopomAnO%s = ‘ world-whelming’, xoopopopdv = ‘ world-freighted ’, pada- 
kowoxely = ‘ to be weak-spirited ’, taoxpareicOa: = ‘to be mastered by the passions’. These words are 


neither obscure nor far-fetched; their meaning is obvious enough, but they are fresh. We have but 
to turn over a few pages of Carlyle’s French Revolution at haphazard to find parallels; Danton is 
‘the Minister of Moloch-Justice’, the while ‘France is dancing its desert-waltz ’ ; ‘Louis Capet was 
only called Inviolable by a figure of rhetoric; but at bottom was perfectly violable, triable’; or 
again, when the King’s sentence is being settled, constitution-monger Sieyes votes ‘ La mort sans 
phrase, Death without phrases, and fares onward and downward. Most spectral, pandemonial ’. 
A good word ‘pandemonial’ (which I have not found in Dr. Murray’s dictionary) for horrors whether 
of the French Revolution or of torture under the Brilliant Madman. Some of the authors new 
coinage passed into circulation; he speaks of Eleazar’s Reason as a pilot, mndadvovy dv, ‘ rudder- 
handling’ or ‘rudder-ruling’ the ship of godliness, where the common expression would have been 
olaxi¢wy, ‘steering’; and we find this new word of his, mdadtovxeiv, used by later writers. not of 
handling the helm of a real ship, but in the very same metaphorical sense we have here. We may 
note the author's love of double-barrelled prepositional compounds, as where he speaks of parents as 
evarooppayiCovres, stamping their seal on the child ; and of prepositions used intensively in composi- 
tion, as in érippwyooyovmevos, another of his coinages, to express the skinflint’s extra-gleaning of his 
grapes. Indeed his love of the ornate is such that he will invent a three-barrelled prepositional 
compound, if the fancy strikes him ; as when, in the case of the torture of the first of the seven 
brethren, in order to describe the horrid ingenuity of the torturers, he says, rov TPOXOV TpoTETL- 
kar €retvoy, ‘they extra-overstrained against him the wheel ’, or as the Syriac version has it, ‘they 


made the wheel more cruel by artifice against him.’ I find no cause to suspect that this book is not 
the work of a single hand. 


$7. AUTHORSHIP. 


The authorship of Fourth Maccabees must be considered doubtful. It was attributed to 
Flavius Josephus by Eusebius, the learned bishop of Caesarea, who lived more than two centuries 
later than Josephus, or between A.D. 270 and 340. The words of Eusebius are (itst. Eccl iia 
see page 76 in E. Burton’s Oxford Ed., 1856): mendévntar d& Kat GAXO od« dyevves onovdacua To 
avdpt wept adroxpdropos oyiopod, 8 tues MaxkaBaixdv evéypayrav, to rods dyOvas tév ev rots oftw 
Kadovpevors MaxkaBaixots cvyypduuacw vaép ths els 7d Octov edboeBelas avdpioauevay “EBpatwv TEPLEXELY. 
‘The man (Josephus) has also produced another work of a lofty character on the Supremacy of 
Reason, to which some have given the title of Maccabean, because it includes the struggles of the 
Hebrews who in the books known as Maccabean strove valiantly for the sake of righteousness before 
God.’ Jerome, writing in a.p. 492, follows Eusebius in naming Josephus as the author, and in 
consequence of this attribution, which was generally accepted in ancient times, we find the book 
frequently printed among Josephus’s works. Internal evidence, however, points strongly the other way. 
For example, the statement made in Fourth Maccabees xvii. 24, that Antiochus publicly held up the 
example of the martyrs to his men to inspire them with courage, ‘so that he conquered all his 
enemies and laid waste their cities, is a singular one to have been made by Josephus, who himself 
has chronicled the notorious failure of Antiochus before Elymais and discusses the question whether 
that failure was not the immediate cause of his death. Again, Josephus (Azz. xii. 4) correctly 
states that Antiochus Epiphanes was the brother of SeleucusIV. But in Fourth Maccabecs iv. 15 the 
writer makes the blunder of calling him his son. Also the writer says in Fourth Maccabees xiv Us 
“we now shudder when we hear of the sufferings of those youths,’ thus presupposing that his hearers 
enjoy peace and safety. Such words would be hardly natural in the mouth of Josephus who was 
actually present at the fall of Jerusalem and wrote the history of the fatal Jewish War. It is also 
worth noting that Josephus in his historical works uses the Greek equivalents of Biblical names, 

656 


INTRODUCTION 


whereas the author of Fourth Maccabees uses the Hebrew indeclinable forms except in the cases of 
lepoodAvpa and ’E\ed¢apos. Indeed the whole form and style of Fourth Maccabees are so unlike any 
of Josephus’s other works that, if he did write it, he must have done so when very young, and then 
have completely changed his style later. He would seem to have changed his views also, for the 
ideal purpose of Fourth Maccabees is to glorify the heroes who sacrifice everything for the sake of 
religion, But the personal ideals of Josephus were of a very different nature, for we learn from his 
own pen that his heroism took quite another shape. After fighting against Rome on behalf of his 
country till victory declared for Rome, he then surrendered and fought against his brethren ; he took 
the Roman name of Flavius in compliment to the Flavian Caesar, and married a Gentile wife, 
contrary to Moses’ Law, to oblige Vespasian. As every single one of these acts would have been 
anathema to the author of Fourth Maccabees, we may fairly conclude that the writer was not Flavius 
Josephus. It has indeed been suggested, by Ewald among others, that the ascription may have 
arisen from the author’s actual name having been Josephus, and that he thus became confused later on 
with the more famous historian, which of course is possible but does seem somewhat futile. Whatever 
his name was, it is more likely that he lived in Alexandria than in Palestine. The implication, noticed 
above, that he and his hearers are living in the enjoyment of peace and safety suits Jerusalem less 
well than Alexandria, at least for any period prior to the Caligulan persecution. And not only is the 
writer’s style but his sentiment more Alexandrian than Palestinian. He shows indeed a proper 
orthodox horror of the Hellenizing Jason’s action in setting up a gymnasium on the Holy Mount, 
but so far from condemning the Greek games in themselves, he does not shrink from comparing the 
struggle between the martyrs and the tyrant to an athletic contest. Indeed, he elaborates the like- 
ness ; the competitors are Antiochus and the martyrs ; the spectators are the whole world; and the 
prize of victory is immortality. He shows a similar tolerance towards Greek art, when he suggests 
that ‘if it were allowable for us’ the art of painting would best bring before the mind the idea of the 
martyrdoms. Surely some Niobe or Medea or other heroine of Greek tragedy was familiar to the 
sight of his hearers and of himself when he said this ; and when he added ‘as might some artist’ (if 
that be the correct reading) he was alluding to some painter whom they all knew. In cosmopolitan 
Alexandria such an allusion could hardly hurt his reputation for orthodoxy, but it would have been 
a hazardous thing to publish such a phrase in Jerusalem, where the very sight of Pilate’s eagles raised 
a fury that was only quenched in blood. Moreover, the main object of his discourse, which is to 
show how Greek philosophy can help an orthodox Jew to keep the Law, is one more likely to be 
addressed to Jews living in the great Greek city of Alexandria than to those at the sacred centre of 
Judaism itself. The general conclusion is that the author was not Flavius Josephus, and that there 
is evidence to show that he was a Jew, living in Egypt, most probably in Alexandria, within a few 
years of the Christian era. 
§ 8. INFLUENCE. 


The direct influence of this book on Jewish literature does not seem to have been great; there 
is, however, a mediaeval work, written in Biblical Hebrew, by Joseph ben Gorion, commonly known 
as Yosippon, which shows traces of Fourth Maccabees. Yosippon’s work is a history of his people 
from the destruction of Babylon to the fall of Jerusalem in A.D. 70. He is sometimes called 
the ‘Hebrew’ Josephus to distinguish him from his namesake, the well-known historian of the 
Antiquities and the Jewish War, who wrote in Greek. Yosippon, indeed, in the text of his book now 
current, claims to be the great historian himself, but this is certainly false. It is now generally held 
that his writings have absolutely no historical value, and that, so far from being the real Flavius 
Josephus, he was a Jew of Southern Italy who lived as late as the ninth or tenth century. But his 
work became exceedingly popular among the Jews of the Middle Ages and it was translated into 
many languages and widely circulated. One modern authority, Trieber, would assign him a date as 
early as the fourth century, and thinks he had the original work of Jason of Cyrene before him, but 
this question is still debated. At any rate Yosippon recounts the story of the martyrdoms much as 
we have it in Fourth Maccabees, but with additions and variations of his own. The first martyr, 
Eleazar, is represented as having formerly been the guest of Ptolemy in Egypt, where he acted as 
one of the LXX, and as having won at Jerusalem the favour of Philippus, by which name is intended 
the general to whom Antiochus entrusted the business of persecuting the Jews. This Philip takes 
Eleazar apart and begs him to eat, before all the people, some of the meat of a Jewish sacrifice, but 
to do so in such a way that he may be supposed to be eating meat sacrificed to the king’s image. 
For the rest of the story of Eleazar the author does little more than expand Maccabees. He then 
brings the Mother, whom he calls Hannah, with her seven sons, before Antiochus himself, : who had 
not gone far from Jerusalem >. and their several martyrdoms follow. I note a few points differing from 
Maccabees. While the first martyr is suffering the others quote the Song of Moses, ‘The Lord will 
judge his people and have mercy on his ie The fifth brother tells the king that e is vain 
. ny : 


1105.2 


THE FOURTH BOOK OF ACCA BEE. 


for him to hope to establish the worship of his own image by their torture. The Mother makes 
a long speech to the youngest son, who promises her that ‘he will keep the Law which Moses our 
teacher, may he rest in peace! gave to the Holy People of Israel’. And the boy calls Antiochus an 
insane dotard of seventy, and tells him ‘it had been better for thee never to have been born from 
the impure womb of the foolish mother who bore thee, thou fatuous fool that hast brought woe upon 
thyself’. There is no mention either of the seventh son or the Mother casting themselves into the 
fire; but Hannah begins her dying speech, ‘ My heart has rejoiced in the Lord and my horn is exalted 
in my God.’ After the martyrdoms Antiochus goes off to Macedonia (?) and the Maccabean rising 
follows. As we might expect, the Stoic philosophy of Fourth Maccabees finds no place here. __ 

Neither can I discover any trace of this Stoicism surviving in the Chanukah services which 
to this day commemorate the Maccabean purification. If one may imitate St. Paul’s simile 
of the wild olive tree, Stoicism was a graft that throve but ill when set in the stem of the ‘good 
olive of Judaism. The Chanukah festival lasts for eight days, beginning on the famous twenty-fifth 
of Chisleu (December), when it was instituted by Judas Maccabaeus, his brothers, and the elders, to 
be celebrated annually in memory of the dedication of the restored altar on the occasion of the 
purification of the Sanctuary at Jerusalem. The popular name, according to Josephus (the true 
Josephus, not Yosippon), was ¢éra, ‘Lights’, because it was and is still celebrated by a grand 
general illumination. The eight-day continuance of it is said to come from the story that the 
priests found one single cruse of holy oil that had remained unpolluted all through the desecration 
under Antiochus, and by a miracle this was made to last for eight days until the priests could 
prepare new oil for the lamps of the holy candlestick. 

In later times the Pharisaic party haggled over the legitimacy of the claims of the family 
of Mattathias to the hereditary High-priesthood which was assumed by the Maccabees in 
153 B.C. Strict Jews held that the Maccabeans, though they had proved themselves national 
heroes, were in a sense irregular as occupants of the sacred office. As an explanation of this 
it is stated by Morris J. Raphall, Rabbi-preacher of the Greene Street synagogue, New York, 
who published in 1854 a Post-Biblical History of the Fews, that the Chasidim condemned 
Judas Maccabaeus because he allied himself with the Parthians and sent an embassy to Rome. He 
quotes from a Midrash Chanukah, which he describes as an ancient Codex in the City Library of 
Leipzig, these words as personally directed against Judas by the leader of the Chasidim: ‘Cursed 
be the man who placeth his dependence on flesh while from the Lord his heart departeth.’ But 
Rabbi Raphall thinks that Mattathias was probably regarded as High-Priest, or Cohen-Gadol, by 
his own followers, and describes him as a priest of the order of Joarib, the first of the twenty-four 
appointed by David by lot, and descended from the elder branch of the family of Aaron. The 
father of Mattathias was Johanan, and his father Asmoneus. In the service for Chanukah, in the 
official Jewish prayer-book, there is a special prayer set out in the morning service for the day 
which runs thus: ‘In the days of the Hasmonean, Mattathias, son of Johanan the High-Priest, and 
his sons, when the iniquitous power of Greece rose up against thy people Israel, to make them 
forgetful of thy Law and to force them to transgress the statutes of thy will, then didst thou in 
thine abundant mercy rise up for them in the time of their trouble... and for thy people 
Israel thou didst work a great deliverance and redemption as at this day. And thereupon thy 
children came into the oracle of thy house, cleansed thy temple, purified thy Sanctuary, kindled 
light in thy holy courts, and appointed these eight days of Chanukah in order to give thanks and 
praises unto thy great name. But I can find nothing that specially recalls Fourth Maccabees in 
the whole service. 

If the Jews themselves have somewhat neglected the book, the Christian Fathers have not done 
so... Phe Maccabeans are lauded by the Western as well as by the Eastern Church; they are 
commemorated in panegyrics by St. Augustine and Leo the Great, and they find a place in the 
calendars of Carthage as well as in those of the Syrians and Arabians. But the Eastern Church 
naturally glorified them first, and I can find no better specimen of the influence of Fourth Maccabees 
on Christian literature than the oration of Gregory Nazianzen on the Martyrs. ‘What of the 
Maccabeans ?’ he begins, ‘for to-day (Aug. 1) is their anniversary ; though by many they be not 
honoured because their &@Anows, their “contest ”, was not after Christ, yet are they worthy to be 
honoured by all, in that their endurance was in behalf of the Law of their fathers. And what 
would men who were martyred before Christ’s passion have achieved if they had been persecuted 
after Christ and had His death on our behalf to imitate? For would not they who without His great 
example showed such virtue have appeared nobler still. in hazarding themselves after that example ? 
Mystical and ineffable is the saying, and one very persuasive to me and to all that love God, that 
none of those who were made perfect! before Christ reached that point outside of the Christian 


* Compare Heb. xi. 4o. 


658 


INTRODUCTION 


faith. Weare reminded of that noble benediction ‘abi in pacem anima naturaliter Christiana’. It 
has been finely said that if Judaism as a religion had perished under Antiochus, the seed-bed of 
Christianity would have been lacking; and thus the blood of the Maccabean martyrs, who saved 
Judaism, ultimately became the seed of the Church. Therefore as not only Christendom but also 
Islam derive their monotheism from a Jewish source, it may well be that the world to-day owes the 
very existence of monotheism both in the East and in the West to the Maccabees. 

This then is the key-note of Gregory’s paean in their honour, delivered in the latter half of the 
fourth century, and he strikes the note again further on where he repeats that ‘the Maccabeans are 
not to be despised because they were before the Cross, but they are to be praised and held in 
honour for having lived according to the Cross’. His oration is really a paraphrase of Fourth 
Maccabees, to which he clearly alludes in the following sentence: ‘For who they were and whence, 
these men, and from what fount of education and training they advanced to such a pitch of virtue 
and glory that they are honoured by these yearly feasts and celebrations, and beyond these visible 
things have enshrined themselves in the hearts of all men, all this those who love labour and 
learning will find made clear in the book, which philosophizes about the Reason being supreme over 
the passions and holding the balance between two, that is to say, between virtue and vice.’ 
A great sentence in more senses than one. Gregory, then, describes Eleazar as the first-fruits of 
those who suffered before Christ, as Stephen was the first-fruits of those after him. He takes not 
a few phrases straight from Eleazar’s mouth, as where the martyr prays that he and his fellow 
martyrs may be accepted as a purification for the whole people ; but when Gregory makes Eleazar 
speak of the youths as his sons, he clearly must do so ina spiritual sense, for in Fourth Macca- 
bees it is very distinctly stated that Eleazar was not their father, and what they’ owed him was 
not their birth but their teaching; and Gregory knows his original perfectly. Gregory, however, 
likes playing such variations on his theme. Thus he makes the youths boldly demand the 
torture for themselves, their only fear being lest any should be denied the crown of martyrdom ; 
but when he comes to describe the sufferings of the Mother, the Christian introduces a 
touch unknown to the Jewish writer. Like him he dwells at length on her agony over her sons’ 
agonies, but the Christian recognizes there a true foretype of the Mother of Sorrows at the crucifixion 
of Christ, and he gives her the palm for courage and devotion. Like the author of Fourth Maccabees 
he delights in his own eloquence. If, as some think, two chapters of Second Maccabees have been 
expanded into the Fourth, Gregory in his turn now expands the Fourth by introducing numerous 
variations of his own, as where he makes the youths whet one another's spirits, os ovGv dddvtes dAAjAovs 
Ongavres, ‘like boar’s tusks whetting each other. He takes the Maccabean author’s simile of the 
mother-bird fluttering round her young ones, threatened by the snake, and applying it more directly 
to the Mother represents her as gathering up their broken bodies and—a curious touch this— 
adoring their relics; mpowexdve: ra deiava he says ; unless indeed we simply render mpocextver ‘she 
kissed them’. He fills her mouth with phrases clearly befitting the Mother of God. ‘Yet.a little 
while, she proclaims, ‘and blessed shall I be among women. When she has done speaking he 
makes her run to the pyre as to her bride-bed, ds én) vupdva thy TupKaidy dpapotca, not waiting for 
her executioners ‘in order that no impure person should touch her pure and honourable body’. 
Gregory makes the tyrant rejoice within himself that she had not borne more sons, for then he must 
have come off even more defeated and worse disgraced. Antiochus plays the part of the devil in this 
drama, and the fate of the Hebrew race is ds én) Evpod, on a razor’s edge, and the martyrs are the 
conquerors. ‘So, says Gregory to his flock, ‘imitate these noble sufferers and do battle bravely 
with our daily Antiochus, pds rov Ka6? ijpepav ’Aytloxov yevvatws avdpi¢dpevor ; and so dismisses 
them with his blessing in the name of Christ, ‘to whom be the glory for ever. Amen. 

Commenting on this oration, Nicetas declares that Gregory opens by maintaining that the 
Maccabeans were truly pre-Christian martyrs ‘ because some averred that these martyrs suffered not 
for Christ but in defence of the Law and of abstinence from swine’s flesh’, and quotes other Fathers 
in defence of Gregory’s position. Further on there is a highly exalted passage where Gregory makes 
the youths say to Antiochus, ‘Our country is the heavenly Jerusalem which no Antiochus can 
besiege, and our kinship is the spirit with which we are inspired by having been born unto virtue. 
Gregory’s word for ‘ the spirit with which we are inspired is eumvevors, and Nicetas finely illustrates 
this from the passage in Genesis where God breathes into man’s nostrils the breath of life. 

In a strain of equal exaltation Gregory’s great contemporary, Chrysostom, the golden-mouthed, 
begins his panegyric on the Holy Maccabeans and their Mother. ‘How bright and joyous is 
our city, and sunnier this day than all the year! Not that to-day the sun pours his beams more 
splendid than of wont upon the earth, but that the light of the holy martyrs flashes brighter than 
lightning over all our city.’ He follows the author of Fourth Maccabees in choosing to compare the 
martyrs’ struggle to the athletic contests of the ee and the martyr’s crown to that of ee aes 

59 


THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABBES 


in the contest. He appeals to Christ in the character of one who ‘ produces the games ’,as the phrase 
went. ri ore rodro dpa, déon0ra ; ‘What in the world is this, Master? Bringest thou feeble age into 
the contests on the arena? Who ever heard of a woman being entered for a contest at such an age? 
None ever heard of it2 And Christ answers that it is not bodily strength on which they rely, but 
that He lends His strength to His athletes. Further on Chrysostom sets forth eloquently the force of 
maternal devotion, quite in the vein of Fourth Maccabees but with instances of his own. ‘Often, 

he says, ‘a mother seeing her child burning with fever—advra dy EAouro nadeiv—would choose to take 
all the pain to herself so as to transfer the fire of the distemper from the child’s body to hers.’ It is 
interesting to observe how Chrysostom can always find something new to say. Fourth Maccabees 
has a beautiful simile of birds defending their young. He alters it by introducing the idea of their 
love of offspring being turned into a snare for themselves. ‘Many wild animals hard to catch are 
thus taken, when, disregarding their own safety in their affection for their young, they fall into the 
hands of the hunters.’ He is very ingenious in these variations, and doubtless intended them to 
remind those among his hearers who, in Gregory’s words, loved labour and learning, of a book so 
well worth knowing, and he contrives to freshen their interest by novel applications. Finally, in his 
stirring close he, like Gregory, lends his powerful support to the claim that these were true martyrs 
before Christ. ‘Who is there, man or woman, old or young, who would not contend for the martyr’s 
crown, when a woman did so—rpé ris xdpitos dywvicayern—contending before the days of grace?’ And, 
lastly, we find him using a phrase that seems to me a probable allusion to Fourth Maccabees xvii. 7, 
where the author suggests the art of painting as well fitted to commemorate the martyrdoms. ‘You 
should all,’ says Chrysostom to his hearers, ‘engrave their contests and their struggles on your hearts as 
it were on a tablet,’ rods dyévas cal ta wadalopata Sonep emt mivaxds Tivos THs Kapdias tuGv anoypdaartes. 
This may primarily refer to St. Paul’s ‘not on tables of stone but on fleshly tables of the heart’, but 
it also seems distinctly to point to the conjectural reading éomep én aivaxds twos in the passage in 
Maccabees. In this connexion we have to consider that the early Church by no means favoured the 
representation of the agonies of martyrdom by the graphic arts. On the contrary, the Church then 
desired to see the martyrs depicted only as blessed and glorified. The physical details of their 
cruel sufferings were not a popular subject until the Dark Ages, and it is quite possible that 
Chrysostom may be deprecating here the outward representation of such sufferings when he tells 
his hearers to engrave them on their hearts. 

There is yet another speech of his, lauding the Maccabean martyrs, in which he selects the last 
and youngest of the sons for his special panegyric. Here, too, he introduces quaint touches of his 
own, as that the tyrant was looking at the braziers, but the youth was looking at the hell into which 
the tyrant was going to cast himself. Also that the youth leapt into the braziers ‘as they had been 
fountains of cool waters, reckoning them a divine font and baptism’. Then the preacher once more 
lauds the Mother, recounting her many sorrows, and borrowing from Fourth Maccabees the 
comparison of her to the Three Children in the burning fiery furnace, which he embellishes thus: 
‘The fuel of their furnace was naphtha and pitch, tow and brushwood; the fuel of hers was nature 
and birth-pangs and maternal love and the sweet voice of her children. The words dvots kal ddives 
cal didocropyla kai Talidwv cvupwvia seem to flow from his mouth as fresh as if he had just prepared 
himself by reading over the story. He borrows direct the simile of the brave Eleazar, like a beetling 
sea-cliff standing fast against the tempest of the passions, and applies it to the Mother, who, like a 
sea-cliff taking the assaults of the waves, remains unmoved while they spend themselves in spume. 
And lastly, ‘She saw in the flames not a form of torment but a nuptial torch, yayjAvov Aawmrdda, a 
fancy which he shares with Gregory. 

There is yet a third discourse on the subject by Chrysostom, but space forbids me to enlarge 
further. The orations are all well worth looking at. They may be found in T. B. Prunaeus’s 
Gregory Naztanzen, Paris, 1609, page 397, and in Fronto Ducaeus’s Fohkn Chrysostom, Paris, 1609, 
pages 581 and 622 ff., as well as in later editions. 

To come down to more modern times, I can find nothing so interesting as the book of Erasmus 
on the Maccabean martyrs. He felt a personal interest in the matter, for in the early sixteenth 
century which saw the beginnings of the Reformation a man who had the courage of his opinions 
had also a right good chance of martyrdom. It was in 1517 that Luther nailed his denunciation of 
Indulgences to the doors of the church at Wittenberg, and in that same year Erasmus seems to have 
compiled his little work for the benefit of his friend Elias Marcaeus, ‘ moderator of the most honour- 
Bee ee of the Maccabeans’ at Cologne. Martyrdom was a thing of which the great leader of 

anists had a very real dread. ‘We have not all strength for martyrdom,and I fear if trouble 
> et eat like Peter, he wrote in 1521, and he had reason to quake when his works were 
5 het y . eee to the Spanish Inquisition six years later. Martyrdoms have a cruel interest for 
who dreads the torture, and it is no ss that he made a book for his friends at Cologne 

fe) 


INTRODUCTION 


out of all that antiquity had said about their martyr-saints. The earliest edition of his work that 
I can hear of was printed by E. Cervicornus at Cologne, Feb. 1, 1524, fol., with the title—‘ Opera 
Iosephi interprete Ruffino presbytero. De insigni machabaeorum martyrio, castigatus ab Erasmo - 
nunquam ante praedictis additus,’ &c., &c. The book was several times reprinted in the sixteenth 
century, e.g. at Basle, 1524, 1534, and 1540, and the Bodleian has a copy of another edition 
from the Cologne press, which is undated but was probably printed in 1534 or later, and has the title 
really preferred by Erasmus, ‘ 7epi abroxpdropos Aoyioy.08, de imperatrice ratione.’ In his prefatory letter 
Erasmus says that he has worked from a Latin text, not having a Greek MS. at hand (the Greek 
text appears not to have been printed till 1526); and that, conjecturing the Greek original from the 
Latin, he has changed some things, but not very much. He shows his literary art in the way in 
which he compliments both the college and the city of Cologne, alluding elegantly to the eleven 
thousand virgins martyred there, and so proceeds to his translation. After the translation he gives 
selections from antiquity, including the following from Jerome: ‘The seven Maccabean brothers 
were born of one mother, by name Maccabea; they kept the Law of their own tradition ; they did 
not eat the flesh of swine. For this.cause they by the most cruel king Antiochus were crowned with 
the glory of martyrdom, in Antioch, together with their pious mother, and there they remain buried 
with great veneration.’ 

“So far St. Jerome, says Erasmus; ‘but’, he continues, ‘it is certain that the relics of these 
Maccabean brothers were by the blessed Helena, mother of the Emperor Constantine, brought to 
Byzantium, and thence by the president Eustorgius to Mediolanum (Milan), and lastly by the act of 
Reginold bishop of Cologne transferred from Mediolanum to Cologne in the year 1164, where now 
they are held in great veneration in the college of the glorious name of the Maccabeans themselves.’ 
Their removal to Cologne in 1164 was celebrated by a special feast, ‘ which ’, observes Erasmus, 
‘is now marked off by our very reverend father and lord in Christ, Hermann de Hassia, archbishop 
of Cologne, in the year 1506, as having been transferred to the feast of St. Cuthbert, archbishop and 
confessor. However, to return to his translation of F ourth Maccabees, or rather to his paraphrase, 
for such it is) He completely rewrites the argument about Reason and the passions, nor do I find 
any allusion to the Stoic classification of the passions, though he agrees with the author of Fourth 
Maccabees that Reason does not extirpate passion but checks it, and he quotes the cases there cited 
of Joseph, Moses, Jacob, and David. In David's case he has a curious variant. David would not 
quench his thirst with the water which ran by his tent because he had sworn not to drink till the 
enemy’s camp was taken, thinking thus to stimulate the valour of his troops. When we come to the 
Hellenizing cainpaign of Antiochus and the tyrant’s persecutions, Erasmus follows his author more 
closely, but I note various changes. Jason builds baths, not a gymnasium, near the temple. The 
women who circumcise their sons fling themselves off the rocks voluntarily, ‘quippe quae vitantes 
longiora tormenta celerem halitum ingestae mortis optarent.’ When Antiochus counsels Eleazar to 
eat the swine’s flesh, he says, ‘It is a mark of superstition and cowardice to make a law for oneself 
and call one’s choice Reason’; and Eleazar replies, ‘ Our law condemns your philosophy, wherein the 
less a man understands the more he thinks he understands.’ Erasmus was thinking of some theologians 
more distinguished for bigotry than learning when he wrote these words. Nor is he at any pains to 
keep a Jewish atmosphere: on the contrary, he puts into the mouth of Eleazar, when he is asking 
God to accept him as an atonement, such a characteristically Christian phrase as ‘Receive me for 
them all, and give them all to me’. 

The martyrdom of Eleazar appears to take place in Jerusalem, but the seven brethren and the 
Mother are brought to Antioch, ‘atrociter de eorum castello Sufandro.’ The Mother is called 
Solomona. The eldest son is Maccabeus, the others are Aber, Machir, Judas, Achas, Areth, 
Jacob. Erasmus describes their tortures at length, and the curious may compare his long Latin 
list of devilish engines with the Greek. When he comes to xi. 7 he transfers thither the speech of the 
Mother which the author had reserved for a later place, and in the same connexion he largely expands 
both the tortures and the speeches of the seventh son. Finally he describes the Mother as herself 
being stripped, scourged, and grievously tormented by Antiochus, until at last she is brought to the 
brazier, ‘ac oratione protensis surrectisque manibus pro gravidis matribus fusa coelibem effudit 
spiritum’. There he introduces a very mediaeval touch, as also when he shows Antiochus terror- 
stricken at the very moment of her death by a flash of lightning. Again, later on, he makes the 
tyrant become so impressed by the martyrs’ courage that he enlists whole legions of Hebrew soldiers 
in his service and wins battles with them. Yet death is not to be staved off; for he shows the king 
at last dying miserably of a disgusting disease, as told in the Second but not in the Fourth Book of 

accabees. 
It will be seen that Erasmus gave himself a perfectly free hand. A century and a half later 
Combefin fell upon him with severity for it. See scholar calls him such unkind names as 
I 


THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 


‘jneptus Paraphrastes (veriusque temerator) Erasmus’. He says that Erasmus put the kingdom of 
heaven for ra rhs dperjs GO\a, and eternal fire for eternal death,—‘est hoc mapaxaparrew non 
rapappdCew, ‘this is to adulterate a monument of antiquity. Ifa monk had taken such liberties with 
the work of Josephus and the words of the Maccabees, how the man would have laughed at him. 

Then he ridicules Erasmus for giving to the martyrs names drawn either from some apocryphal 
writings or invented out of his own head. And again Combefin calls an expression of the Para- 
phrastes ‘ inanis mihi verborum pompa et phalerae’, and casts scorn upon him for expending so many 
rhetorical exaggerations over the tortured Mother, to which the critic would prefer the simplicity of 
the Greek account. I do not know if it was odium theologicum or odium scholasticum which 
prompted this assault, but if Erasmus could have awaked from his long century’s sleep we might 
have had a literary quarrel, the echoes of which would be ringing yet in our ears. The French 
scholar would have had a backer on this side of the Channel in Dr. Wm. Cave of Oxford, who wrote 
that he would like to know why Erasmus put a quantity of stuff into his work of which there is no 
trace in the Greek. ‘Others may solve the question, says Cave, ‘Quin id pro ingenii sui pruritu 
fecerit Erasmus dubitari nequit.’ 

But if one could picture such a ghostly battle of the books as taking place, I am not sure that 
Erasmus might not find on his side the shade of another Oxford scholar, John Lloyd, who translated 
Fourth Maccabees just two years after the defeat of the Great Armada, and decidedly did not love 
Rome. He does indeed criticize Erasmus’s work, though he avoids, intentionally it may be, the 
mention of his name, but he keeps the vials of his wrath for certain Roman theologians, who 
endeavoured to make out that Fourth Maccabees was to be received as canonical, on evidence which 
they claimed to be that of Josephus, and cited Gregory in support of their thesis. Whom our Lloyd 
laughs to scorn, winding up with ‘O dignos Romana meretrice mangones!’ 

Tantaene animis scholasticis irae ? 

Lloyd’s text, based on the Strassburg edition of 1526, like those of Hudson and all the other printed 
texts I have seen (except Swete’s), has the reading ®omep ert rwvos mlvakos in xvii. 7 where the MSS. give 
Gonmep twos Or ws én Tivos, and this conjectural emendation of wivaxos is reproduced in the Latin of 
Erasmus and others. The conjecture, though unsupported, is natural enough, as the author of Fourth 
Maccabees undoubtedly is referring here to a picture. Erasmus, however, tacks on to it quite a new 
idea, and turns this suggested figure of the martyred Mother from an ideal work of art into a sort of 
charm or amulet: ‘if a sculptor were to put this piteous figure on a tomb or set it up on a house, 
he would be free from every dreadful plague and would surely enjoy eternal bliss.’ The idea of the 
picture appears to have commended itself to the printer of a later edition of the book, for the 
Bodleian copy has fourteen rude woodcuts of the martyrdoms where no dreadful detail is spared. 
In their crude horror they remind one of the grim ghastliness of the Macabre pictures, so popular in 
the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, whose very name shows how the word Maccabean ultimately 
came to indicate death in its most detested forms. And this survives to-day in the argot of Paris, 
where the body of a murdered victim is still mockingly termed a ‘ macabé’. 


S89. : THEOLOGY, 


When Paul was brought before the Jewish Council at Jerusalem, in order to divide his opponents 
he exclaimed : ‘I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee: of the hope and resurrection of the dead 
I am called in question.’ And we read that the two parties in the Council proceeded to fall out-on 
the instant, ‘for the Sadducees say that there is no resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit ; but the 
Pharisees confess both.’ This account exhibits very clearly the strongly contrasted beliefs of the 
two great parties among the Jews, as they existed (or were believed to exist) in Palestine about the 
middle of the first century A.D. In Alexandria, however, there was a third form of belief, approach- 
ing that of the Pharisees indeed, but with a difference ; and this third form is the standpoint of the 
author of Fourth Maccabees. Briefly stated it is this. At death men meet with the reward or 
punishment due for their deeds. The righteous are received into bliss (SCG 2.. 15/5 (Kili a7 evi 
18; xviii. 23). The wicked are punished with eternal torture (see. 1X. 8) (QO3PR OUT 1hs x terge 
Nill. 15; xviii. 5,22. Apparently there is no resurrection of the body. Also, like the Pharisees, 
the author believes in angels (see iv. 10, and perhaps vii. 11), and in devils (see xviii. 8). For 
Jewish views of immortality see Oesterley and Box, Synagogue Religion and Worship, p. 224, and 
R. H. Charles, Eschatology, Hebrew, &c., passim. Wow the Alexandrian school came to adopt 
the doctrine of the immortality of the soul but not of the resurrection of the body is too large a 
subject to enter upon here, but it is usually attributed to their having come under the influence 
of the philosophy of Plato and the neo-Pythagoreans. That the author was saturated with Greek 
philosophy is proved by his systematic adoption of its terminology, including the fourfold classi- 

662 


INTRODUCTION 


fication of the cardinal virtues which the Stoics copied from Plato. In his general thesis on the 
Supremacy of Reason, he follows exactly the Platonic classification of @pdvyncws, judgement or self- 
control, avdpeta, courage, duxaroovry, justice, and cwhpootry, temperance. But when he comes to tell 
of the martyr facing the tortures he adds something new. ‘You scoff at our philosophy, says 
Eleazar to the king, ‘but the Law teaches us temperance, and courage, and justice,—so far the 
author goes with Plato ; then comes the new word—‘and ecioéSera, righteousness, so that with due 
reverence we worship only the God who is. This is the key-note of his whole book. The Stoic 
ideal is right, and the Stoic path to it may be well enough, but the driving force is to be sought 
elsewhere, namely in the Law of Moses. It is the same thought that he puts into the mouth of 
the first to suffer of the seven Brethren. ‘Through all the torments I will show you... that the Sons 
of the Hebrews alone are unconquerable,’ the secret of the youth’s courage being that he has been 
trained in the Law of Moses. Similarly Philo, who accepted the Platonic idea of the soul as a 
divine emanation, chose the Stoic ethics for the groundwork of his system, and made Greek philo- 
sophy ‘a means of defending and justifying Jewish religious truths. These he regarded as fixed 
and determinate, and philosophy was merely an aid to truth and a means of arriving at it’ (Fezw7sh 
Encyclopaedia, art. Philo). No better description could be given of the position of the author of 
Fourth Maccabees. But the position was one that the Pharisaic party, which was ultimately suc- 
cessful, could never bring themselves to accept, and the school of Philo and of our author, after 
exerting considerable authority for a time, died away in the end. 

Of direct Christian influence on the book there is naturally no trace, but I. Abrahams, writing 
in the Fewish Encyclopaedia, thinks that as it stands there may possibly be some Christian interpo- 
lation in such passages as vii. 14, xiii. 17, and xvi. 25, which declare that the patriarchs are not 
dead, but live unto God. In the second of these, where we read, ‘ Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob shall 
receive us, Swete’s text omits the phrase «is rovs xéAmovs adtév, which is not in the uncials and 
appears only in MSS. of secondary importance; these particular words may perhaps be a later 
insertion made by some one familiar with the New Testament who wished to allude to Luke xvi. 23, 
but it is difficult to see why the general statement that the Jewish patriarchs live with God should 
be due to a Christian hand. Christian phraseology, however, does certainly find a remarkable echo, 
or rather anticipation, in the prayer of Eleazar, vi. 28, ‘Be merciful unto thy people, and let our 
punishment be a satisfaction in their behalf. Make my blood their purification, and take my soul 
to ransom their souls.’ This idea is repeated in xvii. 21,22, where the author says that the martyrs 
‘became a ransom for our nation’s sin; and through the blood of these righteous men and the pro- 
pitiation of their death, the divine providence delivered Israel that before was evil entreated’. The 
phrases fall with a familiar sound on our ears, but nevertheless the idea of an atonement is not more 
distinctively Christian than it is Jewish. The whole Jewish system of sacrifices was based on the idea of 
the death of an animal being substituted for that ofa man as an atonement for sin. Under the ancient 
law the scape-goat upon whom the lot for the Lord fell, in the service for the Day of Atonement, 
was sacrificed, and his blood was taken within the Holy Place, while the one for Azazel was turned 
out in the wilderness.. The substitution of the goat for the people in the greatest ceremony of the 
year was thoroughly typical of the sacrificial principle. In later times the idea of the propitiatory 
sacrifice was extended from earth to heaven. In the Testament of Levi (circa 107 B.C.) we have 
‘In [the sixth heaven] are the archangels, who minister and make propitiation to the Lord for all 
the sins of the righteous; offering to the Lord a sweet-smelling savour, a reasonable and a 
bloodless offering’. Charles’s note on this (Zest. Twelve Patr. Levi, iii. 5) gives the explanation that 
since the earthly altar and tabernacle of Exodus and Numbers were made after heavenly patterns 
the idea of a sacrificial service in heaven must long have been familiar to Jews. Michael ‘the 
merciful and longsuffering’ is one of these archangels who pray and offer sacrifice for Israel. So 
we see that there is nothing specifically Christian in the suggestion of the sufferings of the righteous 
making atonement for the people. ; 

To go back to ancient times, the sacrifice of Jephthah S daughter (though not an atonement) is 
by no means the only instance in the history of Judaism showing that the idea that a human being 
might be accepted as a sacrifice was quite conceivable. Did not Moses thus offer himself (Exod. 
xxxii. 32) when he found the people worshipping the golden calf, and prayed to the Lord, Vet 
now, if thou wilt forgive their sin —; and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book’? David also, 
when Israei was smitten because of his having numbered the people, cried to the Lord, ‘ It is I that 
have sinned and done evil indeed; but as for these sheep, what have they done? let thine hand, 
I pray thee, O Lord God, be upon me and on my father’s house ; but not on thy people that they 
should be plagued ’ (see 2 Sam. xxiv. 17). Indeed the whole Jewish theory of national religion was 
based on redemption by substitution. The first-born son of every family was due to Yahveh 
and had to be redeemed, just as every Rep orn of any unclean animal, such as an ass, had to be 

3 


THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABERS 


redeemed by the substitution of a calf ora lamb. The author recurs again as he approaches his 
peroration to this thought of the martyrs’ deaths being an atonement, in xvii, 21-22, where he save, 
‘they having as it were become a ransom for our nation’s sin (apostasy) ; and through the : oe 
of these righteous men and the propitiation of their death, the divine providence delivered Israe 
that before was evil entreated.’ As for the pagan world, we find the idea everywhere: to take a 
single instance, I may quote the self-sacrifice of Curtius’s leap into the chasm to appease the gods of 
Rome. In the New Testament, of course, we have numerous parallels ; to take one only, we read in 
Hebrews ix. 28, ‘So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many.’ i. Nh 

It is not only in the idea of atonement that we find thoughts familiar to Christians suggested 
in Fourth Maccabees. The word ‘faith’ also occurs, in a distinctively religious sense. For example, 
in xvi. 22 the Mother, after having spoken of Abraham and Isaac and Daniel and the Three Children, 
says to her sons, ‘And ye also, having the same faith unto God, be not troubled.’ Here aioms 
must mean religious faith, and in the very next verse the Mother speaks of the young men as 
‘knowing religion’. In xv. 24 the author speaks of the Mother s own faith:. ‘she willingly 
surrendered them through faith in God’; and again in xvii. 2 he describes her as giving ‘an 
example of the nobleness of faith’. In this religious sense mtoris belongs not to Stoic, nor even to 
Greek thought, but to that devotional side of the Hebrew mind which was to be more fully 
expressed in Christianity. Here, however, as Maldwyn Hughes says (£¢hics of Fewish Apocr. Lit. 
p. 112),‘It is rather trust in an external Providence than an inner dependence arising from an 
inward relationship. Faith is not a renewing and life-giving power, but confidence in the provi- 
dential order.’ ; 

On the ethical question the author of Fourth Maccabees relies absolutely on the Mosaic Law. 
The Inspired Reason, i.e. the Reason guided by the Law, is autocratic over the passions, while 
depending on the Law for knowledge as to what to do and what to avoid. The author does not 
want the passions extirpated ; he upholds the Stoic virtues, though not the Stoic dmaGeia ; but he 
wants the passions to be brought under rigid control, and he shows how this has been and can 
be done by many examples from the Old Testament, giving as instances Joseph, David, and the 
rest. He does accept the Stoic doctrine about sin, that all sins are alike in being breaches of the 
law, when he makes Eleazar say (v. 20), ‘ for the transgression of the Law, be it in small things or 
in great, is equally heinous ; for in either case equally the Law is despised.’ He never doubts that 
the Law is supreme (v. 16): ‘We, O Antiochus, having accepted the Divine Law as the Law of our 
country, do not believe that any stronger necessity is laid upon us than that of our obedience to the 
Law.’ He isa Jew to the core, and his conclusion is peremptory ; for him the Law is the last word. 

I will close this section with another quotation from Maldwyn Hughes (of. cé¢., p. 111) : ‘ The 
great purpose of the book is to stimulate faithfulness to the Law, and to show that the Greek ideal 
of virtue can be realized only by Judaism. The writer’s heroes are not the Maccabean patriots, to 
whom he makes no reference, but the martyrs of Maccabean times. His silence as to the former is 
a significant hint that he did not sympathize with the political ideals which expressed themselves in 
active resistance to the Gentile powers, but that he preferred the Quietistic method of vindicating 
the Law, by absolute and unswerving faithfulness to it, at whatever pain and cost. The emergence 
of political ideals had resulted in the secularization of Judaism.’ 


§ 10. BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


So far as I can learn the text of Fourth Maccabees was first printed in 1526 in the Greek Bible published at 
Strassburg by Vuolphius (Wolfgang) Cephalaeus, of which there is a good copy in the Bodleian Library. In this 
edition it appears as "laoimmov cis rods MaxkaBaiovs BiBdov. Professor Torrey, whose bibliographical account of the 
book in the Excyclopaedia Biblica is the fullest I have seen and to whom I am indebted for some of the following 
information, quotes Freudenthal’s statement that this text was based on a very poor MS. Once it was in type, 
however, it found general acceptance and was frequently reprinted in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, not 
only in Greek Bibles but also in various editions of Josephus; of the latter we may name the Basle text of 1544, and 
that of John Lloyd (Luidus), Oxford, 1590. Lloyd says that he collated the Strassburg text with an ancient MS. 
at New College. This text was also used for the Greek Bible printed at Frankfort in 1597, with the same title of 
the Book of Josippus on the Maccabees, and it was likewise used by Hudson, Oxford, 1720, and by others who 
followed him, e.g. Dindorf, 1845-7, and Bekker, 1856, the latter work being a decided advance on its precursors. 
In 1709, however, a different text, based on the Codex Alexandrinus in the British Museum and edited by J. E. Grabe, 
was printed at Oxford, and after his death it was printed there again in 1719. It was also used by Apel, Apocr. V. T., 
1837. Still later another text, based on Codex A, was edited by F. Field, Oxford, 1859, in beautiful type. Dr. Field, 
who was of Trinity College, Cambridge, a Tyrrhitt’s Hebrew scholar, and one of the O.T, Revisers, pillories the anony- 
mous editor of a certain text which appeared at Oxford in 1817. The culprit had thought to get a neat transcript of 
the original MS. by rejecting every small-type reading in Grabe and putting back the marginal one. Whereby he not 
only restored many obvious errors in the Codex, but also repeated, in his ignorance, whatever misprints occurred in 
Grabe’s text ; these numbered six in the first chapter alone, ‘cetera per totum libellum innumera!” says Dr. Field 
with crushing severity. Since then the book has appeared in Bagster’s Afocrypha, Greek and English, 1882, and in 


664 


IN PRODUCTION 


Fritzsche’s Lzbri Apocr. V. T., in which the commentary is excellent but the text differs considerably from that in 
Swete’s LX.X, Cambridge, 1894-9, which gives Codex A with variants of Nand V. The present translation is made 
from Swete’s text, the cases where different readings are used being noted at the foot of the page. There is a florid 
paraphrase in English by that prolific seventeenth-century writer Sir Roger L’Estrange, and there are modern English 
translations in Cotton, Five Books of the Maccabees, 1832, in Bagster’s Apocrypha already mentioned, and in Churton’s 
Uncanonical and Apocryphal Scriptures, 1884. The ancient Syriac version of which I have spoken was published in 
1895 by the Cambridge Press from the text of R. L. Bensly; and there is a modern Hebrew translation in Fraenkel, 
Kethubim acharonim, sive Hagiographa posteriora, Leipzig, 1830. Of Latin translations there are several. Erasmus 
made a very free paraphrase, as already described in § 8, in the early sixteenth century, which was reprinted by 
Peter de la Rouiére at Geneva in 1611 with the Greek text. The Bodleian Library has two copies of this edition. in 
one of which there is a marginal collation of the New College MS. of Fourth Maccabees. This copy is catalogued 
C. 9. 5. Art., and has opposite the title a marginal note written ‘’lwcyjrov mepi cappovos Noywrpov. MS. in Collegio 
Novo’, while the printed title has ‘a Des. Erasmo Rot. in sermonem Latinum rapadpacrixés translatus’. Lloyd 
in 1590 brought out at Oxford an edition of the Greek text (in wretched print alas!) collated with the New College 
MS. and accompanied by a Latin version that seems to be well done; this last may be said also of the Latin 
version by Fr. Combefin, Paris, 1672, whose work is praised by W. Cave in his Scréptores Eccl., Oxford, 1688-1740, 
where he attacks Erasmus so severely. The best German translation is that of Deissmann in Kautzsch’s Afocr. i. 
Pseudepigr., Leipzig, 1899, and there are good German commentaries by Grimm, Handbuch zu den Apocryphen, 
1857, by Freudenthal, Die Fl. Josephus beigelegte Schrift iiber die Herrschaft der Vernunft, 1869, by Fritzsche in 
Libri apocr. V. T., 1871, and by Deissmann (in Kautzsch) as mentioned above. The two last named have been 
those chiefly used in preparing the present translation. Other German works that may be consulted, according to 
Professor Torrey, are Zickler’s Apocryphen, 396-402; Gfrorer, Philo und dze alexandrinische Theosophie, 2. 172-200 
(1831); Dahne, Die jiidisch-alexandrinische Religionsphilosophie, 2. 190-9 (1834) ; Ewald, GVZ (3), 4, 632 ff; Gratz, 
MGW7 (1877), pp. 454 ff.; Zeller, Die Philosophie der Griechen (3), 3. 2 (1881), pp. 275-7. Also in English 
translations we have Schiirer’s Jewish People in the Time of Jesus Christ, iii. 244 ff, and Ewald’s History of Israel, 
5. 484 ff. For the ethical and theological side of the book I know nothing so good as Maldwyn Hughes, E¢hics of 
Jewish Apocr. Lit. (date not given). Last but not least I would name Edwyn Bevan’s House of Seleucus, 1902, as 
giving the best account of Antiochus Epiphanes and his attempts forcibly to Hellenize the Jews, and the reader may 
wisely consult his Jerusalem under the High Priests. 


Appended is a comparison of the historical statements of 2 and 4 Macc. abridged from Bensly. 


2 Macc. ili. 1—vil. 41. 4 Macc, iii, 20—xvil. 1. 
1. Deep peace. ili. I. 1. Do. iil. 20. 
2. Seleucus, king of Asia, acts as patron of the | 2. Do. ill, 20. 
Temple. iii. 3. 
3. Simon at variance with Onias. lil. 4. 3- Do. iv. 1. 
4. Tells Apollonius of the Temple treasures. iil. 6. 4. Do. tv. 3. 
3. Heliodorus enters the Temple. Mi t4s | * 5. Apollonius, do. Vv. 8. 
6. Under the new king Antiochus, Jason buys the | 6. Do. 1Vv. 17. 
priesthood. iv. 7. 
7. Jason builds a gymnasium, iv. 12. 7. Do. iv. 20. 
8. Menelaus outbids Jason. iv. 24. 8. Not mentioned. 


9. On report of Antiochus’s death in Egypt Jason 
surprises Jerusalem. v. 5. 

ro. Antiochus storms Jerusalem and massacres. v. IT. 

11. King sends an Athenian to change the Jewish 
customs. Vl. I. 

12. Philip the Phrygian persecutes in Jerusalem. v.22. 


13. Eleazar, a scribe of ninety, is beaten to death. | 


vi. 23-31. 


14-19. The brothers are variously tortured. vii. 

20. Antiochus touched with compassion for Brother VII 
promises him riches and friendship in exchange 
for obedience. Vil. 24. 

21. The Mother implores Brother VII to have com- 
passion on her pains and care as a mother and 
to resist. - vil. 27-29. 


22. The Mother died last. vil. 41. 


665 





g. On report of Antiochus’s death in Egypt the Jews 
rejoice. iv. 22. 

10. Antiochus returns and lays the Jews waste. iv. 23. 

11. King decrees death to those who follow their 
fathers’ religion. iv. 23. 

12. Antiochus himself orders the Hebrews to be 
brought before him. _ v. 2. 

13. Eleazar, priest and lawyer, an old man, is beaten 
and tortured to death with hot irons after 
a speech addressed to Antiochus. Vv. 16-Vl. 30. 

14-19. Do. do. (different order). viii to xiv. 

20. Do. adi. 2=6. 


21. The Mother advises VII in Hebrew in words zot 
given at once, Xil. 7. 


22. The Mother, certain guards say, flung herself into 
the frying-pan. Xvil. I. 


ibs 


THE FOURTH BOOK. OF WEACGALEe. 


Philosophical in the highest degree is the question I propose to discuss, namely whether the 
Inspired Reason is supreme ruler over the passions; and to the philosophy of z¢ I would seriously 


I. 1. Inspired Reason. Philosophy is the power-house of the soul. It covers the motive-power by which out 
higher nature rules or tries to rule our worse self. Man’s first want is meat and drink, and how to supply the want 
his first problem. The physical side of the problem solves itself; he either finds food, or he starves. But there is 
also a spiritual side to the problem, and to it Philosophy contains the answer—or answers. Will a man starve rather 
than sin, sin by stealing food from his brother man, or even by killing and eating him? The hungry wolf solves it 
one way; he will verily eat his brother wolf. But man, as soon as he rises above the wolf level, and developing 
a conscience becomes man, finds himself faced with this most serious problem. It may seem remote to us now living 
in comfort and protected by the police; but it is still quite close up with every exploring expedition, polar or tropical, 
that takes its chances in the unknown. Will the individual man, when tempted, yield to temptation or resist it? From 
the time of the flint-weaponed hunters down to the present day the question has been answered—both in the way of 
the man with a conscience, the higher man, and the way of the man with the heart of a wolf, the lower man. But 
what is the power that enables the higher type to abstain not only from cannibalism but also, as life grows more 
complex, from all kinds of wrong? The answer to that question is duty, the one short word that has a hundred names 
in a hundred lands. Where a man feels the call of duty and can also trust that his fellows feel it, religion, the essence 
of religion at any rate, the binding of soul to soul, exists, and there in truth is the beginning of human society. Where 
the call of duty is not felt, life becomes inhuman; we revert to the conditions of the wolf-pack. Fourth Maccabees is 
the attempt of an orthodox Jew, one well skilled in Greek philosophy, to show how men may rise above the wolf-pack 
level and be true to their duty even under the last extremity of torture. For even though a man may recognize his 
duty, yet through weakness of will he may fail to respond. The driving power, that which out of weakness makes him 
strong to respond, is the mainspring of the higher life, and that is why philosophy, which covers all man’s attempts to 
find and to explain the source of the driving power, may be called the power-house of the soul. : 
The name which the author of the book here takes to express the working action of duty in the human mind is 
Aoyiouds. In its ordinary acceptation Aoywpyds was the word used for common arithmetic, but here it stands for the 
human reason, or rather the rational will, which according to Epicurus disposes of all the greatest and most important 
matters of life (Diog. Laert. 10. 44), and here may be suitably expressed as the personified Reason with a capital R. 
It was a conveniently definite term for the author of Fourth Maccabees to adopt, seeing that Aéyos both in Greek and 
in Jewish philosophy had been already consecrated to a different use. Adyos was the Word. According to Lactantius 
(de Vera. Sap. c. 9) ‘Zeno rerum naturae dispositorem atque artificem universitatis Acyov praedicat, quem et fatum et 
necessitatem rerum et deum et animum Iovis nuncupat’. So in Ps. xxxiii. 6 we have ‘ By the Word of the Lord were 
the heavens made’. In hundreds of passages Jew and Greek alike declare the power of the Word, the Adyos, the 
‘“memra’. To come down from the Psalmist and Zeno to the first century A.D., in Alexandria, the probable date and 
place of origin of Fourth Maccabees, we find the Jewish philosopher Philo actually taking over from the Stoics the 
doctrine that the Adyos is the power of God or the active Divine intelligence in general. With such powerful 
associations clinging to Aéyos it was natural for the author to choose Aoyopds for Reason, and the more so that the 
Stoics had already used it in that sense. There is extant an interesting little dialogue of Cleanthes, given by Pearson, 
lragm. Zeno and Cleanthes, p. 306, in which the two speakers are Aoyiouds and Oupés. 
Aoyiopds. th ror’ €oP bre Bovdet, upé ; TodTS por ppdcor. 
Oupds. Exew, Noyrope, way 6 Bovomat Troreiv. 
Aoyiopos. vat Baowhikdy ye’ mAjy Guws elroy maw. 
Oupos. dy diy eriOupd travO’ bras yevnoerat. 
Reason, What on earth do you want, my good animal? Tell me that. 
Animal Nature. 1 want, O Reason, to be able to do everything I want. 
Reason. A royal appetite indeed; but would you say that again. 
Animal Nature. 1 want whatever I desire to come to pass. 

The contrast between our higher and our lower self could hardly be better put. 

It has happened to some young men entering the study of philosophy to feel a sudden qualm lest they were being 
made fools of by a set of bookworms calling themselves philosophers, weaklings constitutionally unable to enter into 
the feelings of a healthy natural man. Such may take.comfort in the recollection that the writer of this little dialogue, 
Cleanthes, who after Zeno was the great prophet of the Stoics, in his unconverted days had been a pugilist, and that 
no man ever stood up in the ring but had a working knowledge of our animal nature and the need of keeping one’s 
head in spite of its promptings. But though the Stoic ex-pugilist well knew the need for the Aoyouds to dominate the 
Oupds we must remember that the Noyouds of Fourth Maccabees is not precisely the same thing as the Reason of 
Greek philosophy, Epicurean or Stoic. For the oy:ouds of the Jewish writer is qualified by the adjective evoeBys, 
a word which in the mouth of a Hellenistic Jew signifies a strict adherence to the Law of Moses, that is to say the Law 
of God. evoe8ys, in short, was the technical word used in the Diaspora to describe the Chasidim, the ‘ pious’. or 
* godly’ party among the Jews, rigorous precisians whose pride it was to follow the Law in all things. With us 

orthodox’ has something of the same implication, though it applies in our own days to faith rather than to works. 
The ‘Saints’ of Cromwell “doing the work of the Lord faithfully’ perhaps come nearer the ‘idea ; and indeed their 
inspiration was largely drawn from the Old Testament. Thus the word evo«87s means directly inspired by God as He 


666: 


fae TT OURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES) I. 2-15 


2 entreat your earnest attention. For not only is the subject generally necessary as a branch of 
3 knowledge, but it includes the praise of the greatest of virtues, whereby I mean self-control. That 
4 is to say, if Reason is proved to control the passions adverse to temperance, gluttony and lust, it is 
also clearly shown to be lord over the passions, like malevolence, opposed to justice, and over those 
opposed to manliness, namely rage and pain and fear. 
5 But, some may ask, if the Reason is master of the passions, why does it not control forgetfulness 
6 and ignorance? their object being to cast ridicule. The answer is that Reason is not master over 
defects inhering in the mind itself, but over the passions or moral defects that are adverse to justice 
and manliness and temperance and judgement ; and its action in their case is not to extirpate the 
passions, but to enable us to resist them successfully. . 
+ Icould bring before you many examples, drawn from various sources, where Reason has proved 
8 itself master over the passions, but the best instance by far that I can give is the noble conduct of 
9 those who died for the sake of virtue, Eleazar, and the Seven Brethren and the Mother. For these 
all by their contempt of pains, yea, even unto death, proved that Reason rises superior to the 
10 passions. I might enlarge here in praise of their virtues, they, the men with the Mother, dying on 
this day we celebrate for the love of moral beauty and goodness, but rather would I felicitate them 
r1 on the honours they have attained. For the admiration felt for their courage and endurance, not 
only by the world at large but by their very executioners, made them the authors of the downfall 
of the tyranny under which our nation lay, they defeating the tyrant by their endurance, so that 
12 through them was their country purified. But I shall presently take opportunity to discuss this, 
after we have begun with the general theory, as I am in the habit of doing, and I will then proceed 
to their story, giving glory to the all-wise God. 
13,14 Our enquiry, then, is whether the Reason is supreme master over the passions. But we must 
define just what the Reason is and what passion is, and how many forms of passion there are, and 
rs whether the Reason is supreme over all of them. Reason I take to be the mind preferring with 


is revealed to the soul of the ‘righteous man’ in the Book of Moses, and I therefore translate edceBijs Noyeopds by ‘ The 
Inspired Reason’, that is to say the Reason or Rational Will obeying the guidance of the Law. When so guided, the 
Noyeruds becomes our higher self, and includes not only reason, but the moral sense and that noblest form of courage 
which consists in perfect self-sacrifice for the sake of our ideal. With regard to edo«Sis I have only used ‘ Inspired ’ 
for it when thus connected with Aoyiwpds. Elsewhere it is generally represented by ‘righteous’, which must be taken 
in the meaning it usually bears in the Old Testament of ‘following the Law’ in the Jewish sense. Similarly evaeBeva 
is either ‘righteousness’ or ‘religion’, according to the context, with the same definitely limited connotation of 
orthodox Judaism. ; j 

2. the ... virtues. The author takes his classification of the four cardinal virtues from the Stoics, who got them from 
Plato. The four are dpdrynais, dixacorvvn, avSpeia, coppootvn, and the greatest of these is ppdvnots, a puzzling word to 
render adequately. Diogenes Laertius tells us that Apollophanes held ¢péynors to include the whole of virtue, and 
Plutarch says (Szo. Rep. vii. 2) that Zeno defined the cardinal virtues as follows : dpéynais, he held, as a general term 
included the other three ; in things demanding endurance or vigorous action, it was courage ; In things demanding 
fairness, it was justice; in things demanding a choice, it was temperance. It 1s not easy to find English words that 
will correspond exactly to these terms, though courage and justice may pass, and so indeed may temperance, even if 
the idea it brings to our minds is somewhat limited by its modern use for abstinence from alcohol. But hpdyyors, which 
can sometimes be expressed by self-control, covers more than that. It 1s prudence, but that hardly expresses the 
active side of it enough; it is wisdom, but more in its practical than in its intellectual aspect ; it is glorified common 
sense, but that, though expressive, hardly suggests a sufficiently lofty ideal. Judgement 1s nearer to It, judgement in 
the sense in which we have it in the collect where we ask to be given ‘a right judgement in all things’. But the 
selected word for ppdynois must be varied to suit the context. 

3. the passions, 7447. The word includes the emotions and affections as well as what we call the lower self. For 
the Stoic philosophers’ division of the md@n see 1.20: 5 od 

5. ignorance. Zeno, according to Stobaeus, classed some vices as ayvouat, and there was a Stoic dogma, mavra 
dyvoet 6 paddos. The Stoics used the terms omovdaios and pavdos to distinguish between two classes, the initiated and 
the uninitiated in philosophy; much as we might talk of saints and sinners, converted and unconverted, elect’ and 
‘worldly’. I doubt, however, if the Stoic dyvovae were quite what 1s meant by @yvova here. Deissmann thinks that this 
and the following verse have been bodily transposed here from 1. 24, 11. I, where their connexion is clearer. But the 
mere fact that the sentences are repeated in almost the same words need hardly trouble us: the author of Fourth 
Maccabees does not mind repeating himself, as will be abundantly evident before the reader reaches the end of the 
book ; and the author does get a sort of antithesis between the two passages. Here he shows us sceptics laughing at 
Stoicism (compare ‘Coxcombs vanquish Berkeley by a grin’), but in m, I It Is he who laughs at the sceptics. 

10. this day we celebrate, rovror rv xaipév. Apparently the Chanukah festival, for which see § 7 ad finem. 
Even if this treatise is not a synagogue sermon (see § 1) it may very well have been given as a lecture on the anniver- 
sary of the martyrs. Ane welds eee ne posh two verses lower down, clearly imply that the author is speaking to 

ience that he had often addressed beiore. 
ee ary purified. The spirit roused by the martyrs led_to the rising headed by Judas Maccabaeus and 
his brethren, and so was the effectual cause of the Temple being purified and its service re-established. kabapio Ojvac 
refers not only to the cleansing of the Jews from the national sin of apostasy, but to the cleansing of the Temple itself 
after Zeus Olympius had been worshipped there and swine offered upon the altar. 

12. giving glory, ddfav SiSovs. Perhaps the one Hebraism in the whole book. 


667 


22 


31 


a 


THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES J. 16-35 


16 clear deliberation the life of wisdom. Wisdom I take to be the knowledge of things, divine and 
17 human, and of their causes. This I take to be the culture acquired under the Law, through which 
we learn with due reverence the things of God and for our worldly profit the things of man. 
18 Now wisdom is manifested under the forms of judgement and justice, and courage, and temper- 
tg ance. But judgement or self-control is the one that dominates them all, for through it, in truth, 
20 Reason asserts its authority over the passions. But of the passions there are two comprehensive 
sources, namely, pleasure and pain, and either belongs essentially also to the soul as well as to the 
21 body. And with respect both to pleasure and pain there are many cases where the passions have 
23 certain sequences. Thus while desire goes before pleasure, satisfaction follows after, and while fear 
24 goes before pain, after pain comes sorrow. Anger, again, if a man will retrace the course of his 
25 feelings, is a passion in which are blended both pleasure and pain. Under pleasute, also, comes 
26 that moral debasement which exhibits the widest variety of the passions. It manifests itself in 
27 the soul as ostentation, and covetousness, and vain-glory, and contentiousness, and backbiting, 
and in the body as eating of strange meat, and gluttony, and gormandizing in secret. 
28 Now pleasure and pain being as it were two trees, growing from body and soul, many offshoots of 
29 these passions sprout up; and each man’s Reason as master-gardener, weeding and pruning and 
binding up, and turning on the water and directing it hither and thither, brings the thicket of 
30 dispositions and passions under domestication. For while Reason is the guide of the virtues it is 
master of the passions. 
Observe, now, in the first place, that Reason becomes supreme over the passions in virtue of the 
32 inhibitory action of temperance. Temperance, I take it, is the repression of the desires; but of the 
33 desires some are mental and some physical, and both kinds are Clearly controlled by Reason; when 
we are tempted towards forbidden meats, how do we come to relinquish the pleasures to be derived 
from them? Is it not that Reason has power to repress the appetites? In my opinion it is so. 
34 4\ccordingly when we feel a desire to eat water-animals and birds and beasts and meats of every 
35 description forbidden to us under the Law, we abstain through the predominance of Reason. For 
the propensions of our appetites are checked and inhibited by the temperate mind, and all the 
movements of the body obey the bridle of Reason. 


15. opGov Noyou N V cod.as Buoy & coor Prov V 35. piwovrae N V 

15. clear deliberation. ’*Opéds déyos, which here I render by ‘clear deliberation’, is a regular philcsophic term. 
Stobaeus (Z¢/. ii. 192) gives as the Stoic dogma the statement that 6 vopos Was omovdaios, i.e. on the side of the ‘elect’, 
seeing that it is Adyos dpOds, ‘right reason’, enjoining what should be done and forbidding what should not be done ; 
but here the Jew parts company. For him véuos means neither the man-made law of any Greek State, nor the kouvds 
vowos, the Universal Law of the philosophers; but the Law of Moses which is the Law of his God. The Jewish 
moralist may rejoice in the acute intellectual analysis of the Greek mind; but no Greek standard of religious duty for 
him! He will traffic willingly with the Greek for intellectual wares, but when it comes to the moral sense he will pray 
in another temple. 

16. the knowledge of things. Plutarch in Plac. Phd. i. 1 has this, of wey ody Srackol &pacay Thy pev codiay eivat 
Gciwy re Kai dvOperiver éntornunv, the exact phrase we have here with the exception of yrdous for émornun. 

20. the passions. With this analysis of the an compare Stobaeus, EZ. ii. [166], where he explains the Stoic 
position :—mpara & eiva to yevet Tadra Ta Téocapa, embupiay pdBov Avmny HOovyv. emOupiav pev ody xa poBov mponyeic Oat, 


THY pev Tpds Td Hawdpevov dyabdy, thv O€ mpos TO hatyduevov Kakéy. emytyvea Oat d€ Tovrous Sovhy Ka Aomny, HSovny pev Srav 
TvyxXdvepev Gv emiOvpodpev 7) exptyopuer & epoBotpeba, Nimny Sé drav droruyxdvopev Oy emOupovpev 7 TEpiTeg@pev ois 
epoBotpeba. Similarly Diogenes Laertius says (vii. 110) rav O€ maddy ra avetdto, cada pnow ‘Exdrov ép 7@ Oevtépw srepi 
mabey Kat Zhvev ev tO wept mabdv, eivat yern térrapa, Ninny, PoBor, emOvpiav, HSovyr. 

With regard to dxodov@ia: compare this passage from Huxley, which will be found in the peroration of his work on 
Hume and Berkeley, Collected Essays, vi. 318: ‘Our sensations, our pleasures, our pains, and the relations of these, 
make up the sum total of the elements of positive unquestionable knowledge. We call a large section of these and 
their relations matter and motion ; the rest we term mind and thinking; and experience shows that there is a certain 
constant order of succession between some of the former and some of the latter.’ The words underlined exactly 
express axodovOiat. Our author makes the maOn cover the whole range of the emotions and affections, and includes 
under this head our weaknesses and moral defects generally. Among us the word passion generally has a more 
limited connotation. Grimm says that the Stoic view was that the 746y are bad in themselves and belong to the Adyos 
movnpés, but that the author of Fourth Maccabees holds that the ma0y are part of human nature implanted by the 
Creator, and as such require to be controlled but not extirpated. 

27. gormandizing. Compare with this Job xxxi, 17 €f 0€ Kat Tov oud pov épayor pdvos Kal ovxt dppavd perédoxa. 

Aristophanes in the Wasps, 923, has the comic superlative povopayiaratos—‘ the very greedydoggest chap of all.’ 

By the transposition of » and » the scribe in some MSS. has made the word into voudpayos, which should mean 
an eater of laws (swallower of formulae !) if it means anything—a nonsensical error which was corrected by Grabe 
only to be foolishly restored to the text of the 1817 edition by a certain careless man whom Dr. Field holds up to 
scorn, 

29. turning on the water. éndpdw» is leading the water on from the aceguda madre or main irrigating ditch; the 
work is well described in the Airs¢ Georgic, 108 ‘Ecce supercilio clivosi tramitis undam Elicit’, &c. perayéav is 
turning the water from one water-furrow to another so as to irrigate the separate squares or plots. I can find no 
authority for the meaning ‘ transplanting ’ which has been given to it, though it makes good enough sense. 


668 





Mie! OURTTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 2. 1—8.'5 


21 _ And what is there to be surprised at if the natural desire of the soul to enjoy the fruition of beauty 
2is quenched? This, certainly, is why we praise the virtuous Joseph, because by his Reason, with a 
3 mental effort, he checked the carnal impulse. For he, a young man at the age when physical desire 
4 is strong, by his Reason quenched the impulse of his passions. And Reason is proved to subdue the 
5 impulse not only of sexual desire, but of all sorts of covetings. For the Law says, ‘Thou shalt not 
6 covet thy neighbour’s wife, nor anything that is thy neighbour’s.’ Verily, when the Law orders us 

not to covet, it should, I think, confirm strongly the argument that the Reason is capable of 
controlling covetous desires, even as it does the passions that militate against justice. 
> How else can a man, naturally gormandizing and greedy and drunken, be taught to change his 
8 nature, if the Reason be not manifestly the master of the passions? Certainly, as soon as a man 
orders his life according to the Law, if he is miserly he acts contrary to his nature,and lends money 
9 to the needy without interest, and at the seventh-year periods cancels the debt. And if he is par- 
simonious, he is overruled by the Law through the action of Reason, and refrains from gleaning his 
stubbles or picking the last grapes from his vineyards. 
And with regard to all the rest we can recognize that Reason is in the position of master over 
10 the passions or affections. For the Law ranks above affection for parents, so that a man may not 
t1 for their sakes surrender his virtue, and it overrides love for a wife, so that if she transgress a man 
12 should rebuke her, and it governs love for children, so that if they are naughty a man should punish 
them, and it controls the claims of friendship, so that a man should reprove his friends if they do 
13 evil. And do not think it a paradoxical thing when Reason through the Law is able to overcome 
14 even hatred, so that a man refrains from cutting down the enemy’s orchards, and protects the 
property of the enemy from the spoilers, and gathers up their goods that have been scattered. 
15 And the rule of Reason is likewise proved to extend through the more aggressive passions or 
16 vices, ambition, vanity, ostentation, pride, and backbiting. For the temperate mind repels all these 
17 debased passions, even as it does anger, for it conquers even this. Yea, Moses when he was angered 
against Dathan and Abiram did not give free course to his wrath, but governed his anger by his 
18 Reason. For the temperate mind is able, as I said, to win the victory over the passions, modifying 
19 some, while crushing others absolutely. Why else did our wise father Jacob blame the houses of 
Simeon and Levi for their unreasoning slaughter of the tribe of the Shechemites, saying, ‘ Ac- 
20 cursed be their anger!’ For had not Reason possessed the power to restrain their anger he would 
21 not have spoken thus. For in the day when God created man, he implanted in him his passions 
22 and inclinations, and also, at the very same time, set the mind on a throne amidst the senses to be 
23 his sacred guide in all things; and to the mind he gave the Law, by the which if a man order himself, 
he shall reign over a kingdom that is temperate, and just, and virtuous, and brave. 
24 Well then, some one may ask, if Reason is master of the passions why is it not master of forget- 

3 x fulness and ignorance? But the argument is supremely ridiculous. For Reason is not shown to be 

2 master over passions or defecés in itself, but over those of the body. For example, none of you is 
able to extirpate our natural desire, but the Reason can enable him to escape being made a slave by 
3 desire. None of you is able to extirpate anger from the soul, but it is possible for the Reason to 
4 come to his aid against anger. None of you can extirpate a malevolent disposition, but Reason can 
5 be his powerful ally against being swayed by malevolence. Reason is not the extirpator of the 
passions, but their antagonist. 


Il. 8. evoracay S V III. 3. +rov Aoy:cpoy 8 V 





Il. 8. at the seventh-year periods. The reading évracowy, which is that of A, and accordingly is retained by 
Swete, is supported by the Syriac version, which Bensly renders as follows: ‘So he reckoneth by the weeks and 
forgiveth part of that which is due tohim.’ But there is no MS. authority in the Greek for the insertion of the words 
‘ part of’, without which evtdccwr yields very poor sense. And even if we admit “part of’, how can reckoning by the 
weeks be supposed to reduce the debt? The Strassburg Bible of 1526 has the more intelligible reading ¢vorac@y, which 
must mean the seventh-year period of release. This reading is followed by Lloyd (1590) and many others. Lloyd 
translated the passage thus: ‘Cum primum igitur quis (? quisquis) ad Legis praescriptum vivit, si avaro fuerit ac 
sordido ingenio, suis vim adhibere moribus cogitur, ut tenuioribus sine foenore mutuet; atque imminentibus iam 
septimanis mutuum amittat.’ And Lloyd is followed by Hudson (1720), who also reads évorag@y and translates ‘ut 
imminentibus iam septimanis mutuum amittat’. The version of Deissmann, who likewise reads évoragGy, runs, *‘ He 
lends to the needy without interest, although (in the future) when the seventh year comes he even loses the capital he 
has lent’ This reading évorac@y is also supported by the fact that it does certainly correspond very closely with the 
Law as stated in Deut. xv. 9: Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying, The seventh year, the 
year of release, is at hand ; and thine eye be evil against thy poor brother, and thou givest him nought.’ 

22. his sacred guide. As an instance of the Stoic terminology of this book I give the following passage from 
A. C. Pearson’s Fragments of Zeno and Cleanthes, p. 142, where he quotes from Nemes. de Nat. Hom., p. 96 Zivev de 
6 Sreukos dkrapepy pyow elvar thy Wuxny, Statpov avrny cis TE TO ipyepoveKov kal eis Tas mevre aicOnoeis kal eis 70 ovat iKov kal 
ro omeppatexdy. And Diog. Laert. vii. 52 has this: ato Onous dé héyera kara Tors Sraixovs 7d 7 a! yyemovKov mvevpa emt 
ras alcOnoets SujKov . . . Kat) wept Ta aio @nripia KaTacKeEun. 


669 


THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 3. 6—4. 10 


6.7 The case of the thirst of King David may serve at least to make this clearer. For when David 

had fought the live-long day against the Philistines, and by the help of our country’s warriors had 
8 slain many of them, he came at eventide, all fordone with sweat and toil, to the royal tent, around 
9 which was encamped the whole army of our ancestors. So all the host fell to their evening meal; 
ro but the king, being consumed with an intense thirst, though he had abundance of water, was 

11 unable to slake it. Instead, an irrational desire for the water that was in the possession of the 

12 enemy with growing intensity burned him up and unmanned and consumed him. Then when his 
body-guard murmured against the craving of the king, two youths, mighty warriors, ashamed that 
their king should lack his desire, put on all their armour, and took a water-vessel, and scaled the 

13 enemy's ramparts; and stealing undetected past the guards at the gate, they searched through 

14 all the enemy’s camp. And they bravely found the spring, and drew from it a draught for the 

15 king. But David, though still burning with the thirst, considered that such a draught, reckoned 

16 as equivalent to blood, was a grievous danger to his soul. Therefore, opposing his Reason to his 

17 desire, he poured out the water as an offering to God. For the temperate mind is able to conquer 

18 the dictates of the passions, and to quench the fires of desire, and to wrestle Victoriously with the 
pangs of our bodies though they be exceeding strong, and by the moral beauty and goodness 

19 of Reason to defy with scorn all the domination of the passions. And now the occasion calls us to 
set forth the story of the self-controlled Reason. 

zo Ata time when our fathers enjoyed great peace through the due observance of the Law, and were 
in happy case, so that Seleucus Nicanor, the king of Asia, sanctioned the tax for the temple-service, 

21 and recognized our polity, precisely then, certain men, acting factiously against the general concord, 

4 ; involved us in many and various calamities. Onias, a man of the highest character, being then 
high priest and having the office for his life, a certain Simon raised a faction against him, but since 
despite every kind of slander he failed to injure him on account of the people, he fled abroad with 
intent to betray his country. 

2,3 So he came to Apollonius, the governor of Syria and Phoenicia and Cilicia, and said, ‘ Being 
loyal to the king, I am here to inform you that in the treasuries of Jerusalem are stored many 
thousands of private deposits, not belonging to the temple account, and rightfully the property of 
King Seleucus.’ 

4 Apollonius, having made inquiry into the details of the matter, praised Simon for his loyal 
service to the king, and hastening to the court of Seleucus, disclosed to him the valuable treasure ; 
5 then, after receiving authority to deal with the matter, he promptly marched into our country, 
6 accompanied by the accursed Simon and a very powerful army, and announced that he was there 
7 by the king’s command to take possession of the private deposits in the treasury. Our people 
were deeply angered by this announcement, and protested strongly, considering it an outrageous 
thing for those who had entrusted their deposits to the temple treasury to be robbed of them, and 

8 they threw all possible obstacles in his way. Apollonius, however, with threats, made his way into 
9 the temple. Then the priests in the temple and the women and children besought God to come to 
to the rescue of his Holy Place that was being violated; and when Apollonius with his armed host 
marched in to seize the moneys, there appeared from heaven angels, riding upon horses, with lightning 


14. eyeuwoay is supported by the Syriac 18. 77 Kahoxayabia 8 V IV. 8. aredov & Q. Tov tepov N V 





12. two youths. The author’s story of David’s thirst and the water that he poured out like blood upon the 
ground differs materially from that told in 2 Sam. xxiii. 16 ff. and 1 Chron. xi. 11. Here the feat is performed by two 
young soldiers who scour the whole Philistine camp (which lies in a place whose name is not given) in order to find 
the spring. In the O.T. the heroes are three chiefs of David’s mighty men, apparently Jashobeam, Eleazar, and 
Shammah, though there is some uncertainty about the names. The action takes place at Bethlehem and the well is 
close to the gate, neither have they any special difficulty in finding it. The author does not use, perhaps he even 
avoids, the actual phraseology of the LXX, except only that in reference to David’s action he employs the words 
éemOupia and éoreoev. Either his Bible differed materially from ours, or else he allowed himself considerable latitude 
in handling the incident. The latter seems probable, and this should be borne in mind when considering the various 
points on which he differs from the writer of 2 Maccabees. 

20. Seleucus Nicanor. op Nixdvopa. Perhaps we should here read with V tov Nikdvopos, ‘the descendant of 
Nicanor’, he being the one of Alexander’s generals who founded the Seleucid dynasty. The king who is here meant 
was his sixth successor, Seleucus IV (Philopator), son of Antiochus III (the Great), and elder brother of his own 
successor Antiochus IV (Epiphanes). He reigned first as associated with his father and shared his defeat by Rome, 
and after 187 B.c. he reigned as sole king till he was murdered by Heliodorus in 176-5. Seleucus IV wasted little 
money in wars and left a full treasury. The words Xejpara xtAX. may mean that he assigned part of the state revenues 
to the Temple service, or that he sanctioned the exaction of the regular Temple tax, the annual half-shekel which the 
Jews, not in Palestine only but ini all Parts, were expected to pay to the priests. The authority for this tax was derived 
from Moses’ Law, Exod. xxx. 12, 2 Chron. xxiv. 6. After the Captivity it was reduced to a third, in consequence of the 
rise in values and the poverty of the people; but it was raised again to half a shekel by Simon the Maccabee. The 
expression Tv moXurelay drodéxerOat indicates that the king recognized the Jewish form of government which prevailed 
after the Return, that is to Say, a theocracy under which the high-priest was also the chief ruler of the State. 


‘670 


THE FOURTH BOOK ‘OF MACCABEES ‘4, 11:-—5, 2 


11 flashing from their arms, and cast great fear and trembling upon them. And Apollonius fell down 
half-dead in the Court of the Gentiles, and stretched out his hands to heaven, and with tears he 
entreated the Hebrews that they would make intercession for him and stay the wrath of the heavenly 

12 host. -For he said that he had sinned and was worthy even of death, and that if he were given his 

13 life he would laud to all men the blessedness of the Holy Place. Moved by these words, Onias, the 
high-priest, although most scrupulous in other cases, made intercession for him lest King Seleucus 
should possibly think that Apollonius had been overthrown by a human device and not by divine 

14 justice. Apollonius, accordingly, after his astonishing deliverance departed to report to the king the 

15 things that had befallen him. But Seleucus dying, his successor on the throne was his son Antiochus 

16 Epiphanes, an overweening terrible man; who dismissed Onias from his sacred office, and made his 

17 brother Jason high-priest instead, the condition being that in return for the appointment Jason should 

18 pay him three thousand six hundred and sixty talents yearly. So he appointed Jason high-priest and 

tg made him chief ruler over the people. And he (¥asoz) introduced to our people a new way of life 

20 and a new constitution in utter defiance of the Law; so that not only did he lay out a gymnasium 

21 on the Mount of our fathers, but he actually abolished the service of the temple. Wherefore the 

22 divine justice was kindled to anger and brought Antiochus himself as an enemy against us. For 
when he was carrying on war with Ptolemy in Egypt and heard that the people of Jerusalem had 

23 rejoiced exceedingly over a report of his death, he immediately marched back against them. And 
when he had plundered che city he made a decree denouncing the penalty of death upon any who 

24 should be seen to live after the Law of our fathers. But he found all his decrees of no avail to 
break down the constancy of our people to the Law, and he beheld all his threats and penalties 

2; utterly despised, so that even women for circumcising their sons, though they knew beforehand 

26 what would be their fate, were flung, together with their offspring, headlong from the rocks. When 
therefore his decrees continued to be contemned by the mass of the people, he personally tried to 
force by tortures each man separately to eat unclean meats and thus abjure the Jewish religion. _ 

51 Accordingly, the tyrant Antiochus, accompanied by his councillors, sat in judgement on a certain 

2 high place with his troops drawn up around him in full armour, and he ordered his guards to drag 


19. e€edtntnoey NV Syr. 21. erohepwoey 24. evvopiay SV Syr. 





IV. 13. most scrupulous. I have followed Grimm’s rendering, but it here may be noted that evAdBeta, caution, is 
the regular philosophical term for the useful side of the passion which in excess becomes fear. If we take it in the 
latter sense, dAXws e?AaBnOeis would mean that Onias was so much alarmed as to the possible effect on King 
Seleucus that on this occasion he swallowed his repugnance and offered the prayer. In 2 Macc., where the story is 
told at much greater length, and where the offender is called Heliodorus not Apollonius, Onias not only prays but 
also offers sacrifice ‘as an atonement for the man’. Poor Onias seems to have been a lover of peace, nevertheless 
he was, after his retirement, murdered at Antioch by Menelaus, the usurping high-priest who outbid and ousted Jason. 

15. his son, vids. An extraordinary mistake for brother, but the MSS. leave no doubt that the author made it. 
Antiochus Epiphanes was a curious mixture. Like the rest of the Seleucid House he was of mixed Persian and 
Macedonian blood, and his education, half Greek, half Roman, was no less mixed, for he spent his childhood at the 
Graeco-Syrian court, and his boyhood at Rome, where he became a hostage for his father on his defeat. Released 
after his father’s death, he played as a young man at being a citizen and an elected official of Athens, keeping his eye 
all the time on the Syrian throne. Then came the murder of his brother Seleucus by Heliodorus, and Antiochus 
presently made his bid for the kingdom and won. Thenceforth he reigned with a sort of insane energy, acting as the 
militant missionary of Hellenism in the East, and backing up his mission with wayward freakishness. _ While planting 
gorgeous new temples and new Antiochs everywhere, he took advantage of his audacious title of cos Enuavys, the 
Manifest God, to assert his right to plunder remorselessly the already existing temples in order that their treasures 
might support his extravagances. His looting of the Temple at Jerusalem was but one instance out of many, and it 
was the failure of his attempt on the shrine of Ishtar at Elymais that brought about his doom. 

22. war with Ptolemy. Antiochus made several campaigns against Ptolemy and succeeded in conquering the 
whole of Egypt with the single exception of Alexandria, to which he actually laid siege. But he had sear wien 
Rome, who disapproved of his ambitions, and having finished the Macedonian war had got her hands free at last. 
Antiochus was watching the siege when he saw a small party of Romans who had just landed approaching him. He 
recognized their leader, a consular, Pompilius Laenas, whom he had known as a boy in Rome, and held out his hand 
in greeting. Pompilius took no notice of the offered hand, but presented a note from the senate desiring ae to 
quit Egypt. The Syrian king looked at it, and said lightly, ‘I will consider it with my friends. sees es ¥ in 
his hand a vine-stick, a thing as characteristic of a Roman officer as the sjambok was of a Boer comman e e drew 
a circle in the sand with it round the king. ‘Consider there, he said. Antiochus paused, hesitated, an aoe still 
inside the circle, said, ‘The senate shall be obeyed.’ His hand was instantly grasped by Pompilius, and they were 
the best of friends. Having accepted the situation Antiochus withdrew his armies from Egypt, but. Pete eee 
with the Jews, as related in the text, he relieved his feelings by the sack of Jerusalem and the persecution of the Jews. 


V. 1. acertain high place. Tradition varies as to the scene of the martyrdoms. In Maccabees there is nothing 
to indicate that they took place anywhere except at Jerusalem. The early Church, however, nele ve place to nes 
been Antioch, and a basilica was erected there in the martyrs’ honour. For the transfer of the relics from Antioch to 
Milan and Cologne, see § 8. The relics are said now to be in Rome. 


671 


THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 5; 2-2, 


there every single man of the Hebrews and compel them to eat swine’s flesh and things offered to 

3 idols; but if any should refuse to defile themselves with the unclean things, they were to be tortured 

4and put to death. And when many had been taken by force, one man first from among the 
company was brought before Antiochus, a Hebrew whose name was Eleazar, a priest by birth, 
trained in knowledge of the law, a man advanced in years and well known to many of the tyrant’s 
court for his philosophy. 

5 And Antiochus, looking on him, said: 

6 ‘Before I allow the tortures to begin for you, O venerable man,I would give you this counsel, that 
you should eat of the flesh of the swine and save your life; for I respect your age and your grey 
hairs, although to have worn them so long a time, and still to cling to the Jewish religion, makes me 

7 think you no philosopher. For most excellent is the meat of this animal which Nature has graciously 

8 bestowed upon us, and why should you abominate it? Truly it is folly not to enjoy innocent 

9 pleasures, and it is wrong to reject Nature’s favours. But it will be still greater folly, I think, on 
your part if with idle vapouring about truth you shall proceed to defy even me to your own punish- 

to, rr ment. Will you not awake from your preposterous philosophy? Will you not fling aside the non- 
sense of your calculations and, adopting another frame of mind befitting your mature years, learn the 
12 true philosophy of expediency, and bow to my charitable counsel, and have pity on your own 

13 venerable age? For consider this, too, that even if there be some Power whose eye is upon this 
religion of yours, he will always pardon you for a transgression done under compulsion.’ 

14 Thus urged by the tyrant to the unlawful eating of unclean meat, Eleazar asked permission to 

15 speak ; and receiving it, he began his speech before the court as follows: 

16 ‘We,O Antiochus, having accepted the Divine Law as the Law of our country, do not believe any 
stronger necessity is laid upon us than that of our obedience to the Law. 

17,18 ‘Therefore we do surely deem it right not in any way whatsoever to transgress the Law. And yet, 
were our Law, as you suggest, not truly divine, while we vainly believed it to be divine, not even so 

19 would it be right for us to destroy our reputation for piety. Think it not, then, a small sin for us 

20 to eat the unclean thing, for the transgression of the Law, be it in small things or in great, is equally 

21,22heinous; for in either case equally the Law is despised. And you scoff at our philosophy, as 

23 if under it we were living in a manner contrary to reason. Not so, for the Law teaches us self- 
control, so that we are masters of all our pleasures and desires and are thoroughly trained in manli- 

24 ness so as to endure all pain with readiness; and it teaches justice, so that with all our various dis- 
positions we act fairly, and it teaches righteousness, so that with due reverence we worship only the 

25 God whois. Therefore do we eat no unclean meat ; for believing our Law to be given by God, we know 


V. 4. pirocodiay V Il. trav Aoywopov N 24. exdidacker N 





4. advanced in years. According to 2 Macc. he was ninety. Prof. Kraus in the Jewish Encyclopaedia has this 
interesting note on him: ‘Cardinal Rampolla’s investigations have proved the historical character of the account 
despite the fact that while the seven martyrs are mentioned in rabbinical legend, Eleazar seems to be unknown to the 
Rabbis (AZartyre e¢ Sépulture des Macchabées, Bruges, 1900). Gratz had already declared it to be substantially true 
(Geschichte, 2nd ed., ii. 317). Hertzfeld’s supposition (Geschichte des Volkes Isratl, ii. 75) that Eleazar is identical with 
Eleazar ben Harsom is untenable.’ 

5. And Antiochus...said. The author adopts the usual ancient practice of making up speeches for his characters 
a practice too common to call for comment. In some cases the speeches must have been invented from beginning to 
end ; in others they doubtless contain actual phrases worked into their text which had been used by the speaker in 
whose mouth they are put. Such, interweavings of truth and fiction are well known as occurring, to take the most 
obvious case, in Shakespeare’s historical plays; and, to come down to our own day, I have seen in America a popular 
biography of so great a man as Abraham Lincoln which purported to report verbatim long conversations of his 
suitable indeed to the circumstances but unquestionably invented. It is hard to be sure that even the shortest phrase 
is truly recorded in history. I think I have seen four or five different accounts both in Greek and Latin of the scene 
outside Alexandria between Antiochus and Pompilius Laenas (see on iv. 22, note), where scarcely a dozen words were 
spoken between the two men, but I cannot remember that any two of the reports can be said to coincide, or even to 
approach it. So at Waterloo ; what was the word that Cambronne used? or did the Duke ever say, ‘ Up guards and 
at them,’ or anything of the sort? We must make the best of our history as we have it. 

,20, equally heinous. This is a well-known doctrine of the Stoics. Stobaeus (Eth, ii. 218) says toa te wdvra 
eyovow cat ra duaprnpara, otk eri 8 duo. And he goes on to explain how a lie is always a lie «at Guapravew dé 
a a NTTOY OK EoTL, TaTaY yap dyapriay Kara dudevow mpatresOa. Horace in the Satires makes fun of the idea 

a Tht st)) & 

“It never can be an equivalent crime 
To crib the cheap cabbage and plunder the shrine,’ 
Zeno himself 1s quoted as the original authority for it by Diog. Laert. vii. 120 dpécxe re abrois toa yyeiobar ra 
apaptnuata Kaba dno Zyvev. With these pronouncements of the Stoics we may compare James li. lo: ‘For whosoever 
shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. St. James was the most Jewish of the 
apostles, and the idea which to us seems so strained was not less familiar to the Jew than to the Greek. 


672 


7) 


fr POUR? BOOK OF MACCABEES 5. 26—6. 17 


26 also that the Creator of the world, as a Lawgiver, feels for us according to our nature. He has 
commanded us to eat the things that will be convenient for our souls, and he has forbidden us to 
27 eat meats that would be the contrary. But it is the act of a tyrant that you should compel us not 
only to transgress the Law, but should also make us eat in such manner that you may mock at this 


, 29 defilement so utterly abominable to us. But you shall not mock at me thus, neither will I break the 


30 sacred oaths of my ancestors to keep the Law, not even though you tear out mine eyes and burn out 
31 mine entrails. I am not so unmanned by old age but that when righteousness is at stake the strength 
33 of youth returns tomy Reason. So twist hard your racks and blow your furnace hotter. I do not so 
34 pity mine old age as to break the Law of my fathers in mine own person. I will not belie thee, O Law 
35 that wast my teacher ; I will not desert thee, O beloved self-control ; I will not put thee to shame, 

O wisdom-loving Reason, nor will I deny ye, O venerated priesthood and knowledge of the Law. 
36 Neither shalt thou sully the pure mouth of mine old age and my lifelong constancy to the Law. 


37, 38 Clean shall my fathers receive me, unafraid of thy torments even to the death. For thou indeed 


mayest be tyrant over unrighteous men, but thou shalt not lord it over my resolution in the matter 
of righteousness either by thy words or through thy deeds.’ 

But when Eleazar replied thus eloquently to the exhortations of the tyrant, the guards around 
him dragged him roughly to the torturing place. And first they unclothed the old man, who was 
adorned with the beauty of holiness. Then binding his arms on either side they scourged him, 
a herald standing and shouting out over against him, ‘Obey the orders of the king!’ But the 
great-souled and noble man, an Eleazar in very truth, was no more moved in his mind than if he 
were being tormented in a dream; yea, the old man keeping his eyes steadfastly raised to heaven 
suffered his flesh to be torn by the scourges till he was bathed in blood and his sides became a mass 

7 of wounds; and even when he fell to the ground because his body could no longer support the 
8 pain he still kept his Reason erect and inflexible. With his foot then one of the cruel guards as 
9 he fell kicked him savagely in the side to make him get up. But he endured the anguish, and 
10 despised the compulsion, and bore up under the torments, and like a brave athlete taking punishment, 
11 the old man outwore his tormentors. The sweat stood on his brow, and he drew his breath in hard 
12 gasps, till his nobility of soul extorted the admiration of his tormentors themselves. Hereupon, 
13 partly in pity for his old age, partly in sympathy for their friend, partly in admiration of his courage, 
14 some of the courtiers of the king went up to him and said: ‘ Why, O Eleazar, dost thou madly 
15 destroy thyself in this misery? We will bring to thee of the seethed meats, but do thou feign 
only to partake of the swine’s flesh, and so save thyself.’ 


o1 ww N A 


an 


16,17 And Eleazar, as if their counsel did but add to his tortures, cried loudly: ‘No. May we sons of 


Abraham never have so evil a thought as with faint heart to counterfeit a part unseemly to us. 


II. evuxia S 


26. according to our nature. The Rabbis explained these commands to abstain from unclean food in the 
following way : ‘These commands were given with the highest of all objects—for the sake of the purity which obedience 
to them imparts to the moral life.’ And again: ‘ The ideal Jew does not say, “I have no desire to eat swine’s flesh, 
no desire to indulge in any sensual cravings ; I desire, but I will conquer the desire for the sake of my Father which 
is in Heaven”’’ (Oesterley and Box, Synagogue Religion and Worship, p. 412). Of course anthropologists explain such 
matters as taboos, probably based on a primitive totemism. ; 

38. through thy deeds. Before we begin the dreadful story of the martyrdoms I would like to recall the words 
of Heine, the emancipated Jew, who from his mattress-grave tilted against Destiny with a sardonic humour that often 
mocked both himself and his race. ‘If suffering ennobles,’ he says, “then has Israel attained the highest rank.’ And if 
the Jewish refusal to eat swine’s fiesh seems a trivial cause for which to endure death in torments, let me also quote 
here these words of a yet more recent writer: ‘There is no idea so ridiculous and outlandish but that some one has 
sone to the stake for it. Thousands have died for the Crescent as for the Cross, for the Synagogue as for the Church, 
for heresy as for orthodoxy, for undistinguishable shades of opinion about beliefs which were wholly false, for tyranny 
as for liberty, for anarchy as for order——faithful unto death for the truth that was no truth, doing loyal service to 
detestable masters, wasting heroism in the service of poltroons. Yet by such have the great human virtues of constancy 
and loyalty been established ; and if not martyrs for the truth, they are witnesses to the best in man—his fantastic 


chivalry and contempt for death, when once an idea has laid hold of his imagination.’ 


VI. 5. Eleazar. This name means ‘God help’. As to his defiance of torture let me quote the following passage 
from Pearson’s Fragments oy Zeno and Cleanthes, p. 214: : The Indian philosophers are said to, have used 
these words to Alexander: capara pev perd§ers ex tdrou eis rémov, uxas &° nperépas ovK dvayxdoets Tovey a ja Bovdépeba. 
nip avOporas péytoTov KodaoTnptor, TOUTOV pets Karappovouper. umilarly Philo, in telling the same story (Quod omnis 
probus sit liber, p. 879), has this: tp peytorous tots (@o. copacr movous Kat Oopav seyiberdhs Nae ae ee 
ywopeba, Cavtes Katdpeda. Other historians attest the custom of burning themselves alive, which is sal we ave been 
practised by the Brahmans. Strabo, xv. 1.65, says aia xiorov 8 abrois vopiver Oat yooov copatikyy’ Tov O vmovoncavta 
Kal’ abrov rodro ekdyew Kabioayra émi thy mupay vpdrat kehevetv, dxivyr ov d€ Kaleo Oat. : “4 A 

1c. We will bring. In 2 Macc. vi. 21 they beseech him ‘to bring flesh of his own provision, suc | as was 
lawful for him to use, and make as if he did eat of the flesh taken from the sacrifice commanded by the king’. 


673 Xx 


1105.2 


31; 


THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 6973-717 


18 Contrary to Reason, indeed, were it for us, after living unto the truth till old age, and guarding in 
19 lawful guise the repute of so living, now to change and become in our own persons a pattern to 
20 the young of impiety, to the end that we should encourage them to eat unclean meat. Shame were 
21 it if we should live on a little longer, during that little being mocked of all men for cowardice, and 
22 while despised by the tyrant as unmanly should fail to defend the Divine Law unto the death. There- 
23 fore,O sons of Abraham, do ye die nobly for righteousness’ sake ; but as for you, O minions of the 
tyrant, why pause ye in your work ?’ / ; 
24 Bes ey, aes cha triumphant over the tortures and unmoved even by the pity of his 
25 executioners, dragged him to the fire. There they cast him on it, burning him with cruelly cunning 
26 devices, and they poured broth of evil odour into his nostrils. But when the fire already reached 
27 to his bones and he was about to give up the ghost, he lifted up his eyes to God and said, ‘Thou, 
28 O God, knowest that though I might save myself I am dying by fiery torments for thy Law. Be 
29 merciful unto thy people, and let our punishment be a satisfaction in their behalf. Make my blood 
their purification, and take my soul to ransom their souls.’ * 
30 And with these words the holy man nobly yielded up his spirit under the torture, and for the 
sake of the Law held out by his Reason even against the torments unto death, 
32 Beyond question, then, the Inspired Reason is master over the passions ; for if his passions or 
sufferings had prevailed over his Reason we should have credited them with this evidence of their 
33 Superior power. But now his Reason having conquered his passions, we properly attribute to it 
34 the power of commanding them. And it is right that we should admit that the mastery lies with 
35 Reason, in cases at least where it conquers pains that come from outside ourselves ; for it were 
ridiculous zo deny it. And my proof covers not only the superiority of Reason to pains, but its 
superiority to pleasures also; neither does it surrender to them. 
x For the Reason of our father Eleazar, like a fine steersman steering the ship of sanctity on the 
2 sea of the passions, though buffeted by the threats of the tyrant and swept by the swelling waves 
3 of the tortures, never shifted for one moment the helm of sanctity until he sailed into the haven of 
4 victory over death. No city besieged with many and cunning engines ever defended itself so well 
as did that holy man when his sacred soul was attacked with scourge and rack and flame, and he 
moved them who were laying siege zo his soul through his Reason that was the shield of sanctity. 
5 For our father Eleazar, setting his mind firm as a beetling sea-cliff, broke the mad onset of the 
6 surges of the passions. O priest worthy of thy priesthood, thou didst not defile thy holy teeth, 
7 nor didst thou befoul with unclean meat thy belly that had room only for piety and purity. O 
8 confessor of the Law and philosopher of the Divine life! Such should those be whose office is to 
serve the Law and defend it with their own blood and honourable sweat in the face of sufferings to 
g the death. Thou, O father, didst fortify our fidelity to the Law through thy steadfastness unto 
glory ; and having spoken in honour of holiness thou didst not belie thy speech, and didst confirm 
10 the words of divine philosophy by thy deeds, O aged man that wast more forceful than the tortures, 
O reverend elder that wast tenser-strung than the flame, thou great king over the passions, Eleazar. 
11 For as our father Aaron, armed with the censer, ran through the massed congregation against the 
12 fiery angel and overcame him, so the son of Aaron, Eleazar, being consumed by the melting heat of 
13 the fire, remained unshaken in his Reason. And yet most wonderful of all, he, being an old man, 
with the sinews of his body unstrung and his muscles relaxed and his nerves weakened, grew a young 
14 man again in the spirit of his Reason and with Isaac-like Reason turned the hydra-headed torture 
15 to impotence. O blessed age, O reverend grey head, O life faithful to the Law and perfected by 
the seal of death! 
16 Assuredly, then, if an old man despised the torments unto death for righteousness’ sake it must 
17 be admitted that the Inspired Reason is able to guide the passions. But some perhaps may answer 
that not all men are masters of the passions because not all men have their Reason enlightened. 


18. en avtwa & 24. weraBaddopevoyv & VII. 13. rover & Syr 





20. a little longer. There is a curiously close correspondence between these words and the counsel attributed by 
Stobaeus to Eusebius: ‘We ought not therefore for the sake of brief, uncertain, and transitory pleasure to choose 
great evils which endure for all time, and, in a life which is of the briefest, injure the after-life which is immensely long, 
nor yet, fearing a short pain, should we loose hold on great blessings which endure for all time and on the happiness 
of the immensely long life which comes after this world.’ £¢hica ii. 420. 

29. to ransom their souls. These remarkable words on the martyr’s death being taken as an atonement for the 
whole people are discussed in § 9. 

35. for it were ridiculous, émei Kal yeNoiop. Bensly translates the Syriac thus: ‘It is therefore ridiculous that 
a man should say, Reason does not rule, where we have shown that it overcame not only passions (sufferings) but also 
threats. Lloyd, whose reading is the same as that in our text, translates ‘nisi ridiculi esse velimus’. of eLwbev 
adynddves are the physical tortures as distinguished from of éSo6ev rédvor of xv. 29 and xviii. 2. 


674 


THE POURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES. 7. '18—8. 24 


18 But as many as with their whole heart make righteousness their first thought, these alone are able 

19 to master the weakness of the flesh, believing that unto God they die not, as ‘our patriarchs, Abra- 

20 ham and Isaac and Jacob, died not, but that they live unto God. Therefore there is nothing 
contradictory in certain persons appearing to be slaves to passion in consequence of the weakness of 

21 their Reason. For who is there that being a philosopher following righteously the whole rule of 

22 philosophy, and having put his trust in God, and knowing that it is a blessed thing to endure all 

23 hardness for the sake of virtue, would not conquer his passions for the sake of righteousness? For the 
wise and self-controlled man alone is the brave ruler of the passions. Yea, by this means even young 
boys, being philosophers by virtue of the Reason which is according to righteousness, have triumphed 
over yet more grievous tortures. 


8x For when the tyrant found himself notably defeated in his first attempt, and impotent to compel 


21> 


2 an old man to eat unclean meat, then truly in violent rage he ordered the guards to bring others of 
the young men of the Hebrews, and if they would eat unclean meat to release them after eating it, 
3 but if they refused, to torture them yet more savagely. And under these orders of the tyrant 
seven brethren together with their aged mother were brought prisoners before him, all handsome, 
4 and modest, and well-born, and generally attractive. And when the tyrant saw them there, standing 
as if they were a festal choir with their mother in the midst, he took notice of them, and struck by 
their noble and distinguished bearing he smiled at them, and calling them nearer said : 
‘O young men, I wish well to each one of you, and admire your beauty, and honour highly so 
large a band of brothers; so not only do I advise you not to persist in the madness of that old 
6 man’ who has already suffered, but I even entreat of you to yield to me and become partakers 
in my friendship. For, as I am able to punish those who disobey my orders, so am I able to 
7 advance those who do obey me. Be assured then that you shall be given positions of importance 
gand authority in my service if you will reject the ancestral law of your polity. Share in the 
9 Hellenic life, and walk in a new way, and take some pleasure in your youth; for if you drive 
me to anger with your disobedience you will compel me to resort to terrible penalties and put 
ro every single one of you to death by torture. Have pity then on yourselves, whom even J, your 
11 Opponent, pity for your youth and your beauty. Will you not consider with yourselves this 
thing, that if you disobey me there is nothing before you but death in torments?’ 
12 With these words he ordered the instruments of torture to be brought forward in order to per- 
13 suade them by fear to eat unclean meat. But when the guards had produced wheels, and joint- 
dislocators, and racks, and bone-crushers, and catapults, and chaldrons, and braziers, and thumb- 
14 screws, and iron claws, and wedges, and branding irons, the tyrant spoke again and said, ‘ You 
15 had better feel fear, my lads, and the Justice you worship will pardon your unwilling transgression ’. 
But they, hearing his persuasions, and seeing his dreadful engines, not only showed no fear 
but actually arrayed their philosophy in opposition to the tyrant, and by their right Reason did 
abase his tyranny. 
16 And yet consider ; supposing some amongst them to have been faint-hearted and cowardly, what 
sort of language would they have used? would it not have been to this effect ? 
17 ‘Alas! miserable creatures that we are and foolish above measure! When the king invites us 
18 and appeals to us on terms of kind treatment shall we not obey him? Why do we encourage our- 
rg selves with vain desires and dare a disobedience that is to cost us our lives? Shall we not,O men my 
brothers, fear the dread instruments and weigh well his threats of the tortures, and abandon these 
20 empty vaunts and this fatal bragging? Let us take pity on our own youth and have compassion on 
22 our mother’s age; and let us lay to heart that if we disobey we shall die. And even the divine 
23 justice will have mercy on us, if compelled by necessity we yield to the king in fear. Why should 
24 we cast away from us this dear life and rob ourselves of this sweet world? Let us not strive against 


VII. 19. they live unto God. These words on immortality are repeated in xvi. 25. The closest parallel is 
Mark xii. 26: ‘And as touching the dead, that they rise: have ye not read in the book of Moses, how in the bush God 
spake unto him, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? He is not the God 
of the dead, but the God of the living.’ 

See also § 9. 


VIII. 13. wheels, &c. Erasmus gives the horrid list in Latin thus : ‘Exhibentur itaque rotae, radii, ungulae, 
rotabula, catapultae, lebetes, catastae, frixoria, digitaria, pugillaria, manus ferreae, subulae, succensoria, ollae aeneae, 
sartago. Haec enim illis nomina esse reperimus. Succensorlum ad excitandam flammam quoddam tenue esse ferri 
telum accepimus. Exhibentur id genus reliqua nimis profecto abhorrenda, quae sigillatim enarrantem dies sit defe- 
cturus.’ Lloyd’s list is ‘ rotae, eculeus, fidiculae, uncl, catapultae, lebetes, sartagines, digitalia, manicae ferreae, cunei, et 
folles’. For myself I agree with the poet that artists in torture should be hoist with their own petard. 

‘, . . neque enim lex aequior ulla est 
Quam necis artifices arte perire sua.” 
675 xx 2 


THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACGABERS ¢i25-— 7a. 


25 necessity nor with vain confidence invite our torture. Even the Law itself does not willingly con- 
26 demn us to death, we being in terror of the instruments of torture. Why does such contentiousness 
inflame us and a fatal obstinacy find favour with us, when we might have a peaceful life by een 
27 the king?’ But no such words escaped these young men at the prospect of the torture, nor di 
28 such thoughts enter into their minds. For they were despisers of the passions and masters ee aie 
29 And thus no sooner did the tyrant conclude his urging of them to eat unclean meat than all wit 
~ one voice together, and as with one soul, said to him: 
‘Why dost thou delay, O tyrant? We are ready to die rather than transgress the command- 
ments of our fathers. For we should be putting our ancestors also to shame, if we did not walk in 
obedience to the Law and take Moses as our counsellor. O tyrant that counsellest us to transgress 
4 the Law, do not, hating us, pity us beyond ourselves. For we esteem thy mercy, giving us ie life 
5 in return for a breach of the Law, a thing harder to bear than death itself. Thou wouldst terrify us 
* with thy threats of death under torture, as if a little while ago thou hadst learned nothing from 
6 Eleazar. But if the old men of the Hebrews endured the tortures for righteousness’ sake, yea, until 
they died, more befittingly will we young men die despising the torments of thy compulsion, over 
; which he our aged teacher also triumphed. Make trial therefore, O tyrant. And if thou takest our 
g lives for the sake of righteousness, think not that thou hurtest us with thy tortures. For we through 
g this our evil entreatment and our endurance of it shall win the prize of virtue; but thou for our 
cruel murder shalt suffer at the hands of divine justice sufficient torment by fire for ever. 
1o These words of the youths redoubled the wrath of the tyrant, not at their disobedience only but 
11 at what he considered their ingratitude. So by his orders the scourgers brought forward the eldest 
of them and stripped him of his garment and bound his hands and arms on either side with thongs. 
12 But when they had scourged him till they were weary, and gained nothing thereby, they cast him 
13,14 upon the wheel. And on it the noble youth was racked till his bones were out of joint. And as 
joint after joint gave way, he denounced ¢he ¢yrant in these words: 
15 ‘O thou most abominable tyrant, thou enemy of the justice of heaven and bloody-minded, thou dost 
" torment me in this fashion not for manslaying nor for impiety but for defending the Law of God. 
16 And when the guards said to him, ‘Consent to eat, that so you may be released from your 
17 tortures, he said to them, ‘ Your method, O miserable minions, is not strong enough to lead captive 
18 my Reason. Cut off my limbs, and burn my flesh, and twist my joints; through all the torments I 
rg will show you that in behalf of virtue the sons of the Hebrews alone are unconquerable.’ As he thus 
spake they set hot coals upon him besides, and intensifying the torture strained him yet tighter on 
20 the wheel. And all the wheel was besmeared with his blood, and the heaped coals were quenched 
by the humours of his body dropping down, and the vent flesh ran round the axles of the machine. 
21 “And with his bodily frame already in dissolution this great-souled youth, like a true son of Abraham, 
22 groaned not at all; but as if he were suffering a change by fire to incorruption, he nobly endured 
23 the torment, saying, ‘Follow my example, O brothers. Do not for ever desert me, and forswear 


9 


oO nN & 


IX. 2. Movoe: N Syr. 19. AeyovTe N 





IX. 9. torment by fire for ever. For the eschatology of this passage see §9. There is here no trace of the 
spirit of the Crucified : ‘Father, forgive them ; for they know not what they do.’ 

18. alone are unconquerable. Some commentators think that the words put into the mouths of the martyrs are 
unreal and impossible. Dramatic inventions they doubtless are, like most other speeches that have come down to us 
from antiquity, but for a commentator to reject them a frior7 as impossible is to assume to himself the power to plumb 
the depths of human nature. That is an assumption that does not commend itself to one who has heard with his 
own ears the strange things even a ruffian can say with the hangman’s rope round his neck. And when it comes to 
martyrdom for a principle, we have good evidence that men dying for what they hold truth can play the man in the 
tenth or twentieth century as well as in the first. Did not Latimer, here in Oxford three and a half centuries ago, say 
at the stake, ‘Play the man, Master Ridley; we shall this day light such a candle, by God’s grace, in England, as 
I trust shall never be put out’? And did not Cranmer—Cranmer who so feared the fire—thrust the hand which had 
signed his recantation into the flames that it might be burned first? The nature of man is strangely compounded, and 
it is best not to dogmatize too rashly about what it can or cannot rise to. 

19. tighter on the wheel. Bensly translates the Syriac here: ‘The 
against him.’ Erasmus translates : ‘Haec eo loquente praeparatur incen 
obiicitur, atque ita tendentibus corpus radiis et contrahentibus flammis, 
rumpuntur.’ In this he adds to the original narrative certain explanator 
torment; probably some fifteenth-century expert in torture told him all about how it was done, if indeed he had not 
seen it for himself. But it is better not to go more closely into the horrors of torture. The writer happened once to 
be in company with some frontiersmen who were pursuing a white renegade, said to be guilty of having betrayed the 
whites to the Indians. He learned that if they caught the renegade they proposed to burn him alive, and they treated 
with some scorn the suggestion that death was penalty enough, as they grimly jested over the various particulars of 


what they intended for him. The wretch was not caught, but it is as true to-day as ever it was that the dark places 
of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty. 


y made the wheel more cruel by artifice 
dium, et ut erat affixus rotae, igni in catasta 
costis deinde patentibus lateribus vitalia 
y details as to the exact workings of the 


676 


THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 9. 24—11. 12 


24 not our brotherhood in nobility of soul. War a holy and honourable warfare on behalf of righteous- 
ness, through which may the just Providence that watched over our fathers become merciful unto his 
25 people and take vengeance on the accursed tyrant. And with these words the holy youth yielded 
up the ghost. 
26 But while all were wondering at his constancy of soul, the guards brought forward the second 
in age of the sons, and grappling him with sharp-clawed hands of iron they fastened him to the 
24 engines and the catapult. But when they heard his noble resolve in answer to their question, ‘ Would 
28 he eat rather than be tortured ?’ these panther-like beasts tore at his sinews with claws of iron, and 
rent away all the flesh from his cheeks, and tore off the skin from his head. But he steadfastly 
29 enduring this agony said, ‘ How sweet is every form of death for the sake of the righteousness of 
30 our fathers!’ And to the tyrant he said, ‘O most ruthless of tyrants, doth not it seem to thee that 
at this moment thou thyself sufferest tortures worse than mine in seeing thy tyranny’s arrogant 
31 intention overcome by my endurance for righteousness’ sake? For I am supported under pain 
32 by the joys that come through virtue, whereas thou art in torment whilst glorying in thy impiety ; 
neither shalt thou escape, O most abominable tyrant, the penalties of the divine wrath.’ 
10: And when he had bravely mét his glorious death, the third son was brought forward and was 
2 earnestly entreated by many to taste and so to save himself. But he answered in a loud voice, 
‘ Are ye ignorant that the same father begat me and my brothers that are dead, and the same 
3 mother gave us birth, and in the same doctrines was I brought up? I do not forswear the noble 
4 bond of brotherhood. Therefore if ye have any engine of torment, apply it to this body of mine; for 
5 my soul ye cannot reach, not if ye would. But they were greatly angered at the bold speech of the 
6 man, and they dislocated his hands and his feet with their dislocating engines, and wrenched his 
limbs out of their sockets, and unstrung them; and they twisted round his fingers, and his arms, 
7 and his legs, and his elbow-joints. And in no wise being able to strangle zs spirit they stripped off 
his skin, taking the points of the fingers with it, and tore in Scythian fashion the scalp from his head, 
8 and straightway brought him to the wheel. And on this they twisted his spine till he saw his own 
9 flesh hanging in strips and great gouts of blood pouring down from his entrails. And at the point 
ro of death he said, ‘We, O most abominable tyrant, suffer thus for our upbringing and our virtue that 
11, 12 are of God; but thou for thy impiety and thy cruelty shalt endure torments without end. And 
13 when this man had died worthily of his brothers, they brought up the fourth, and said to him, ‘ Be 
not thou also mad with the same madness as thy brethren, but obey the king and save thyself.’ 
14, 1g But he said unto them, ‘ For me ye have no fire so exceeding hot as to make meacoward. By the 
blessed death of my brethren, by the eternal doom of the tyrant, and by the glorious life of the 
16 righteous, I will not deny my noble brotherhood. Invent tortures, O tyrant, in order that thou 
17 mayest learn thereby that I am brother of those who have been already tortured.’ When he heard 
this the bloodthirsty, murderous, and utterly abominable Antiochus bade them cut out his tongue. 
18 But he said, ‘ Even if thou dost remove my organ of speech, God is a hearer also of the speechless. 
19, 20 Lo, I put out my tongue ready: cut it out, for thou shalt not thereby silence my Reason. Gladly 
21 do we give our bodily members to be mutilated for the cause of God. But God will speedily pursue 
after thee ; for thou cuttest out the tongue that sang songs of praise unto him.’ 
11: But when this man also was put to a death of agony with the tortures, the fifth sprang forward 
2, 3 saying, ‘I shrink not, O tyrant, from demanding the torture for virtue’s sake. Yea, of myself I come 
forward, in order that, slaying me also, thou mayest by yet more misdeeds increase the penalty thou 
4 owest to the justice of Heaven. O enemy of virtue and enemy of man, for what crime dost thou 
5 destroy us in this way? Doth it seem evil to thee that we worship the Creator of all and live 
6, 7 according to his virtuous Law? But these things are worthy of honours not of tortures, if thou 
8 didst understand human aspirations and hadst hope of salvation before God. Lo, now thou art 
9 God’s enemy and makest war on those that worship God.’ As he spake thus the guards bound 
ro him and brought him before the catapult; and they tied him thereto on his knees, and, fastening 
them there with iron cramps, they wrenched his loins over the rolling ‘wedge’ so that he was 
11 completely curled back like a scorpion and every joint was disjointed. And thus in grievous strait 
12 for breath and anguish of body he exclaimed, ‘ Glorious, O tyrant, glorious against thy will are 


XI. 7. avOpwrov robe 





XI. 3. increase the penalty. Erasmus paraphrases thus: ‘Reum te gehennae effusus quattuor innocentum 
sanguis effecit, me quinto gradatim numerus ipse ampliandus est, ut tibi tandem poenae ex multitudine peremptorum 
accrescant.’ ‘ ; ; 

7. if thou didst understand. ciep yoOdvov avOpamov mobdyv. Lloyd’s text omits 7 and 8 entirely, following the 
Strassburg Bible. What Erasmus had before him is hard to guess: what he prints is ‘, . . honor nobis est et salus 
non poena: mirificum accipiemus a deo beneficium, si in nulla nobis laterum parte parcatur’. 


677 


THE FOURTH BOOK. OF MACCABEES @Iea2-4le.0, 


the boons that thou bestowest on me, enabling me to show my fidelity to the Law through yet 
more honourable tortures. ; 
13 And when this man also was dead, the sixth was brought, a mere boy, who in answer to the 
14 tyrant’s inquiry whether he was willing to eat and be released, said: ‘I am not so old in years as 
15 my brethren, but I am as old in mind. For we were born and reared for the same purpose and are 
16 equally bound also to die for the same cause ; so if thou chooseth to torture us for not eating unclean 
meat, torture.’ , 
17,18 As he spake these words they brought him to the wheel, and with care they stretched him out and 
1g dislocated the bones of his back and set fire under him. And they made sharp skewers red-hot 
20 and ran them into his back, and piercing through his sides they burned away his entrails also. But he 
in the midst of his tortures exclaimed, ‘O contest worthy of saints, wherein so many of us brethren, 
in the cause of righteousness, have been entered for a competition in torments, and have not been 
22 conquered! For the righteous understanding, O tyrant, is unconquerable. In the armour of virtue 
23 I go to join my brothers in death, and to add in myself one strong avenger more to punish thee, O 
24 deviser of the tortures and enemy of the truly righteous. We six youths have overthrown thy tyranny. 
25 For is not thine impotence to alter our Reason or force us to eat unclean meat an overthrow for thee? 
26, 27 Thy fire is cool for us, thy engines of torture torment not, and thy violence is impotent. For the 
guards have been officers for us, not of a tyrant, but of the Divine Law; and therefore have we our 
Reason yet unconquered.’ 
12: And when this one also died a blessed death, being cast into the cauldron, the seventh son, the 
2 youngest of them all, came forward. But the tyrant, although fiercely exasperated by his brethren, 
felt pity for the boy, and seeing him there already bound he had him brought near, and sought to 
3 persuade him, saying, ‘Thou seest the end of the folly of thy brethren; for through their dis- 
4 obedience they have been racked to death. Thou, too, if thou dost not obey, wilt thyself also be 
5 miserably tortured and put to death before thy time; but if thou dost obey thou shalt be my friend, 
6 and thou shalt be advanced to high office in the business of the kingdom.’ And while thus appealing 
to him he sent for the boy’s mother, in order that in her sorrow for the loss of so many sons she 
7 might urge the survivor to obey and be saved. But the mother, speaking in the Hebrew tongue, as 
8 I shall tell later on, encouraged the boy, and he said 40 the guards, ‘Loose me, that I may speak to 
g the king and to all his friends with him.’ And they, rejoicing at the boy’s request, made haste to 
10, 11 loose him. And running up to the red-hot brazier, ‘O impious tyrant,’ he cried, ‘and most ungodly 
of all sinners, art thou not ashamed to take thy blessings and thy kingship at the hands of God, 
1z and to slay his servants and torture the followers of righteousness? For which things the divine 
justice delivers thee unto a more rapid and an eternal fire and torments which shall not leave hold 
13 on thee to all eternity. Art thou not ashamed, being a man, O wretch with the heart of a wild 
beast, to take men of like feelings with thyself, made from the same elements, and tear out their 
14 tongues, and scourge and torture them in this manner? But while they have fulfilled their righteous- 
15 ness towards God in their noble deaths, thou shalt miserably cry “ Woe is me!” for thy unjust slaying of 
17 the champions of virtue.’ And then standing on the brink of death he said, ‘I am no renegade to 
18 the witness borne by my brethren. And I call upon the God of my fathers to be merciful unto my 
19, 20nation. And thee will he punish both in this present life and after that thou art dead’ And with 
this prayer he cast himself into the red-hot brazier, and so gave up the ghost. 
13x If therefore the seven brethren despised the tortures even to the death, it is universally proved 
2 that the Inspired Reason is supreme lord over the passions. For if they had yielded to their passions 
or sufferings and eaten unclean meat, we should have said that they had been conquered thereby. 
3 But in this case it was not so; on the contrary by their Reason, which was commended in the sight 
4 of God, they rose superior to their passions. And it is impossible to deny the supremacy of the 
5 mind ; for they won the victory over their passions and their pains. How can we do otherwise than 
admit right Reason’s mastery over passion with these men who shrank not before the agonies of 


21 


16 


. 


_ 18 extehos 19. avtov kat N20, ayavos 8 Syr. XII. 6. eavrny ehenoaca...... emt THY TwTNpLOY evmeOccay N 
oyr. XIII. 2. ee Nav 





19. sharp skewers. Erasmus has ‘Subulis etiam ferire pendentis latera ad viscera iubet, ut per eas (quae his 
ductae erant in longum tramitem) rimas ad intimas fibras flamma perveniret’. 


_ XII. 7. speaking in the Hebrew tongue. Erasmus chooses to insert her speech at this point instead of keeping 
it back as the author had done. He also adds, borrowing from I know not where, or else inventing, a long torture 
scene with the seventh son; and in the son’s speech he introduces (apparently after verse 12) ‘Sit enim inter te et 
reliquos discretio potestatis. Numquid alterius tu operis, tuve alterius naturae homo es? Una nascendi et moriendi 
omnibus ratio est. Quisquis hominem interficit, interfici se posse confirmat. Tu effigiem tuam laceras, tu in torquendo 
nihil proficis.’ 

678 


el 


Tee POURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 13,.6—14.'8 
6 burning? For even as towers on harbour-moles repulse the assaults of the waves and offer a calm 
7 entrance to those entering the haven, so the seven-towered right Reason of the youths defended the 
8 haven of righteousness and repulsed the tempestuousness of the passions. They formed a holy choir 
9 of righteousness as they cheered one another on, saying: ‘ Let us die like brothers, O brethren, for 
the Law. Let us imitate the Three Children at the Assyrian court who despised this same ordeal of 
10, 11 the furnace. Let us not turn cravens before the proof of righteousness.’ And one said, ‘ Brother, be 
12 of good cheer,’ and another, ‘ Bear it out nobly’; and another, recalling the past, ‘ Remember of what 
stock ye are, and at whose fatherly hand Isaac for righteousness’ sake yielded himself to be a sacri- 
13 fice.’ And each and all of them together, looking at each other brightly and very boldly, said, ‘ With 
a whole heart will we consecrate ourselves unto God who gave us our souls, and let us lend our bodies 
15 to the keeping of the Law. Let us not fear him who thinketh he kills; for a great struggle and 
16 peril of the soul awaits in eternal torment those who transgress the ordinance of God. Let us then 
17 arm ourselves with divine Reason’s mastery of the passions. After this our passion, Abraham, Isaac, 
and Jacob shall receive us, and all our forefathers shall praise us.’ 
And to each separate one of the brothers, as they were dragged off, those whose turn was yet to 
come said, ‘ Do not disgrace us, brother, nor be false to our brethren already dead.’ 
19  Youare not ignorant of the love of brethren, whereof the divine and all-wise Providence has given 
an inheritance to those who are begotten though their fathers, implanting it in them even through 
20 the mother’s womb; wherein brethren do dwell the like period, and take their form during the same 
21 time, and are nourished from the same blood, and are quickened with the same soul, and are brought 
into the world after the same space, and they draw milk from the same founts, whereby their frater- 
22 nal souls are nursed together in arms at the breast ; and they are knit yet closer through a common 
ae and daily companionship and other education, and through our discipline under the Law 
of God. 
23 The feeling of brotherly love being thus naturally strong, the seven brethren had their mutual 
24 concord made yet stronger. For trained in the same Law, and disciplined in the same virtues, and 
25 brought up together in the upright life, they loved one another the more abundantly. Their 
26 common zeal for moral beauty and goodness heightened their mutual concord, for in conjunction 
with their piety it rendered their brotherly love more fervent. 
27 But though nature, companionship, and their virtuous disposition increased the ardour of their 
brotherly love, nevertheless the surviving sons through their religion supported the sight of their 
14 1: brethren, who were on the rack, being tortured to death; nay more, they even encouraged them to 
face the agony, so as not only to despise their own tortures, but also to conquer their passion of 
2 brotherly affection for their brethren. O Reasoning minds, more kingly than kings, than freemen 
3 more free, of the harmony of the seven brethren, holy and well attuned to the keynote of piety! 
4, 5 None of the seven youths turned coward, none shrunk in the face of death, but all hastened to 
6 the death by torture as if running the road to immortality. For as hands and feet move in har- 
mony with the promptings of the soul, so those holy youths, as if prompted by the immortal soul 
7 of religion, went in harmony to death for its sake. O all-holy sevenfold companionship of brethren 
8in harmony! For as the seven days of the creation of the world do enring religion, so did the youths 


D4 


y 


18 


g. Aooupuas (ac superscrip.). 12. karapynobes S V Syr. 19. adeAdornros N 24. eavtous nyamav & V Syr. 
XIV. 2. Baotheoy 8 V 3. evappoorou N 





XIV. 2. more kingly than kings, Baciewr Baoixorepor. The Stoics held that the wise man alone was a king : 
udvov evar Tov copoy Baoihéa Kat Baowixdy (Stob. EZh. i. [222] of Heeren’s ed.). Also we have in Diog. Laert. vii. 122 
ov povoy & edevOépous etvar rods copovs adda Kal Baowdéas, TIS Bacthetas ovons apxns ayuTevOvvov. 

8. the seven days of the creation, ores mepi rv €Bdopd5a Xopevorres krh. Erasmus paraphrases thus : ‘ Quos (credo) 
propterea in eo numero esse voluit in quo mundum ipse construxit, ut septem fratres septem dierum, quibus perfecta 
sunt omnia, aemuli redderentur.’ The general sense of the passage in the Greek is clear enough, though a word for 
word translation does not yield very intelligible English, and Deissman accordingly transposes ¢Bdopdda and evoeBeay, 
and renders it ‘For as the seven days of creation around the (sacred) number seven, so circled the youths in chorus 
round piety’. Grimm describes the passage as a forced comparison in the style of the Alexandrian mystics; the 
seven days of the week were meant by God to recall to His people’s minds the sacred seven days of creation ; and 
the figure seven being thus a means of grace, this sacred number stands in the text as a visible expression of the 
piety which was the centre of these young men’s lives. Doubtless the above explains well the Jewish feeling of 
reverence for the mystical nature of seven. This feeling of reverence was, however, common to other ancient peoples 
besides the Jews, and most students of early man now incline to the belief that the sacred number seven derived its 
mystic significance from astrology. Astrology, indeed, was forbidden to the Jews, but that need not prevent their having 
assimilated ideas to which it had given birth elsewhere. When first men began to observe the stars attentively, it 
presently appeared that in the heavens, visible to the naked eye, there were certain bodies that were always changing 
their position among the fixed stars; and ultimately men succeeded in tracing out, more or less correctly, their motions 
and calculating their periodic times. These times ran from the Moon’s one month to the thirty years of Saturn, and 


679 


THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 14, 8—15. 10 


choir-like enring their sevenfold companionship, and made the terror of the tortures of no account. 
9 We now shudder when we hear of the suffering of those youths; but they, not only seeing it with 
their eyes, nor merely hearing the spoken, imminent threat, but actually feeling the pang, endured 
ro it through; and that in the torture by fire, than which what greater agony can be found? For 
sharp and stringent is the power of fire, and swiftly did it bring their bodies to dissolution. 

tr And think it not wonderful if with those men Reason triumphed over the tortures, when even 
12a woman's soul despised a yet greater diversity of pains; for the mother of the seven youths 

endured the torments inflicted on each several one of her children. 

‘13. But consider how manifold are the yearnings of a mother’s heart, so that her feeling for her 
14 offspring becomes the centre of her whole world; and indeed, here, even the irrational animals have 
15 for their young an affection and love similar to men’s. For example, among the birds, the tame 
16 ones sheltering under our roofs defend their nestlings; and those that nest upon the mountain 

tops, and in the rock clefts, and in the holes of trees, and in the branches, and hatch their young 
17 there, do also drive away the intruder. And then, if they be unable to drive him away, they flutter 
around the nestlings in a passion of love, calling to them in their own speech, and they give suc- 

18 cour to their young ones in whatever fashion they can. And what need have we of examples of the 
19 love of offspring among irrational animals, when even the bees, about the season of the making 

of the comb, fend off intruders, and stab with their sting, as with a sword, those who approach their 

20 brood, and do battle against them even to the death? But she, the mother of those young men, 

with a soul like Abraham, was not moved from her purpose by her affection for her children. 

15: © Reason of the sons, lord over the passions! O religion, that wast dearer to the mother than 
2 her children! The mother, having two choices before her, religion and the present saving alive of 
3 her seven sons according to the tyrant’s promise, loved rather religion, which saveth unto eternal 
4 life according toGod. O how may I express the passionate love of parents for children? We stamp 

a marvellous likeness of our soul and of our shape on the tender nature of the child, and most of all 

5 through the mother’s sympathy with her children being deeper than the father’s. For women are 
softer of soul ¢hanx men, and the more children they bear the more do they abound in love for them. 

6 But, of all mothers, she of the seven sons abounded in love beyond the rest, seeing that, having in 
7 seven child-bearings felt maternal tenderness for the fruit of her womb, and having been constrained 
8 because of the many pangs in which she bore each to a close affection, she nevertheless through the 
9 fear of God rejected the present safety of her children. Ay, and more than that, through the moral 
beauty and goodness of her sons and their obedience to the Law, her maternal love for them was 
to made stronger. For they were just, and temperate, and brave, and great-souled, and lovers of each 
other and of their mother in such manner that they obeyed her in the keeping of the Law even unto 


XV. 4. (5) after ran evarroo ppaytopev N* TO Toy TaTepav V 7. nvaykacpevn & V 





their proper motions were seen to be confined within the broad belt of the heavens known to us as the Zodiac. Seven 
was found to be the number of these mAdynres or Wanderers, who did indeed appear to go like the fixed stars round 
the earth from east to west once in every twenty-four hours, but, as was well known to Chaldaean, Egyptian, and Greek 
star-gazers, had likewise another exceedingly complicated set of movements peculiar to themselves. The direction of 
these movements was retrograde or from west to east: dé yap duopav én’ dvatohas avrupéper Oar says Plutarch (Pac. 
Phil. ii. 16), describing the astronomical knowledge possessed by Alcmaeon and the mathematicians. And the early 
star-gazers, who by painful labour had obtained this difficult knowledge, took these movements of the mysterious Seven 
their journeyings and their standings still, their oppositions and their conjunctions, to be the visible hand of Fate 
writing the scroll of man’s destiny upon the sky. Thus the sacred Seven, the Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter 
Venus, and Saturn, to whom in the course of time were assigned the different hours of the day and after whom were 
named the days of the week, came to be honoured as the lords of heaven and earth, and the very number of them 
seven, was nothing less than a power to conjure with. : 

9. We now shudder. An important inference can be drawn from this phrase. It is true that viv may mean no 
more than that the discourse is being delivered on the anniversary of the martyrs. But-it has also been taken to 
indicate something further, namely, that the audience shudder at the past as contrasted with the present state of things 
in which they find themselves. If this be so, it certainly points to a time when the Jews in Alexandria had little or no 
personal experience of persecution, and necessarily indicates for the discourse a date previous to the awful persecution 
under Caligula in a.D. 38. See § 5. 


XV. 4. a marvellous likeness, Woxis re kat popdis dpodrnra. There is a whole literature, ancient as well as 
modern, on heredity and the mysterious relation of parent to child in mind as well as body. 1 will only quote here 
a fragment of Cleanthes from Nemesius, Vat. Hom., p. 32 (see Pearson, /ragm. Cleanthes, 36) ‘O KrXedvOns rordvde 
meKet ovddoyio pdr" ou pdvov yoy Suoror Tots yovetor yvopeOa kata 76 GGpa GAA Kai KaTd Th puyny, Tots madden, Trois HOeot 
Tais Siabéoeor: and also this from Plut. Plac. Phil. lib. 5, Cap. 11 of Stwrxol, dd Tod gepatos Sdov Kai TS puyie Gener Out 
7a omeppara, Kat Tas opoidrnras dvarddrrecbat ek TOV adTaey yevev Tovs TUTovus Kal Tods Xapakripas, womepavet Coypadoy amd 
CHOl@Y Xpopatay eikdva tod BAerouevov. And yet one more from cap. 12, where he makes the curious statement that 
Soe women have admired statues So passionately as to produce children like them : wodAdxis yap <ixdvev kai dv8pudvrev 
a elope tae eno Sst e n ol Srekoi, cupmabeia ths Siavolas, kara pevpdrev ciokpicets Kat axtivey, ovK 

680 


12, 


THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 15. 11—16. 5 


11 death. But nevertheless, though she had so many temptations to yield to her maternal 
instincts, in no single instance did the dreadful variety of tortures have power to alter her Reason ; 
13 but the mother urged each son separately, and all together, to die for their religion. O holy nature, 
and parental love, and yearning of parents for offspring, and wages of nursing, and unconquerable 
14 affection of mothers! The mother, seeing them one by one racked and burned, remained unshaken 
15 in soul for religion’s sake. She saw the flesh of her sons being consumed in the fire, and the 
extremities of their hands and feet scattered on the ground, and the flesh-coverings, torn off from 
16 their heads right to their cheeks, strewn about like masks. O mother, who now knew sharper 
17 pangs than the pangs of labour! O woman, alone among women, the fruit of whose womb was 
18 perfect religion ! Thy firstborn, giving up the ghost, did not alter thy resolution, nor thy second, 
19 looking with eyes of pity on thee under his tortures, nor thy third, breathing out his spirit. Neither 
didst thou weep when thou beheldest the eyes of each amid the torments looking boldly on the same 
20 anguish, and sawest in their guivering nostrils the signs of approaching death. When thou sawest 
the flesh of one son being severed after the flesh of another, and hand after hand being cut off, and 
head after head being flayed, and corpse cast upon corpse, and the place crowded with spectators 
21 on account of the tortures of thy children, thou sheddest not a tear. Not the melodies of the sirens 
nor the songs of swans with sweet sound do so charm the hearers’ ears, as sounded the voices of the 
22 sons, speaking to the mother from amid the torments. How many and how great were the tortures 
with which the mother was tormented while her sons were being tortured with torments of rack and 
23 fire! But Inspired Reason lent her heart a man’s strength under her passion of suffering, and 
exalted her to make no account of the present yearnings of mother-love. 
24 And although she saw the destruction of her seven children and the many and varied forms of 
25 their torments, the noble mother willingly surrendered them through faith in God. For she beheld 
in her own mind, even as it had been cunning advocates ina council-chamber, nature, and parenthood, 
26 and mother-love, and her children on the rack, and it was as if she, the mother, having the choice 
27 between two votes in the case of her children, one for their death and one to save them alive, thereupon 
28 regarded not the saving of her seven sons for a little time, but, as a true daughter of Abraham, called 
29 to mind his God-fearing courage. O mother of the race, vindicator of our Law, defender of our religion, 
30 and winner of the prize in the struggle within thyself! O woman, nobler to resist than men, and braver 
31 than warriors to endure! For as the Ark of Noah, with the whole ving world for her burden in 
32 the world-whelming Deluge, did withstand the mighty surges, so thou, the keeper of the Law, beaten 
upon every side by the surging waves of the passions, and strained as with strong blasts by the 
tortures of thy sons, didst nobly weather the storms that assailed thee for religion’s sake. 


16: Thus then, if one both a woman and advanced in years, and the mother of seven sons, endured 


the sight of her children being tortured to death, the Inspired Reason must confessedly be supreme 
2 ruler over the passions. I have proved, accordingly, that not only have men triumphed over their 
3 sufferings, but that a woman also has despised the most dreadful tortures. And not so fierce were 
the lions around Daniel, not so hot was the burning fiery furnace of Mishael, as burned in her the 
4 instinct of motherhood at the sight of her seven sons being tortured. But by her religion-guided 
5 Reason the mother quenched her passions, many and strong as they were. For there is this also to 


II. +Pacavor 13. yeveoet V: yeveots Syr. 18. es| toe NV 21. ws V Syr. 32. umep N V Syr. 
XVI. 3. exewny opwcav & V Syr. ourws mrotktA@s N V Syr. 





13. wages of nursing. Deissmann would read yéveois Piddaropye kai tpopé, and objects to Grimm who upholds 
rpopea. The MS. authority for yéveous is weak, but V reads yevécer ; and yéveois, according to Bensly, has the support 
of the Syriac, and it makes good sense with or without Deissmann’s emendation of rpope. The Strassburg text has 
& gious icpa kal pirtpa yovewr, kal oiveois pirdaropye, Kal Tpodeia, Kat pnrépov adduacta wé6n, which Lloyd keeps, 
rendering, ‘O sanctissimam naturam, amorisque parentum illecebras ; et intelligentiam indulgentissimam, et nutricia, 
matrumque motus indomitos.’ The marginal collation in the Bodleian copy of the Geneva edition of 1611 has the 
curious variation yoval purdaropyot Kai tpopeia. I have attempted to render yeveors puddaropye, kat rpogeta. 

20. the place crowded. The text here is very corrupt: xepiov (A) gives good sense and has the support of V, 
but there is another reading xoptov (N*) or xoptdtoy (N°-*) which appears as yopeiov, a dancing-place, in the Strassburg 
LXX 3; yxopetov would undoubtedly be quite in the author’s rhetorical style, as it would artfully recall his comparison 
in viii. 4 of the band of youths to a xopés or festal choir with the mother in their midst, and also allude to xopevovres above 
in xiv.8. The Syriac has the strange rendering, ‘when she saw the servants of the tyrant falling like a storm upon her 
sons, which does not seem reconcilable with any Greek text known to us. a 

29. the struggle within thyself. These are the oi évdodev mévor as distinguished in xviii. 2 from ot €£aOev mova, the 
physical tortures. We may note again in d6\opdpe how the author recurs to the comparison with the Greek games. 

31. her burden in the world-whelming Deluge. «xooporAnO7s and xoopopopew are vigorous compounds coined 
by the author, and good specimens of their sort, just as the whole passage 1s typical of his rhetoric. The three 
alliterative quadrisyllables, rolling in like waves one after the other, aim at something like the Homeric moAvproia Boro 
Oardoons. I have attempted a slight imitation of his effect with ‘world-whelming’ and ‘whole living world’. 


681 


a9 


17 


THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 2655 —1/m2 


consider, that had the woman been weak of spirit, despite her motherhood, she might have wept 
6 over them, and perchance spoken thus: ‘Ah, thrice wretched me, and more than thrice wretched ! 
7 Seven children have I borne and am left childless! In vain was I seven times with child, and to no 
profit was my ten months’ burden seven times borne, and fruitless have been my nursings, and 
8 sorrowful my sucklings. In vain for you, O my sons, did I endure the many pangs of labour, and 
g the more difficult cares of your upbringing. Alas, for my sons, that some were yet unwed, and those 
that were wedded had begotten no children ; I shall never see children of yours, nor shall I be called 
to by the name of grandparent. Ah me, that had many beautiful children, and am a widow and 
11 desolate in my woe! Neither will there be any son to bury me when J am dead! : 
12 But the holy and God-fearing mother wailed not with this lamentation over any one of them, neither 
13 besought she any to escape death, nor lamented over them as dying men; but, as though she had a 
soul of adamant and were bringing forth the number of her sons, for a second time, into immortal life, 
14 She besought rather and entreated of them that they should die for religion’s sake. O mother, warrior 
of God in the cause of religion, old and a woman, thou didst both defeat the tyrant by thy endurance, 
15 and wast found stronger than a man, in deeds as well as words. For verily when thou wast put in 
bonds with thy sons, thou stoodest there seeing Eleazar being tortured, and thou spakest to thy 
16 sons in the Hebrew tongue: ‘ My sons, noble is the fight; and do ye, being called thereto to bear 
17 witness for our nation, fight therein zealously on behalf of the Law of our fathers. For it would be 
shameful if, while this aged man endured the agony for religion’s sake, you that are young men shrank 
18 before the pain. Remember that for the sake of God ye have come into the world, and have enjoyed 
20 life, and that therefore ye owe it to God to endure all pain for his sake; for whom also our father 
Abraham made haste to sacrifice his son Isaac, the ancestor of our nation; and Isaac, seeing his 
21 father’s hand lifting the knife against him, did not shrink. And Daniel, the just man, was cast to 
the lions, and Ananias, Azarias, and Mishael were flung into the furnace of fire, and they endured 
23 for God’s sake. And ye also, having the same faith unto God, be not troubled ; for it were against 
Reason that ye, knowing righteousness, should not withstand the pains.’ 
24 With these words the mother of the seven encouraged every single one of her sons to die rather 
25 than transgress the ordinance of God; they themselves also knowing well that men dying for God 
live unto God, as live Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the patriarchs. 
1 Some of the guards declared that when she also was about to be seized and put to death, she 
2 cast herself on the pyre in order that no man might touch her body. O mother, that together 


20. opwy o Iaaak Syr. 24. aroOavew NS Syr. 25. evdores NV XVII. 1. tus.8 V Syr. 





XVI. 14. old anda woman. The Syriac has ‘ who didst go a warfare in old age’. 

20. ancestor of our nation. ¢évomdrwp is another of the author’s coinages like e@vdmAnOos in vii. 11. He has an 
affection for the word ¢@vos, much as some English writers like to speak of ‘our people’, by way of heightening the 
sense of union between author and reader as belonging to a nation set apart for great ends. 

25. knowing well. I have accepted the reading of N, «idéres, but it really seems to me that I have translated 
<iSéras, which Grimm adopts apparently without MS. authority. In this I rely upon Deissmann, whose note I translate 
verbatim : ‘Read with Sin. Ven. eidéres. Freudenthal, S. 123 f., is unjust in his complaints of the “ungrammatical 
sequence”. For this formal and rigid ¢iSéres is found elsewhere: 2 Cor. i. 7, Rom. xili. 11, Egyptian report of the 
Berlin Museum No. 246, Z.11f. Private letter, Fayoum, 2-3 century A.D.: 4 otk iddres (szc) Ore vuKrds Kab nuepas 


évruyxavo (s2c) TO bed imép ipo. The nominative plural of a participle in other instances readily becomes an 
anacolouthon.’ 


XVII. 1. she cast herself, caurjv Eppuper kara tis mupas. It is curious in what a sidelong fashion the author does 
but hint at the suicide of the woman. The writer of Second Maccabees never alludes to it at all, though he can 
hardly have considered it wrong, for the act is nowhere forbidden in the Old Testament and he himself celebrates 
(xv. 42) the self-inflicted death of Razis, who ‘ fell upon his sword, choosing rather to die manfully, than to come into 
the hands of the wicked, to be abused otherwise than beseemed his noble birth’. It is well known that the Stoics 
habitually advocated suicide, é€aywyn, when life became a burden, but the author of Fourth Maccabees makes no 
allusion to this, neither does he quote the various Old Testament instances of it. There is, indeed, only one case in 
the O.T. that can really be considered analogous to the Mother’s, for Samson’s deed in pulling down the house on 
himself and his enemies must be classed as an act of war, and was no more suicide than the self-devotion of Arnold 
von Winkelried embracing the spears at Sempach, or of Salkeld and Burgess blowing in the Cashmere Gate at Delhi. 
There is, however, an exact parallel in the case of Saul, when he killed himself (or had himself killed) ‘lest. these 
uncircumcised come and thrust me through, and abuse me’. Erasmus does not mention the mother’s suicide, unless 
indeed ‘ultro’ is intended to suggest it, but (as already mentioned in § 8) he pictures the woman as being in the first 
mstance most horribly tortured by Antiochus, and then, ‘ being brought to the fire-vomiting brazier,’ she of her own 
accord (z/tvo) joins her sons who had been already burnt, in their pains, ‘ac oratione protensis surrectisque manibus 
pro gravidis matribus fusa coelibem effudit spiritum’; where coelébem is quite un-Jewish and mediaeval. As to the 
morality of such an act opinions differ and will differ to the end of time. During the Indian Mutiny 
ago, a bishop of the Irish Church gave it as his opinion that it was morally justifiable for white women there to choose 
death before outrage, and those who know anything of savage warfare, be it in India, or Africa, or America, or even 
in Europe (for we still have savages in Europe), will agree with him. As to such a deed being cowardly, I can only 


682 


near sixty years 


cr, 


a1, 


Weer OU RTM BOOK OF MACCABEES 17. 2-24 


with thy seven sons didst break the tyrant’s force, and bring to nought his evil devices, and 
3 gavest an example of the nobleness of faith. Thou wert nobly set as a roof upon thy sons as pillars 
4 and the earthquake of the torments shook thee not at all. Rejoice therefore, pure-souled mother, 
5 having the hope of thy endurance certain at the hand of God. Not so majestic stands the moon amid 
the stars in heaven as thou, having lit the path of thy seven starlike sons unto righteousness, standest 
6 in honour with God; and thou art set in heaven with them. For thy child-bearing was from the 
7 son of Abraham. And had it been lawful for us to paint, as might some arést, the tale of thy 
piety, would not the spectators have shuddered at the mother of seven sons suffering for righteous- 
8 ness’ sake multitudinous tortures even unto death? And indeed it were fitting to inscribe these 
words over their resting-place, speaking for a memorial to future generations of our people: 


=9 HERE LIE AN AGED PRIEST 


AND A WOMAN FULL OF YEARS 
AND HER SEVEN SONS 
THROUGH THE VIOLENCE OF A TYRANT 
DESIRING TO DESTROY THE HEBREW NATION. 
Io THEY VINDICATED THE RIGHTS OF OUR PEOPLE 
LOOKING UNTO GOD AND ENDURING 
THE TORMENTS EVEN UNTO DEATH. 


12 For truly it was a holy war which was fought by them. For on that day virtue, proving them 
13 through endurance, set before them the prize of victory in incorruption in everlasting life. But the 

first in the fight was Eleazar, and the mother of the seven sons played her part, and the brethren 
14 fought. The tyrant was their adversary and the world and the life of man were the spectators. 


. 16 And righteousness won the victory, and gave the crown to her athletes. Who but wondered at the 


17 athletes of the true Law? Who were not amazed at them? The tyrant himself and his whole 
18 council admired their endurance, whereby they now do both stand beside the throne of God and 
19 live the blessed age. For Moses says, ‘All also who have sanctified themselves are under thy 
20 hands.’ And these men, therefore, having sanctified themselves for God’s sake, not only have 

received this honour, but also zke honour that through them the enemy had no more power 
22 over our people, and the tyrant: suffered punishment, and our country was purified, they having 

as it were become a ransom for our nation’s sin; and through the blood of these righteous men 

and the propitiation of their death, the divine Providence delivered Israel that before was evil 
23 entreated. For when the tyrant Antiochus saw the heroism of their virtue, and their endurance 
24 under the tortures, he publicly held up their endurance to his soldiers as an example ; and he thus 


3. orvdous NV 4. BeBaay 8 V 7. ws emt Tos N* V Syr. evoeBias cov tatopiay N V 





say that a few years ago, when the Red Indian tortures still awaited captives, many frontiersmen, men whom it would 
hardly have been safe to call cowards, made no secret that they intended to keep their last bullet (if need be) for 
themselves. As to whether a woman could harden her heart to the act, let me borrow the words of the author of this 
book, woddaydGev pv odv kai GAaxdbev exon’ dy vpiv enideiEar, and say that many a woman in every age and every land 
has chosen death rather than that polluted hands should touch her body. 

7. some artist, os emi twos. The conjecture mivakos is highly plausible, but lacks MS. authority ; and If we may 
take éni as ‘after’, i.e. ‘in the style of’, wivaxos is not really needed, for the word (wypapjoa itself must imply an 
artist to paint the picture. In § 8 I have discussed the very striking allusion to this passage in Chrysostom’s rovs 
dyavas kai Ta madaiopata Sorep emt mivakés Twos THs Kapdias buay amroypdwartes, and also the curious turn given to it by 
Erasmus when he suggests that the figure of the martyr might be made into an amulet. The latter quite excels 
himself in his paraphrase of the first part of the passage : ‘ Si possit in picturam aliquam manus humana describere et 
victorum omnium poenarum genus in posteros ceris, ut gestum constitit, explicare, sine lachrymis nemo transiret, omnis 
utique multitudo conflueret, suffragarentur plurimi, et multa videretur donasse qui in gloriam summi dei stratagemata 
depinxisset.’ 

8. for a memorial. fois drd tod vous eis pveiay Neyspeva. The author may well have been thinking of the great 
monument of polished white stone, rising above a cloister with monolithic columns of the same, which Simon 
Maccabeus set up in memory of his parents and his brethren at Modin near Joppa. Neither Josephus in his Amzz- 
guities nor the author of 1 Macc. speaks of any inscription on the monument, though the latter mentions the armour 
of the heroes being set on the pillars, ‘and by the armour ships carved, that they might be seen of all that sail on the 
sea.’ But some fitting inscription there must have been of a tenor not unlike that proposed here. Of course to employ 
sculpture to represent Jewish heroes and martyrs was out of the question, but our author in the verses which follow 
uses the imagery of the Greek games, making the tyrant and the martyrs, as it were, competitors, In a way to give the 
idea of a frieze—may one say ?—like that of a Greek temple, commemorating their exploits. : 

19. under thy hands. sdvres of jrytacpévos td tas xeipds gov. This is taken word for word from Deut. xxx. 3. 

22. having as it were become a ransom. déo7ep dvrinpuxoy ‘yeyovsras. The idea of the deaths of the martyrs 
becoming a ransom for the sin of Israel has been noticed in § 9, and the deliverance of Israel through them in the note 


oni. Il. a : 
24. as an example. One would like further evidence before giving credence to the story that Antiochus publicly 


683 


THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 17. 24—18. 14 


inspired his men with a sense of honour and heroism on the field of battle and in the labours of 
besieging, so that he plundered and overthrew all his enemies. ; : 

183 430) Israelites, children born of the seed of Abraham, obey this Law, and be righteous in all ways, 
2 recognizing that Inspired Reason is lord over the passions, and over pains, not only from within, 
3 but from without ourselves; by which means those men, delivering up their bodies to the torture 

for righteousness’ sake, not only won the admiration of mankind, but were deemed worthy of 
4a divine inheritance. And through them the nation obtained peace and restoring the observance 
of the Law in our country hath captured the city from the enemy. é ; 

5 And vengeance hath pursued the tyrant Antiochus upon earth, and in death he suffers punish- 
ment. For when he failed utterly to constrain the people of Jerusalem to live like Gentiles and 
abandon the customs of our fathers, he thereupon left Jerusalem and marched away against the 
Persians. 

6 Now these are the words that the mother of the seven sons, the righteous woman, spake to her 

7 children: ‘I was a pure maiden, and I strayed not from my father’s house, and I kept guard over 

8 the rib that was builded zzto Eve. No seducer of the desert, no deceiver in the field, corrupted me ; 

9 nor did the false, beguiling Serpent sully the purity of my maidenhood; I lived with my husband 
all the days of my youth; but when these my sons were grown up, their father died. Happy was 

tohe; for he lived a life blessed with children, and he never knew the pain of their loss. Who, 

tr while he was yet with us, taught you the Law and the prophets. He read to us of Abel who 
was slain by Cain, and of Isaac who was offered as a burnt-offering, and of Joseph in the prison. 

12 And he spake to us of Phineas, the zealous priest, and he taught you ¢#e song of Ananias, Azarias, 

13 and Mishael in the fire. And he glorified also Daniel in the den of lions, and blessed him: and 

14 he called to your minds the saying of Isaiah, “ Yea even though thou pass through the fire, the 


XVIII. 5. eAwyv V Syr. g. em(noas S © V 





extolled them to his troops. The text here is practically the same as that of the Strasburg LXX, and also as that of 
Lloyd, but Erasmus, followed by Lloyd, takes the latter part of the sentence in a way that is hard to reconcile with the 
original: ‘videns namque Antiochus magnitudinem fidei mortisque contemptum peditum sibi legiones ex Hebraeorum 
numero congregat, per quas hostem perculit, et laudis plurimum cepit.’ If this be so the Syrian king would have 
understood William III’s feeling, when he met in battle the brave exiles whom the penal laws had driven from Ireland, 
and cried, ‘ Cursed be the laws that deprive me of such soldiers.” But history knows nothing of these Hebrew legions, 
and Antiochus, like William, had to do without the soldiers whose religion he could not shake. 

all his enemies. «ai éxmopOjoas éviknoey rdvtas tovs mohepiovs. This is one way of drawing a moral from 
history. Whether Antiochus fired his soldiers by the martyrs’ example or not, he did certainly after leaving Jerusalem 
conquer Armenia and no small part of Persia. And as it would rather spoil the moral to say that in the full tide of 
success he failed miserably in an attack on an obscure Persian temple and died almost immediately after, the fatal 
ending is quietly dropped just for the moment. But of course the audience knew perfectly well the story of Antiochus’ 
death, so the author covers himself by deftly alluding to it five verses later, where he says that vengeance pursued 
the tyrant upon earth, and in death he suffers punishment still. It is a neat rhetorical turn. 


XVIII. 2. from within. of 2S0ev révor are mental sufferings, oi €€w0ev mévoi are physical: see on xv. 29 and yi. 35. 

4. restoring the observance, dvavewodpevos. If we keep this reading we must take it that some masculine word 
like Israel equivalent to 76 26vos is the subject understood. ‘The alternative is to read the plural forms given in & and 
V both for the participle and the verb, and make the subject simply ‘they’, or even ‘the Maccabees’ understood. 
Historically the statement is correct ; for the Maccabees truly did recapture Jerusalem and restore the Law and win 
Jewish independence. 

7. I strayed not, ody trepéByv marpixdy otkov. Erasmus translates word for word, ‘domum patriam non reliqui’. 
This home-keeping habit was of course a virtue highly extolled in a Jewess, and certainly the race seems to have found 
a certain profit in the strictness with which it has been practised. 

the rib that was builded, riyy dxodounuerny mAevpay. In the translation I have added zz¢o Eve to make the sense 
clear. Grimm at one time held the idea that the phrase might mean ‘the woman’s side of the house *, but he gave it 
up. The allusion to the Garden of Eden and the creation of Eve is infinitely more in keeping with Jewish style and 
taste. The. actual words in Genesis are kai @Koddunoer 6 Oeds Tv meupav, nv éhaBev ard tov "Addy. The moral of the 
passage is that a woman gets her body, as it were, direct from God, and should therefore keep it worthy of Him. 

8. No seducer of the desert, A\yedy rijs epynpias POopels év medio. This is a curious instance of the Jewish belief 
that evil spirits haunted the waste, to which we have references in the New Testament. It seems hardly credible to 
us, but the Jews did actually believe that out in the desert there were demons who would lie in wait for women and 
lead them astray. The Australian Arunta similarly hold that certain rocky places in their deserts are the habitation 
of wanton spirits, and that women venturing near them may become mothers, apparently without knowing it. And 
for the Jew the Prince of the demons was Satan, the Avpeoy amdrys épis who had started ‘his campaign against mankind 
ry corrupting Eve. The authors of Synagogue Religion and Worship, already quoted, say, ‘ Jewish traditions vary, 

Owever, as to the reason of Satan’s tempting Eve; in several passages it is stated that Satan’s lust towards her 
brought about her fall; see Bereshith rabbah, c. 18,19; Sanhedrin 59»; Sotah 9»; Yebamoth 103°; Abodah zarah 22») 
Philo has some curious remarks about the woman and the serpent in Sacr. Leg. All. iii. 20, 21. He calls sons 
snakelike, and declares that 7) 180vn && éavtijs éore woxOnpd. ee 

g. these my sons. It looks as though some phrase such as ‘and bore him seven sons’ were omitted between 
8 and 9. It is therefore necessary to insert ‘7zy sons’ in 9 to explain roirav. 


684 


17, 


minty POURTTI «BOOK OF MACCABEES 18.) 15-24 


15 flame shall not hurt thee.” He sang to us the words of David the psalmist, ‘‘ Many are the afflictions 
16 of the just.” He quoted to us the proverb of Solomon, “ He is a tree of life to all them that do his 
18 will.’ He confirmed the words of Ezekiel, “Shall these dry bones live?” For he forgat not the 
tg song that Moses taught, which teaches, “I will slay and I will make alive. This is your life and the 
blessedness of your days.” ’ 
20 Ah, cruel was the day, and yet not cruel, when the cruel tyrant of the Greeks set the fire blazing 
for his barbarous braziers, and with his passions boiling brought to the catapult and back again to his 
21 tortures the seven sons of the daughter of Abraham, and blinded the eyeballs of their eyes, and cut 
22 out their tongues, and slew them with many kinds of torment. For which cause the judgement of 
23 God pursued, and shall pursue, the accursed wretch. But the sons of Abraham, with their victorious 
mother, are gathered together unto the place of their ancestors, having received pure and.immortal 
24 souls from God, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 


21. exnpooey N! 


23. having received, &c. These words point to an original difference between good and bad souls before their 
incorporation in the body. Cp. Wisd. viii. 19. 


685 


PIRKE ABOTH 


SAYINGS OF THE FATHERS 
Herford - 


INTRODUCTION 


$1. SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE BOOK: 


THE treatise called ‘ Pirké Aboth’, or ‘ Sayings of the Fathers’, is a collection of maxims, mostly 
,ethical and religious, uttered by Jewish teachers within a period extending from the third 
century B.C. to the third century A.D. ‘ Pirké Aboth’ is not its original title, neither is ‘ Sayings of 
the Fathers’ a correct rendering of that title; but the former is very ancient, and the latter is so far 
sanctioned by custom that it would be inconvenient to correct it to ‘Chapters of Fathers’, though 
‘that is what it ought to be. The book was not the production of one author. It was one of the 
sixty-three treatises of the Mishnah, the great corpus juris in which the Tradition of the Elders was 
reduced to order. The compiler or editor of the Mishnah was Rabbi Judah the Holy, commonly 
called ‘ Rabbi’, who died A.D. 219 ; and to that extent he may be regarded as the author of the 
Pirké Aboth. But this treatise, like the Mishnah itself, is mainly composed of material older 
than the time of ‘Rabbi’; and both give clear evidence of later additions. From this it will be 
‘seen that Pirké Aboth can hardly be treated as a book in the ordinary sense of the word, and that 
no definite date can be given for its composition or even for its completion. While still a portion of 
‘the Tradition of the Elders, it differs in character and form from the main body of the Tradition, 
and is thus capable of separate treatment and study. As a collection of moral and religious sayings 
it was included in the liturgy of the synagogue at least as early as the eleventh century ; and many 
commentaries upon it were written in and after the Middle Ages. Since the invention of printing, it 
has been published in innumerable editions, mostly Hebrew, but recently in other languages. 

The contents of the book are not arranged in any obvious order, and it is evidently made up 
of several collections differing in aim and method. Chronological sequence is observed in ch. i, and 
to some extent in ch. ii. It is wholly disregarded in the remaining chapters. The maxims in 
ch. i-iv are the utterance of named teachers, while those in ch. v are mostly anonymous. Ch. vi 
is no part of the original book, and only attempts to catch the manner of it. “But in all six chapters 
there is no attempt at a completely representative list of names. Sixty-five teachers are named, out 
of the hundreds who belonged to the period of the Mishnah; and while it was not to be expected 
that all these should be included, it is hard to account for some of the omissions. It is remarkable 
that Gamaliel II, one of the most important of all, is not mentioned, though all the line of Hillel, 
with that one exception, is represented, down to the beginning of the third century.) 50, toe, 
in regard to the substance of the maxims, while these touch upon some of the main heads 
of Rabbinical theology and ethics, they by no means cover the whole field; and in what they 
do give there is no appearance of systematic arrangement. The whole collection, indeed, might well 
have been taken from the editor’s note-book. But, while thus ‘formless’, it is by no means ‘void’; 
and the reader who will persevere will find much that is valuable and instructive for the right 
understanding of the religion and ethics of the Pharisees ; much, also, which, without being either 
very profound or very sublime, is yet well and wisely said. 

For the explanation of the origin and nature of the book, several things need to be said which 
cannot well be given under the separate heads of title, date, integrity of composition, and authorship. 
In place of these sections there will here be given— 


§ 2. HISTORICAL AND CRITICAL ACCOUNT OF PIRKE ABOTH. 


1. Origin and growth of the Mishnak as a whole. The characteristic feature of the reformation 
of Ezra in the fifth century B.c. was the stress laid upon the idea of Torah as the complete 
divine revelation given to Israel. ‘Torah’ should never be translated ‘Law’; it is much 
more than Law. The written record, the Pentateuch, contained divine instruction in other 
forms besides that of precept. The interpretation of the Pentateuch was the unfolding of 

686 


INTRODUCTION 


the contents of revelation in every direction, not in that of practical conduct alone. The truth 
thus rendered explicit through valid interpretation was part of the contents of the original 
revelation; hence the written word and the unwritten interpretation were each Torah, and 
together made up the whole Torah. What was sought in the divine revelation was either 
truth to be known or directions for conduct to be obeyed. In order to carry out the funda- 
mental command, ‘Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, &c., it was needful that 
the Jew should know exactly what the divine will was on every occasion of choice. Therefore one 
main line on which the idea of Torah was developed was that of a Rule of right conduct. This was 
obtained first of all from the written word, and thence extended by successive definitions and the 
application of recognized methods of interpretation. The results of this process were carefully 
handed on from one teacher to another, being regarded as ascertained portions of Torah, no longer 
to be disputed and of binding authority. The body of judicial interpretations thus accumulated is 
the Tradition of the Elders; and the name given to the Rule of right conduct embodied in the 
tradition is Halachah. The tradition probably began with Ezra, but no names are preserved of the 
earliest teachers. In the centuries after his time, the mass of halachah increased in amount and 
complexity, since in each generation the more eminent teachers made their own contributions to it. 
The teachers whose names are given in the Pirké Aboth are those who were chiefly instrumental in 
developing the Tradition on the line of halachah. R. Akiba (see notes) made the first attempt to 
classify the unwieldy mass of halachah, but left the work unfinished. His pupil, R. Meir, carried 
it further ; but it was left to R. Judah (Rabbi) to undertake and accomplish the orderly arrangement 
of the whole, in the Mishnah. In form, the Mishnah is a series of definitions of halachah upon 
various subjects, extending over the whole range of practical life, regarded from the point of view of 
the Pharisee. In addition to the definitions of halachah, the Mishnah contains many rejected 
opinions, together with the reasons for rejecting them; also the names of the teachers on whose 
authority the tradition rested, as well as occasional historical and biographical notes. It is divided 
into six orders (sedarim) and sixty-three treatises or books (massichtoth). Each treatise is divided 
into chapters (ferakim), and each chapter into paragraphs (each called a halachah or a mishnah). 
One of these treatises, in the fourth order, is that now known as Pirké Aboth. In the editions of the 
Mishnah and the Talmud it is always called ‘ Aboth’. 

2. The treatise Aboth. While the rest of the Mishnah consists mainly of halachah, Aboth contains 
no halachah at all; and the only reason for its inclusion in the Mishnah would seem to be the fact 
that its list of ‘ Fathers’ is made up of those teachers who mainly produced the Mishnah. But why it 
was placed where it now stands, in the main division dealing with ‘ Injuries’, has not been satisfactorily 
explained. That it was incorporated in the Mishnah, and was not left an isolated book as might well 
be supposed, is shown by the fact that in the Gemara (the later comment on the Mishnah, in the third 
to the fifth centuries) there are at least seventeen references to passages in Aboth, introduced by one 
or other of the formulae regularly used in quoting from the Mishnah. Several of these references 
are on the authority of R. Johanan, who had been a pupil of ‘Rabbi’ and must have known the 
Mishnah as Rabbi left it. But it was incorporated in the Mishnah, as an extraneous element, 
not forming part of the halachic tradition. The motive for the collection of the contents of Aboth 
was originally the desire to indicate the links in the chain of tradition from. the time of Moses to the 
time of the compiler, whoever he was. This earliest nucleus of Aboth is contained in ch. i, and, 
as I believe, ends there. It will be seen from the notes that the last teacher mentioned in ch. i died 
in the war of A.D. 68-70, a date which is one of the fixed points of Rabbinical chronology. Who it 
was that drew up this list of ‘Fathers’ there is no evidence to show; it might well have been 
R. Zadok (iv. 7), an old man who just survived the fall of Jerusalem. But it is clear that the 
title ‘Fathers’ belongs to this earliest list, and, strictly speaking, only to that. The ancient, not the 
contemporary, teachers were the Fathers of Israel. In ch. ii is found another list, probably 
suggested by, but not continuous with, the earlier one. It deals mainly with R. Johanan b. Zaccai, 
his teacher, and his chief pupils; in other words, with the men who re-established the tradition after 
the war. A connexion with the older series is made by the statement that R. Johanan b. Zaccai 
‘received from’ Hillel. But there is no further attempt to carry on the successive stages of the 
tradition. The mention in ii. 1, 2 of Rabbi and his son is clearly a later addition, and the same may 
perhaps be the case with R. Tarphon ii. 19, 20. Chapters ili and iv (which are continuous) 
abandon chronology altogether, and seem to be due to a desire to enrich the former collections 
of ancient wisdom with specimens from later times. Ch. v in its turn abandons the form of personal 
reference, and consists mainly of a series of groups based on numbers. All these different elements 
are clearly distinguishable ; but it is impossible to allot them to their respective authors. I can only 
suggest that Rabbi found ch. i and ii already in existence, possibly also iii and iv (if he did not 
compile them himself), and that he added ch. v ee conclusion to the whole collection. Ch. vi was 

7 


PIRKE ABOTH 


not added till long after. The Mishnah, as left by Rabbi, contained then the treatise Aboth 
substantially complete ; but interpolations were made in the one as in the other. Those in Aboth 
will be pointed out in the notes. The Mishnah became the subject of study in the Rabbinical 
schools both of Palestine and Babylonia, and the resulting commentary is called the Gemara. The 
Mishnah and the Gemara together form the Talmud, and there are thus two Talmuds, known 
respectively as the Jerusalem and the Babylonian. But there is no Gemara on Aboth, since it did 
not deal with halachah. At some period, probably after the closing of the Talmud, there was 
compiled a sort of expansion of Aboth, the work known as the Aboth of R. Nathan, though he was 
certainly not the compiler of the whole of it (see the preface in Schechter’s edition of the AJ, 
1887). The older Aboth was not displaced by the later expansion ; it gradually came to be used as 
a book of edification for Sabbath reading by students in the colleges. The earliest trace of such use 
is in the college at Sura, towards the middle of the ninth century. At some later period, but before 
the end of the eleventh century, its use was extended from the colleges to the synagogues, and 
it was appointed to be read in the service on certain Sabbaths. Already in the college at Sura, the 
sixth chapter had been added to Aboth; and, if the reading was intended to last over six Sabbaths 
(as is the case in many Jewish communities), here would be the reason for compiling an additional 
chapter to the original five. Since the eleventh century, Aboth has been included in all the Jewish 
liturgies, though the days on which it is to be read vary in different localities. The most usual 
practice is to read it on the six Sabbath afternoons after Passover. 


§ 3. THE MANUSCRIPTS. 


These are either of the whole Talmud, or of the Mishnah, or of Aboth separately. The Munich 
MS. of the Babylonian Talmud, written in 1369, and collated by Rabbinowicz for his variae 
lectiones, contains Aboth; but it has never been published, and the great work of Rabbinowicz was 
left unfinished at his death, the collation of Aboth being amongst the unprinted remainder. The 
most important Mishnah MS. is that in the Cambridge University Library (Add. 470. 1), fully 
described in Taylor’s edition of Aboth (Appendix, 1900). In that Appendix, Taylor gives a 
classified list of 170 MSS. of Aboth contained in the libraries of London (B. Museum), Oxford 
(Bodleian), Cambridge, Paris, Hamburg, Berlin, St. Petersburg, and Parma. The reader is referred 
to Taylor's list, also to the section on MSS. in Strack’s article ‘Thalmud’ in Hauck’s 
Lncyklopadie. The present translation and notes have been made (so far as manuscript authority is con- 
cerned) with the help of Taylor's critical material; it may be sufficient therefore to describe briefly 
the chief MSS. used by him. For convenience of printing, ordinary capitals have been substituted 
for his Old English letters. 


A. The Cambridge MS. mentioned above, containing the whole Mishnah according to the Palestinian recen- 
sion, date fourteenth century. It has been published in full by W. H. Lowe, 1883. Taylor uses this 
as the basis of his translation. Aboth contains only five chapters. 

B. Cambridge, St. John’s College, K. 7. A copy (1517) of the commentary on Aboth (six chapters) by 
R. Isaac Israeli (1368), which was based upon an older commentary by R. Israel of Toledo (twelfth— 
thirteenth centuries). 

C. Cambridge University, Add. 667, date 1220. Contains an unpointed text of Aboth (six chapters), also 
a commentary upon it. 

D. Br. Museum, Add. 27200-1, date not later than 1242. Contains an unpointed text of Aboth, together 
with commentary. Six chapters are given; but it is expressly stated that Aboth ends with v. 29: 

S. London, Jews’ College, date about 1610. Contains pointed text of Aboth, six chapters, with a grammatical 
commentary. 


§ 4. INFLUENCE OF ABOTH ON LATER LITERATURE. 


Very little can be said under this head, although Pirké Aboth has been more widely read 
amongst Jews than almost any other book. Its influence upon life and character has been very 
great, because it has kept before the minds of its readers a certain type of piety. But it does so 
only by expressing the ethical, and to some extent the religious, ideas common to the whole of the 
literature coeval with the Talmud. It strikes out no new line, presents no new thought whose 
influence might be traced in later writings. The object of its compilation was to collect the treasures 
of ancient wisdom, not to invite a search for the new. There was progressive thought in Talmudic 
and mediaeval Judaism; but it received no stimulus from Pirké Aboth. When Maimonides wrote 
his commentary on Aboth, he got his ethics mainly from Aristotle and interpreted the Jewish wisdom 
in terms of the Greek. Aboth served him as a basis for his exposition, not as the source of his ideas 
The same is more or less true of all the many commentaries on Aboth; the object of them is to 
unfold the meaning of an ancient manual of piety, according to the moral judgement of the 

688 


INTRODUCTION 


interpreter, and not to go beyond it. The value of Aboth consisted largely in its presentation of 
the past, its reflection of the wisdom and piety which had stood the test of long experience, and was 
consecrated by the memory of revered sages and saints of the olden time. As a factor in training 
character it has played a great part in Jewish history; but as a source of new developments in 
literature, what influence it may have had is merged in that of the Talmud and the Midrash as a 
whole. 

Outside the domain of Jewish literature and life Aboth has had practically no effect at all. It 
was known only to scholars, and by them used for the illustration of Jewish thought ; it did not, so 
far as I know, lead to any fresh literary creation by non-Jewish writers. 


§ 5. THEOLOGY OF ABOTH. 


As will have appeared already, the main character of the book is ethical rather than theological. 
A theology is certainly implied in it, but it is the theology which underlies the whole of Rabbinical 
Judaism, and is in no way peculiar to Aboth. A full account of this theology would be out of place 
in an introduction to a book which is not specially theological, and would moreover occupy far more 
space than could be given to it. All that will here be attempted is to remark on those features of 
Aboth which may be regarded as theological. The distinction here drawn between ethical and 
theological would be hardly felt by those for whom Aboth was intended or by whom it was 
compiled. To be virtuous was to do the will of God; and the way to become virtuous was to learn 
what He had revealed and to take it to heart. A Talmudic Rabbi would not deny that there were 
virtuous Gentiles; but for those to whom the Torah, the complete divine revelation, had been given, 
there could be no moral excellence apart from Torah. The sanction of ethics was the revealed will 
of God; and there was no moral worth in obeying the precepts, in doing the things prescribed, 
unless there were the conscious intention of serving God in so doing. Hence, for all that the 
maxims in Aboth are in form mostly ethical, they are in substance religious, and, to the Jew, 
inseparable from religion. The character formed in accordance with them is the character of the 
hasid, the saint, the type of what the Jew ought to be as one of the children of God. To bear this 
in mind is constantly necessary in reading Aboth, else the non-Jewish reader will be likely to be 
little impressed by a series of moral counsels which do not appear to be very profound or very 
interesting. Behind them all (or nearly all) is, for the Jew, the thought of his personal relation to 
God, to whose perfect service those counsels are the guides. In this sense, the whole of Aboth is 
religious, though not specifically theological. 

Of theology proper, the chief concept in Aboth is Torah, as it is the chief concept in all 
Rabbinical theology. What Torah means has been to some extent explained in §2. A large 
proportion of the maxims in Aboth refer to the study of Torah ; and by that is to be understood 
not merely the reading of the Pentateuch but the study of the divine thought, revealed implicitly in 
the written word (directly in the Pentateuch, indirectly in the rest of Scripture), and rendered 
explicit in the oral interpretation. Torah virtually means the whole of divine truth, so far as it was 
accessible to human minds. The characteristic terms of Talmudic Judaism are those of teaching 
and learning ; the names Talmud, Mishnah, Midrash express the giving or receiving of knowledge, 
the thing known being Torah. Hence the keynote of Rabbinism is wisdom, and its saints are its 
sages; and here is to be found the clue to the remarkable difference in tone and character between 
the Talmudic literature and the N. Testament. 

When the real significance of Torah is understood, it will not seem surprising that in Aboth 
there is no very frequent mention of God. Wherever Torah is referred to God is implied. He is 
not actually named by the use of the word ‘ God ’ all through the book, except in Scriptural citations. 
The term most often used is ‘ Makom’, lit. ‘ place’, as we should say ‘the All-present’.’’ But it must 
not be inferred from this that the Talmudic idea of God was of a remote and abstract being. This 
was not so; although the evidence for denying this frequent misrepresentation cannot be given here. 
God is once referred to, in the concluding verse of the original book, v. 23, as ‘thy Father which is 
in heaven’, a term which is quite as characteristic of Talmudic religion as ‘Makom’, and which 
belongs of right to Judaism no less than to Christianity. eB 

In regard to God’s dealings with man, His foreknowledge is asserted, but most stress Is laid upon 
His justice which shows itself in retribution ; reward and punishment are apportioned for good deeds 
and bad respectively, and, though sometimes described in figures of speech commercial rather than 
religious, reward and punishment signify the divine approval and disapproval not limited to particular 
forms of expression. God must be served not for the sake of the reward, but for His own sake ; ‘ for 
the sake of Heaven’ is only another way of saying ‘for the sake of God’. The love of God to man 


1 Other terms are ‘ Holy One, blessed be He’, ‘ Heaven ’, ‘ Shechinah ’, ‘ King of the kings of the kings’. 
689 wey. 
1105-2 


PIRKE ABOTH 


is also mentioned, and is not confined to Israel (iii. 19). God hears prayer; and prayer is not to be 
restricted to fixed forms, but is to be the spontaneous utterance of the soul to Him. It may be 
inferred, though it is not expressly said, that as man was made in the image of God, the characteristics 
of the saint (see especially vi. 6) are likewise (so far as they are applicable) attributes of God. 

There is no theological doctrine which is taught in Aboth and not found elsewhere ; while there 
is much that is found elsewhere and only unmentioned in Aboth because there was no occasion for 
it. The object of the compiler was not to produce a handbook of theology, but to illustrate from 
famous examples the character of the saint. For Rabbinical theology as a whole the reader is 
referred to the Fewish Encyclopedia, and is warned that Weber’s System of Synagogue T, heology is 
a most unsafe guide, as it presents the results of great learning from a standpoint entirely mistaken 
and by a method fundamentally wrong.! (See the present writer's Pharisaism, Pp. 235-7.) 


§ 6. BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


There is no need to distinguish here between editions of the text and editions of the book ; and 
the critical problems presented by the text are of comparatively small importance, relating only to 
various readings and interpolations. There is nothing in the criticism of Aboth comparable to the 
problems presented by the Hexateuch, or Isaiah, or the Synoptic Gospels. 

Apart from the editions of the Mishnah and of the whole Talmud, there is, so far as I know, no 
editio princeps of Aboth. The separate text appeared first in the prayer-books, or less probably in 
the commentaries. It was never, till quite recently, printed as a book on its own account. The 
text in Hebrew, for private edification, has been published in many editions, but without any 
pretence of textual criticism. 

Of critical editions, prepared with all the resources of modern scholarship, there are only two. 
The first is that by C. Taylor (reprinted as second edition with appendix, in two volumes, 1900). 
This gives text, translation, critical and general notes, and a full critical apparatus. It is quite 
indispensable to the student of Aboth, though the notes are somewhat overloaded and not always 
strictly relevant. The chief omission is an account of the origin and history of the book, a few 
lines in the preface being all that is given to that branch of the subject. With that exception, 
Taylor’s edition leaves little to be said by any future editor of the text. The other critical edition 
is that by Strack, published in 1882. It is much shorter than that of Taylor, the notes being mainly 
grammatical and literary. But, so far as it goes, the work could hardly be improved ; the scholar- 
ship and minute accuracy for which Strack is so well known appear on every page. The introduction, 
though short, includes almost everything that is necessary, except an account of the MSS. Strack 
does not say what text he has used, nor what is the authority for the various readings which he 
rejects. For further details upon editions of Aboth, see the article in the Fewzsh Encyclopedia, and 
Strack’s Introduction just mentioned. 


SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES. 


In the following translation I have used the text as given in Taylor, in Strack, in the Wilna 
edition of the Talmud Babli (1880-1884), and in the Amsterdam edition of the Mishnah, 1675 
(a copy that belonged to R. Moses of Rothenburg). I have not followed any one of them exclu- 
sively. I have also got useful help from the edition, with commentary, called ‘Minhah hadashah’ 
1722 (written by Michael Moravezyk and published in 1576). I have throughout consulted the 
commentaries of Rashi, R. Obadiah of Sforno (Bartenora), Maimonides, and Jom-tob- Heller. 
I have followed the usual division of chapters ; but, as there is no recognized division of paragraphs 
I have used my own judgement in dividing them. z 


* The student, however, should bear in mind that Rabbinic Pharisaism after the destruction of the 


: uid T le j 
70 A.D. differs largely from Pharisaism before that date. See the Introduction to this Vol.—Gen. Editor, ee OM 


690 


PIRKE ABOTH 
SAYINGS OF THE FATHERS 


1: Moses received Torah from Sinai and delivered it to Joshua, and Joshua to the Elders, and the 
Elders to the Prophets, and the Prophets delivered it to the men of the Great Synagogue. They 
said three things: Be deliberate in judgement; and raise up many disciples; and make a fence for 
the Torah. 

2 Simeon the Just was of the remnants of the Great Synagogue. He used to say: On three things 
the world standeth: on the Torah, and on the Service, and on the doing of kindnesses. 

3 Antigonos of Socho received from Simeon the Just. He used to say: Be not like slaves who 
serve the master with a view to receiving a present; but be like slaves who serve the master not with 
a view to receiving a present: and let the fear of Heaven be upon you. 

4 Jose ben Joezer of Zeredah and Jose ben Johanan of Jerusalem received from them. Jose b. 
Joezer of Zeredah said: Let thy house be a house of meeting for the Wise, and bedust thyself with 
the dust of their feet, and drink with thirst their words. 


I. 1. Torah. A technical term not identical with ‘Law’. Torah (= teaching) denotes the revelation which God 
gave to Israel by Moses, supposed to be complete and final. The Pentateuch is the written record of that teaching ; 
hence the name Torah is often applied to the Pentateuch. But Torah included also the unwritten tradition whereby 
the implicit contents of the revelation were made explicit by successive interpretations. No English word is equivalent 
to Torah, which is therefore retained untranslated in the text and the notes. 

the Elders. Probably the ‘able men’ chosen by Moses to assist him (Exod. xviii. 25), and regarded as 
a permanent body. 5; ; 

Great Synagogue. In the rabbinical tradition a council founded by Ezra which lasted for many years. The 
scanty references to it indicate the assembly mentioned in Neh. ix, x. No such permanent council can be shown to 
have existed ; but the tradition is not wholly worthless. The term ‘Great Synagogue’ may be taken to denote the 
early Scribes (Sopherim), who developed the religion of Torah on the lines and in the spirit of Ezra, for several 
generations after his time. See my Pharisaism, pp. 18-22. a 

They said, i.e. the men of the Great Synagogue said. Tradition represented as decrees of a council what 
were probably only the rules agreed on by the Scribes for their own guidance. The three sayings are certainly very 
ancient. It was the duty of the Scribes to judge, also to teach Torah. 

a fence for the Torah, mind 3°D. This does not mean that the Torah was to be made into a stiff hedge, but 
refers merely to precautions by which a man might be guarded from transgression before it was too late. 

2. Simeon the Just, or the Righteous. It is impossible to be sure who is meant, whether Simeon, grandson of 
Jaddua, who was High Priest from 310 to 291 B.C. (or 300-270), or his grandson, who was High Priest from 219 to 199. 
Josephus mentions both (Azz. xii. 2. 5 and 4. 10), but he only applies the epithet ‘the Just’ to the older man. The 
Simon of Sirach i is probably the younger, and he is not there called ‘the Just’. The rabbinical references confuse 
the two, and possibly allude to other men also. i : ; 

the world standeth. Meaning that the three things are the fundamentals of human (or perhaps national) life. 

Torah. See above. ; 

the Service, 711397. The Temple service. The three things represent revelation, worship, and sympathy, i. e. 
God’s word to man, man’s response to God, and man’s love to his fellow men. 

3. Antigonos of Socho. Note the Greek name. His date, being dependent on that of Simeon the Just, is 
uncertain. Later tradition said that he had two disciples, one of whom, Zadok, became the founder of the Sadducees. 

a present, The Hebr. word D5 represents the Gk. édpos, and is distinguished from * reward’, 12, that which 

has a right to expect. } ; 
ce ade Heaven, i.e. the fear of God. Heaven, for God, a frequent substitute in Jewish speech; the most 
familiar instance is ‘kingdom of heaven’ = kingdom of God. The two dicta of Antigonos are unconnected with 
er. ) : 
ni me here to v. 12, the successive teachers are arranged in pairs. They are so grouped elsewhere in the 
Talmud, and are called Zigoth (Pairs). They are represented in tradition as having been, in each case, the president 
and vice-president of the Sanhedrin, the great council of the state. This is incorrect, as Kuenen has conclusively 
shown (see his essay ‘ Over de samenstelling van het Sanhedrin’). If, however, there were some assembly of Scribes, 
as suggested above, v. I, then the Zigdth may have been presidents and vice-presidents of that body. a 

Jose b. Joezer was probably among the sixty who were killed by Alcimus (1 Mace. vii. 16), 162 B.C. Alcimus 
is said to have been his nephew. a ; : ee: iw 

from them, D7. The MSS. and printed texts are divided between this reading and an alternative from him 
ywod. For the former ABCD, for the latter S. Taylor, Baer, and Strack adopt the former. The latter 1s perhaps due 
to a desire to obviate the difficulty of the reading ‘from them’, since only Antigonos 1s mentioned in the preceding verse. 
The reading ‘from them’ implies that a name or names are missing between Antigonos and the first Pair. This 
favours the authenticity of the list ; if it had been fictitious, names would have been supplied. 

the Wise. The recognized teachers, whether the early Scribes or the later Rabbis. 

pedust thyself. The disciple should sit at the feet - his teacher ; cp. Acts xxl. 3. fe 

OR: ; 


PIRKE ABOTH 1. 5-10 


5 Jose b. Johanan of Jerusalem said: Let thy house be opened wide; and let poor folk be thy 
household ; and talk not much with the wife. F : 

5@__ [He said it concerning his own wife; much more concerning the wife of his associate. Hence the 
Wise have said: So long as a man talks much with the wife he causes evil to himself, and desists 
from words of Torah, and his end is that he inherits Gehenna.] , ; 

6 Joshua b. Perahiah and Nittai the Arbelite received from them. Joshua b. Perahiah said: Make 
to thyself a teacher ; and get thee an associate ; and judge every man with a leaning to Azs merit. 
7 Nittai the Arbelite said: Keep far from an evil neighbour, and consort not with the wicked, and 
be not heedless of retribution. ter 
8 Judah b. Tabbai and Simeon b. Shetah received from them. Judah b. Tabbai said: Make 
not thyself as those that prepare the judges ; and when the suitors are standing before thee let them 
be in thine eyes as wicked men; and when they have been dismissed from before thee let them be in 
thine eyes as just men who have received their sentence. 
9 Simeon b. Shetah said: Do much in examining the witnesses; and be careful in thy words; 
perchance by means of them they may learn to lie. 
to Shemaiah and Abtalion received from them. Shemaiah said: Love work, and hate mastery, and 
make not thyself known to the government. 


5. the wife, or ‘woman’ in general; cp. John iv. 27. But the former is more likely, because the whole verse refers 
to the one household ; also in the following verse, which interprets this saying, the meaning is clearly ‘ wife’. 

5a. This verse is a later comment on the preceding, though it is included in all the MSS. Ch. i is the oldest 
part of the treatise (v. Introduction) ; this verse may have been added by the compiler. 

He said it. The Hebr. is 199N, which, being unpointed, may be translated ‘ he said it *, or ‘they said’. The 
former suits the context, while the latter can only be made intelligible by supplying ‘the Wise’ from the next clause. 
Taylor and Strack render ‘they said’, and do not notice the alternative. Schoettgen has ‘he said it’, dixzft. The 
meaning of the prohibition to talk with the wife is variously explained : (a) it distracts the man’s attention from words 
of Torah ; (4) she may put him to shame by gossiping of what he says to her; (c) it may lead to his talking with other 
women, thence to suspicion, thence to sin. 

inherits, /". So most MSS. S has 351 ‘descends into’. ‘Inherit’ is frequently used of Paradise, the bliss 
after death ; v. zz/fra, v. 22, ‘Garden of Eden’, and cp. Matt. xxv. 34, 41. 

Gehenna, [éevva, the abode of the wicked after death. 

6. The second Pair, v. supra, i. 4. Their approximate date is 110 B.C. J. b. Perahiah, according to one set of 
traditions in the Talmud, was the teacher of Jesus. 

Nittai the Arbelite. From Arbela (mod. Irbid) in Galilee, a few miles west-north-west of Tiberias. Nittai is the 
usual reading, and is a contracted form of Nethaniah. A reads Mattai, here and Hag. ii. 2, the only other place where 
this teacher is mentioned ; the difference is only between NN) and ‘NN, 

associate, faver, 13M, the name applied to members of a society, Zabirah, pledged to strict observance of 
the rules of ‘clean’ and ‘ unclean’, &c. The term is possibly derived from Ps. cxix. 63, and was used by Pharisees to 
designate each other. 

leaning to his merit, N\St qm. Metaphor of a balance with two pans, one to hold the merit, the other the demerit. 
That which holds the merit is to be helped to descend. The maxim simply means ‘ believe the best of every man’. 

7. evil neighbour. Probably general. 

heedless, perhaps ‘hopeless’. It has been suggested (/. Exc. s.v. Nittai) that this third saying was uttered in 
reference to the persecution of the Pharisees by John Hyrcanus after he had gone over to the Sadducees (Josephus, 
Ant. xiii. 10. 6), and that it was meant to encourage the Pharisees to hope that Hyrcanus would yet be punished for 
his apostasy. This is possible ; but the commentators interpret the saying of retribution in general. 

8. The third Pair. S.b. Shetah, brother-in-law of King Jannaeus (126-76 pz. c.), whom he survived. He was 
successful in restoring the influence of the Pharisees which had been lost under Hyrcanus (see above). In the 
tradition, though J. b. Tabbai is here placed first, S. b. Sh. is by far the more important. (See Rev. d. Etudes 
Juives, 1912, pp. 216-32.) 

prepare the judges, }'J"17 ‘Dy, i.e. influence them before the trial. As the maxim is addressed to judges the 
meaning seems to be ‘do not listen to those who prepare the judges’, in any case ‘ be impartial’. This clause is 
repeated below, iv. 7. [If we read }9)"30 we have an excellent sense: ‘ Make not thyself like those who prepare the 
suits,’ i.e. do not play the part of a counsel but of a judge.—Gen. Editor.] 

wicked: not, however, guilty (Taylor). The judge must not assume that the accused has done what he is 
accused of, but must merely show no favour to either party ; he must not say ‘ this man is respectable ’ (Rashi). 

just: as they have received the sentence, there is no further ground of imputing evil to them: they have 
satisfied the law. i 

9. Again addressed to judges. careful in thy words, 7252 7n?: the judge is not to indicate what his own 
pinion is, lest the witnesses should adapt their evidence to his views and swear falsely for the sake of a verdict in 

eir favour. 

10. The fourth Pair. Shemaiah and Abtalion are probably the Sauéas and Woddlov of Josephus (Anz. xv. 1. 1) 
es said : Helin Cae: ies origin; but Gratz (G. d. Jud. iii. 481) disproves this, and suggests 

ey were Alexandrian Jews. ate, 60 B.C., circa. Shemaiah i i reg : it i i 
Josephus that he was a disciple of Abtalion. ; gies Pron Beait tees DUE Mens eid by 
mastery, N32", the word used in later literature to describe the status of a Rabbi. 
Can Nes St he was ee and magnified his office. The Talinad (b. Sees fas ra 
seph aled before his brethren becaus i eit i { ; 
etree. e e he behaved with rabsanuth » 1. he domineered over them. Shemaiah 


692 


PIRKE ABOTE 1. 11-16 


Zip Abtalion said: Ye Wise, be careful in your words; lest ye become guilty with the guilt shat 
involves exile, and be exiled to a place of evil waters, and the disciples that come after you drink and 
die, and the Name of Heaven be found profaned. 


12 Hillel and Shammai received from them. Hillel said: Be of the disciples of Aaron, one that 
__ loves peace, that pursues peace, that loves mankind and brings them nigh to Torah. 
13 He used to say: Whoso makes great his name destroys his name; whoso adds not makes to cease ; 


and he who will not learn is guilty so as ¢o deserve killing. And whoso serves himself with the crown 
passes away. 


14 He used to say: If I am not for myself, who is for me? And when I am for myself, what am I? 
And if not now, when? 


15 Shammai said: Make thy Torah a fixed duty; say little and do much; and receive every man 
with the look of a cheerful face. 


16 Rabban Gamaliel said: Make to thyself a teacher ; and remove thyself from what is doubtful ; and 
do not often tithe by mental valuation. 


government, NW. The authorities (so ii. 3 below). It is dangerous to become known to the authorities, or it is 
corrupting. Probably here the latter is meant ; as Shemaiah was very well known to the authorities. 

11. Wise. The teachers, Rabbis; see above, i. 4. To expound Torah wrongly is to promote the transgression of 
its precepts. If, as the divine retribution for doing so, a teacher is exiled to a place of evil waters, i.e. a place where 
there is no sound teaching of Torah, he may perpetuate his error, so that those who come after, i.e. learn from him, 
may drink, i.e. receive his teaching, and die, i. e. fall into sin for which death is the divine punishment. In that 
case, it will be found, i, e. it will result, that the name of God has been profaned. 

12. Hillel and Shammai, the fifth and last Pair (date 30 B.c. and after). Hillel is said to have lived 120 years, 
but this is only a way of comparing him with Moses. The same is said of R. Johanan b. Zaccai. The disciples of 
H. and S. were divided in opinion upon many questions, and their controversies lasted for nearly a century. It was 
perhaps owing to this that no further Pairs are mentioned. The authorized tradition was that of the school of H.; 
and, with the one exception of R. Joh. b. Zaccai, descendants of H. successively held the leading position (later, with 
the title of ‘ Nasi’, ‘prince’) down to A.D. 415. Seven sayings of H. are given in this book, i. 12-14, ii. 5-8. The 
originals are part in Hebrew, part in Aramaic. 

disciples of Aaron. The association of Aaron with peace is frequent in the Rabinical literature, and is possibly 
due to H. himself. 

mankind, ny"3, lit. ‘ creatures’, but the commentators agree that it refers to the human race as a whole; and 
thus it often denotes the Gentiles as distinguished from the Jews. Taylor compares Mark xvi. 15 and Rom. viii. 19. 
The sense is probably the same; but in these and similar passages xriows is in the singular (R. V. ‘ creation’). 


brings. .. nigh to Torah, mind j37p2. As the Torah was the divine revelation, the ‘creatures’, i. e. all mankind, 
should be invited to come and share in it. This is the motive of ‘compass sea and land to make one proselyte’, Matt. 
SSN hy AOS 
wa Yiteh ? he original is in Aramaic. name, reputation. For the sense of the maxim cp. ‘vaulting ambition doth 
o’erleap itself’ (Shaks.). 

adds not, i. e. to what he learns from his teacher; he must contribute something from his own intelligence. 

makes to cease. The reading varies between the trans. and the intrans. *}D° and 41D’. In the first case the 
learner loses what he has learned ; in the second he comes to an end, is good for nothing. 

guilty ... killing, 2°n xd. For the form of the phrase cp. (A. V.) Matt. xxvi. 66. ‘Guilty of death’ gives 
the wrong sense in English; but it exactly represerts the Hebrew, of which évoxos @avdrov is the rendering in the 
Gospel. To refuse to learn Torah at all is to despise the divine revelation, and is, as it were, spiritual suicide. One 
who does so ‘ deserves death’, but is not ‘guilty of killing’ himself. 

serves himself, makes his own profit out of. 

crown: any position of authority or privilege, here his knowledge of Torah. The teacher of Torah must not be 
paid for teaching. The Rabbis either worked for their living or had private means. See below, iv. 7, where this 
maxim is paraphrased by R. Zadok, and Hillel’s own words added, perhaps by the editor. 

14. Original in Hebrew. The general sense is of self-reliance and readiness. The contrast between ‘now’ and 
‘when?’ refers either to ‘this world’ and ‘the world to come’, or else merely to the present and some future time. 
The opportunity may never come again. : ; i: , 

15. Shammai (see above, v. 12) was much less prominent in the tradition. He had the character of being harsh 
and severe, as contrasted with Hillel. hiveae 

fixed, Y3P: ‘duty’ is added to complete the sense. Torah is to be the foundation of all, the one essential in life, and 
the study of it is to take precedence over everything else. Another interpretation is that fixed times are to be kept for 
the study of Torah lest it be omitted. Another is, that Torah (precept) is to be applied uniformly, not in favour of one 
and against another, but equally to both. 

16. Rabban Gamaliel. In Hebrew Soba. Grandson of Hillel; this is the teacher of Paul, and the Gamaliel 
of Acts v. 34. Rabban isa title, first used in his case, to denote the head of the house of Hillel. According to the 
Rabbinical view, this carried with it the presidency of the Sanhedrin; but the passage in Acts shows that Gamaliei did 
not hold that position. After the fall of Jerusalem, when the Sanhedrin ceased to be the great council under the 
presidency of the High Priest, and became merely the assembly of the Rabbis, the chief of the house of Hillel was its 
president ; except that for some years, A. D. 70-80, R. Johanan b. Zaccai held the office. The title Rabban is not 
indicated in the passage in Acts; but if it were the retrospective compliment of a later age, it would almost certainly 
have been given also to Hillel. Perhaps it is the expression of the fact that Gamaliel was held in honour of all the 

eople’. ; : 
pooee ... doubtful, PDDN fi sbnon. Taylor renders ‘ Be quit of doubt’, but does not explain the saying. 
The commentators connect it with the previous saying, and take it to mean, ‘In doubtful cases consult some one else, 


693 


17 


18 


21 


PIRKE ABOTH 1. 17—2. 1 


Simeon his son said: All my days I have grown up among the Wise, and I have not found ae 
thing better than silence ; and not study is the chief thing but action ; and whoso makes many words 


occasions sin. ; 
Rabban Simeon b. Gamaliel said: On three things the world stands: on judgement, on truth, and 
on peace. [As it is said: ‘Truth and judgement of peace judge ye in your gates.’] pt 
Rabbi said: What is that right way which a man should choose for himself? Whatever is an 
honour to him that does it and an honour to him zz the sight of men. And be careful over a light 
precept as over a weighty, for thou knowest not the giving of the rewards of the precepts. And 
reckon the loss izvolved in a precept against its reward, and the reward of a sin against its loss. And 


and do not depend on your own judgement alone’; the reference is to the functions of a judge, and not to the difficulties 
of a searcher after truth. The third saying is mere practical advice not to rely on guesswork in estimating the 
amount to be separated (from corn, &c.) as tithe. ; 4 

17. Simeon his son. This would be the son of the preceding, and is so understood by nearly all the commentators. 
But a much more probable explanation is that vv. 16, 17 have been transposed, and that the Simeon of v.17 is the 
son of Hillel and father of Gamaliel. In favour of this view is the fact that this Simeon is not called Rabban, as he 
would have been if he had succeeded Gamaliel. Also, that Simeon the son of Hillel was so unimportant that he is 
only once mentioned in the Talmud ; this is in keeping with the saying mentioned in v. 17, which is the utterance of 
a shy, retiring man. Also, in v. 18, there is Rabban Simeon b. Gamaliel, i.e. the man to whom v. 17 1s commonly 
supposed to refer, viz. the Simeon who was one of the leading men during the siege of Jerusalem (Jos. Wars, 
iv. 3.9). The commentators, however, having already assigned v. 17 to him, are obliged to assign v, 18 to a younger 
S. b. Gamaliel, in the middle of the second century, who is here quite out of place. The identification I propose 
makes the arrangement simple and natural ; it brings the line of Hillel down to the year of the siege and stops there, 
in accordance with the remark in the Talmud (b. Shabb. 15%) that the order of succession was: Hillel, Simeon, 
Gamaliel, Simeon ; of whom it is said that the four held office for a hundred years prior to the destruction of the 
Temple. The whole line of descent for the period included in this book is as follows: Hillel, Simeon I, Gamaliel I, 
Simeon II, Gamaliel II, Simeon III, Judah the Prince, Gamaliel III, each being son of his predecessor. For 
the bearing of this conjecture on the compilation of the book, see the Introduction. The saying recited in v. 17 
scarcely needs explanation ; it is in keeping with the character of a man who had no head for study, and found it 
safest to remain silent. It was natural that he should lay more stress on the practice than on the theory of Torah. 
On the danger of much speaking cp. lil. 17 below, ‘ Silence is a fence for wisdom.’ 

18. For the identification of this teacher, see preceding note. This is the Simeon of the siege, in the course of or 
soon after which he was apparently killed. His maxim is a variant on v. 2 above, where three fundamentals are laid 
down in a saying ascribed to Simeon the Just. The text, Zech. viii. 16, cited in support of the maxim, is probably an 
editorial addition. The citations of Scripture become more frequent in the later parts of the book, but it is seldom 
possible to be sure whether any of them were included in the original text. 


II. 1. For the division of chapters in this book see the Introduction. 

Rabbi. This is R. Judah the Prince (Nasi), son of Simeon III, see above on i. 17; also called Judah the 
Holy (ha-kadosh). The title Rabbi was given to every accredited teacher in Palestine, but always with the addition 
of his own name, thus—Rabbi Zadok. In the case of Judah the Holy, the name was omitted and the title alone 
given, as if to indicate that he was ze Rabbi par excellence. Rabbi died A.D. 219. He is said to have been born 
A.D. 135, but this is probably too early. He was the last and chief compiler of the Mishnah, though additions were 
made to it after his time. This is evident from the mention of him in this verse, and still more from v.2. See the 
Introduction. 

way, path, or course, used as in English of the manner of life, course of action. The ‘ way of the earth’, pos 755, 
means general intercourse with one’s fellow men. It was the aim of the Rabbis to deduce from Torah directions for the 
practical service of God in daily life, guidance in the right ‘way’; and the rules which they formulated were called 


(singly and collectively) ‘halachah’, nsdn, i.e. ‘going’, in other words ‘rule of right conduct’. The Mishnah is, 
mainly, a collection of ‘halachah’, and the Gemara the commentary on it. Mishnah and Gemara together make up 
the Talmud. For the use of the term ‘ way’, in its ethical meaning, cp. Acts xviii. 26; xix. 9, 23; xxiv. 14; also the 
title of the early Jewish treatise, adapted to Christian use, ‘The Two Ways.’ 

a man, DUNN, not especially a Jew. 


him that does it. The almost universal reading is nwy), which is pointed either nyyo or mvp. I do not venture 


to depart from this in the translation. But MWY is not the verb which would naturally be used in reference to 777 
‘way’; and, further, some commentators have felt that the maxim of Rabbi requires a different antithesis. R. Israel 


of Toledo (twelfth to thirteenth century) suggests that neyd ought to be read nvyp (or, more simply, ame y?, as the 
first letter of the next word is )), and translated ‘to his Maker’. The maxim would then mean that a man’s actions 
should be honourable in the sight of God, as well as in the sight of men. This is certainly a brilliant conjecture, but 


there is no manuscript authority for it. According to the usual reading, the meaning is merely that a man should do 
what is a credit to himself and meets with the approval of his fellow men. 


light ... weighty, on... nbp, i.e. in appearance. In theory, all precepts of the Torah were of equal 
obligation, because all were expressions of the divine will. 
rewards, 12. The Rabbis meant by ‘reward’ the sign (whatever form it might take) of God’s approval of what 
was done in obedience to His will; they did not mean a payment for service rendered, a claim for which could be set 
up against God. The precepts were to be obeyed ‘with a perfect heart’, not for the sake of the reward. (See my 
Pharisaism, pp. 267-76.) The saying of Rabbi is commented on in this sense (though he is not named) in Midrash 
Rabbah, Deuz., p. 1124, a fine passage too long to quote. 
loss . . . reward, 773¥,.. 18 IDEM. Whatever sacrifice a duty entails there is the divine approval for it, 


694 


Zech, viii 








PirRich ABOTH 2) 1-6 


keep in view three things, and thou wilt not come into the clutches of sin; know what is above thee, 
an eye that sees and an ear that hears, and all thy deeds written in a book. 

2  Rabban Gamaliel the son of Rabbi Judah the Prince said: Comely is study of Torah with 
worldly occupation, for toil in both makes sin forgotten. And all Torah without work ends in failure 
and brings zwzth zt sin. And let all who labour with the congregation labour with them for the Name 
of Heaven, for the merit of their fathers upholds them, and their righteousness standeth for ever. 
And ye—I confer upon you, saith God, [plenteous] reward, as if ye had wrought. 

3 Be careful with the government, for they do not come near to a man except for their own need; 


and they appear like friends in the hour of their advantage, and they stand not by a man in the hour 
of his need. 


4  Heused to say: Make His will as thy will that He may make thy will as His will; efface thy will 
before His will that He may efface the will of others before thy will. 

5 Hillel said: Separate thyself not from the congregation, and be not sure of thyself till the day of 
thy death ; and judge not thine associate until thou comest to his place. And say not ofa word which 


cannot be understood that it will be understood in the end. And say not ‘when I am at leisure I 
will study’; perchance thou wilt not be at leisure. 


6 Heused to say: A rude man fears not sin; and no vulgar person is pious; and the shy man does 


and whatever be the advantage or profit gained by sin, there is the divine disapproval, retribution, behind it. Cp. 
Matt. xvi. 26. 
three things. It is not quite clear what the ‘three things’ are, as ‘know what is above thee’ may be reckoned 
as one of them. But probably this is only a variation on ‘consider’, and the three things are the seeing eye, the 
listening ear, and the book of record. C reads ‘know that above thee ave’, &c. For the book of record cp. Rev. xx. 12. 
2. Rabban Gamaliel. This is Gamaliel III, son of Rabbi. His date may be put at A.D. 250; hardly anything is 
known of him. The heads of the house of Hillel continued to hold the position of Nasi, and were the representatives 
of their people in dealing with the Roman government; but they ceased to take the lead in the teaching of Torah in 
the Rabbinical schools. Of this Gamaliel’s contemporaries, the chief teachers were R. Johanan in Palestine and Rab 
in Babylonia. 
worldly occupation, ~N 717. See above, note on v. I, on ‘ way of the earth’; Rabbinical opinion was divided on 
the amount of #8 75° to be allowed in conjunction with Torah; see below, iii. 20, vi. 7. 


failure...sin, fi)... npr. The consequences, not of Torah, but of Torah without practice ; cp. Jas. ii. 26, iv. 17. 
congregation, N2¥. The community of Israel as a whole, or any local community ; the reference is to synagogue 
officials, and more particularly to the ‘ parnas’ or steward who dispensed the charity and administered the funds of 
the congregation. The steward must do his work as a service of God, and not take credit to himself for what he does. 
The congregation do their charity through him, but the ‘righteousness’ is theirs, not his. The merit of their fathers 
upholds them, not the merit of the steward. But, if the steward acts thus piously and disinterestedly, there is reward, 
divine approval, for him also. God reckons it to him as if he had done from himself what the congregation have done 
through his agency. 
saith God, or, the Scripture, not in the text but implied in the singular of the verb nbyp. A has the plural poy 
‘they confer’, ‘they’ being the angels, the ‘family above’, as they are called in the Rabbinical literature. The phrase 
is often used as equivalent to Providence. There is no thought of beings independent of God. ABC omit plenteous. 
3. This is apparently said by the same R. Gamaliel III as the preceding. It is not clear to whom the advice is 
addressed. Gamaliel himself, as Nasi, was the official representative of the Jews to the Roman authorities ; but the 
synagogue stewards may have been brought into contact with government officials. But it is possible that the saying, 
being anonymous, does not belong to Gamaliel at all, and may be addressed to others than the stewards of the 
preceding verse. The saying is based on bitter experience of the ways of the Roman government, but expresses 
a cynical opinion about all governments, that they only act from self-interest. 
4. He. The speaker of the preceding verse, presumably Gamaliel III. ; a ; 
His will, i.e. God’s will. The thought is clear, but falls short of the unconditional submission of ‘Not as I will, 
but as Thou wilt. Thy will be done.” There is no exact parallel to that saying of Jesus in the Rabbinical literature. 
5. Hillel. See above, i. 12. There was a much later Hillel, but there is no ground for supposing that the speaker 
here is any but the early and famous Hillel. For the want of chronological order in the book see the Introduction. 
Separate... congregation. Probably intended as a warning against taking up strange and heretical opinions 
and practices. The saying is ascribed to R. Zadok, see below, iv. 7, but perhaps only because he there repeats another 
saying of Hillel. 
say not... understood. The reading varies between TWDN ‘can be’, and WSN °S ‘cannot be’. Also 


some commentators supply by ‘of’, to make sense. Two interpretations are possible: (a) the teacher shall not teach 
what cannot be understood and excuse himself by saying that it will be understood in time, after reflection by the learner ; 
he ought to express his meaning clearly at the first ; (4) the learner ought not to say ‘of’ anything which is taught and 
which seems to him unintelligible, that he will learn what it means later on; he ought to apply himself to it at once till 
hemastersit. The difference between ‘can be’ and ‘cannot be’ understood is in appearance, not In reality. The inter- 
pretation (4) is that of Rashi (or the commentary ascribed to him). It is confirmed by the final clause, *say not when 
I am at leisure,’ &c. : 
6. rude, 3, ‘empty of everything, even the knowledge of business’ (Bartenora). He has no Torah to keep him 

from sin. 

vulgar, in the sense of ‘one of the common herd’, Hebr. POND DY, a famous term much discussed. It 
denotes all who for whatever reason did not seek to conform their lives and actions to the Torah. Cp. John vii. 49. 

shy, }¥°2. One who is afraid to ask his teacher to explain what he does not understand. 


695 


PIRKE ABOTH 2. 6-13 


not learn nor the passionate teach, nor he that hath much business become wise. And in a place 
where there are no men strive to be a man. . : 

7 _ Moreover, he saw a skull which floated on the face of the water, and he said to it: Because thou 
drownedst they drowned thee; and at the last they who drowned thee shall be drowned. 

8 He used to say: More flesh more worms; more wealth more care; more maidservants more 
lewdness ; more menservants more thieving ; more women more witchcraft ; more Torah more life; 
more classroom more wisdom; more counsel more discernment; more righteousness more peace. 
Whoso has gained a good name has gained 7¢ for himself; who has gained for himself words of Torah 
has gained for himself the life of the world to come. 

9  Kabban Johanan b. Zaccai received from Hillel and from Shammai. He used to say: If thou 
hast practised much Torah, take not credit to thyself, for thereunto wast thou created. RES 

to Five disciples there were to Rabban Johanan b. Zaccai, and these are they: Rabbi Eliezer 
b. Hyrcanus, Rabbi Joshua b. Hananiah, Rabbi Jose the priest, Rabbi Simeon b. Nathaniel, and 
Rabbi Eleazar b. Arach. He used to sum up their praise—Eliezer b. Hyrcanus is a plastered cistern 
which loseth not a drop; Joshua b. Hananiah, happy is she who bore him ; Jose the priest is 
pious ; Simeon b. Nathaniel feareth sin; Eleazar b. Arach is a full-flowing spring. 

11 He used to say: If all the Wise of Israel were in one scale of the balance and Eliezer b. Hyrcanus 
in the other scale, he would weigh down them all. Abba Saul said, in his name: If all the Wise 
of Israel were in one scale of the balance and Eliezer b. Hyrcanus with them, and Eleazar b. Arach 
in the other scale, he would weigh them all down. . ; 

12 He said to them: Go and see what is that good way to which a man should cleave. R, Eliezer 
said: A good eye. R. Joshua said: A good associate. R. Jose said: A good neighbour. 
R. Simeon said: He that regards the result of an action. R. Eleazar said: A good heart. He 
said to them: I regard the words of Eleazar b. Arach more than your words, for your words are 
included in his. , 

13 He said to them: Go and see what is that evil way from which a man should keep himself. 


passionate, {75P. The teacher who loses his temper when his pupils do ask him questions. 
become wise. Cp. Sirach xxxviii. 24. 

7. An epigram of retribution. The original is in Aramaic. 

8. A series of epigrams. For the sake of brevity the original 7271) ‘one that increases’ is rendered by ‘more’. 
There is more of cynicism in these sayings than of the gentle and lovable nature for which Hillel was traditionally 
famous. 

9. Rabban Johanan b. Zaccai. One of the disciples of Hillel; he died about A.D. 80, and is said to have been 
120 years old; probably he was born about the beginning of our era. He saved Judaism after the fall of Jerusalem, 
A.D. 70, by gathering the surviving Rabbis in Jabneh, and re-establishing the broken fabric of the study of Torah. 
The surviving heir of the House of Hillel, Gamaliel II, son of Simeon II (see above, i. 17, 18), was probably too young 
to take the lead. He succeeded to the presidency on the death (or retirement ?) of R. Johanan. Note that the title 
‘Rabban’ is given to Johanan; also that he is said to have ‘ received from’ Hillel, the same phrase as that used in 
the earlier verses of ch, i. This is the last occasion on which the phrase is used in the book. 

practised, MWY. So ABCD, supported by Abarbanel and many commentators. The printed editions have 


‘learned’, nb, possibly influenced by a similar phrase in ii. 20. Since the verb NYY does not go well with ‘Torah’, 
some MSS. read 731) ‘good’, instead of M71N, with the meaning ‘done much good’; but the authority for this is 


wv 
very slight. It may have been suggested by 2319 after prnn by. LK. 7:10 / 

10. The five disciples of R. Johanan. All are known in the Rabbinical tradition, but the first two far outshone the 
others. R. Eliezer died shortly before a.p. 116, and was then an old man. R. Joshua had been a singer in the 
Temple. He was living in A.D. 1 30, for he met the emperor Hadrian in Alexandria; but he was dead before 
the rebellion of Bar Cocheba broke out in A.D. 1 35. Of the other three Rabbis, no chronological details can be given. 
ACD omit ‘ Rabbi’ before their names when their master refers to them ; the printed texts add it. Note the reference 
to the mother of R. Joshua; tradition Says that she used to bring him in his cradle to the Synagogue that he might 
thus early be accustomed to hear words of Torah (Jer. Jeb. 3a). This is reported by Dosa b. Harchinas (see below, 
ili. 14), who knew him as a child. 

11. He, i.e. R. Johanan. The two clauses contradict each other. R. Eliezer and R. Eleazar b. Arak cannot both 
have been supreme. The remark of Abba Saul (a contemporary) seems intended to replace a misquoted opinion of 
R. Johanan by a correct version. This is confirmed by R. Johanan’s approval of R. Eleazar in vv. T2er34 

12. He. Again R. Johanan. 

Go and see. Merely an opening formula, ‘ Come now.’ 

good way. See above on ii. 1. The answers give not a ‘way’ but the clue to finding the way. 

good eye. Cp. Matt. vi. 22, 23. In general it means an unselfish disposition. 

associate. See above oni. 6. 

neighbour. See above, i. 7. 

result of an action. The meaning is that the ‘ good way’ is found by learning from experience. 

good heart, as being the source of all feeling and all action. This is the ground why R. Johanan approved 
R. Eleazar’s answer before all the rest. 

13. The negatives to the preceding answers. R. Simeon, however, varies the form of his reply. The man who 
borrows and does not pay is one who acts without considering the consequences. The clause, ‘ He that borrows from 
man,’ &c., although it is included in the MSS., is probably a later gloss, because it is out of keeping with the brevity 
of all the other replies. The proof-text shows that the author of the gloss interpreted R. S.’s saying of literal borrowing. 


696 





PIRKE ABOTH 2. 13-18 


R. Eliezer said: An evil eye. R. Joshua said: An evil associate. R. Jose said: An evil neighbour. 
R. Simeon said: He that borrows and does not pay. [He that borrows from man is as he that 
borrows from God, blessed be He; as it is said, ‘The wicked borroweth and payeth not, but the Ps. xxxvii. 21 
righteous showeth favour and giveth.’] R. Eleazar said: An evil heart. He said to them: I regard | 
the words of Eleazar b. Arach more than your words; for your words are included in his. 
14 They said cach three things. R. Eliezer said: Let the honour of thine associate be dear to thee 
as thine own. And be not easily wroth; and repent one day before thy death. And warm thyself 
at the fire of the Wise, and be careful of their glowing coal lest thou be singed. For their bite is the 


bite of a jackal, and their sting the sting of a scorpion, and their hiss the hiss of a serpent, and all 
their words like coals of fire. 


15 R. Joshua said: An evil eye and the evil principle and hatred of mankind drive a man out of 
the world. 


16 R. Jose said: Let the wealth of thy associate be dear to thee as thine own. And set thyself to 
learn Torah, for it is not a legacy to thee. And let all thy actions be to the Name of Heaven. - 
ty R. Simeon said: Be careful in reading the ‘Shema’ and in prayer. And when thou prayest make _ 
not thy prayer a fixed form, but [mercies and] entreaties before God. [As it is said: ‘For he is Joel ii. 13 
gracious and merciful, longsuffering and full of compassion, and repenteth him of the evil.’] And 
be not wicked in thine own sight. 


18 R. Eleazar said: Be alert to learn Torah, [and know | what thou shalt answer to an Epicurean ; 


14. They. The five Rabbis of the preceding verses. 
three things. It will be noticed that most of the teachers in i, ii are credited with a group of three sayings ; 
this arrangement is not maintained in the case of later teachers. The three sayings of R. Eliezer are variously dis- 
tinguished, according as the remark about ‘the fire of the Wise’, &c., is included or excluded. Maimonides excludes 
it, and this seems right, although a connexion can be made out between the other three clauses so as to group two of 
them as one. R. Eliezer was excommunicated in his old age by his colleagues; and the caustic criticism of the Wise 
probably expresses his sentiments upon the subject. Itmay well have been remembered as an epigram, but hardly as an 
expression of habitual wisdom, 
honour, good name, credit. For a variant of the saying see below, iv. 15. 
repent ... death. R. Eliezer explained his meaning thus :—Repent every day, since thou knowest not the day 
of thy death (b. Shabb. 153). 
fire of the Wise, as being dangerous to play with. The vivid similes which follow are easily intelligible under 
the circumstances of R. Eliezer’s closing years, and need no comment. 
15. evileye. See on v.12, above. 
evil principle, 97 “¥°. According to the Rabbinical psychology, there were in every man two opposing prin- 
ciples or impulses, one towards good, the other towards evil. The evil principle corresponds to the oapé of Paul. 
mankind. See above oni.12. In place of N73 C reads DIN ‘without cause ’, possibly influenced by a similar 
phrase in b. Joma 9”, Cp. Matt. v. 22, where, however, «ix is omitted in R. V. 


drive... out of the world, ndiyn }D ,.. PN NW. Taylor compares I John iii. 15 ; but the exclusion referred to in 
R. Joshua’s saying is exclusion from this world, not from that to come. The meaning Is that the selfish man is solitary ; 
he cuts himself off from all human fellowship. 

16. wealth. For the form of the saying cp. ii. 14, and note the contrast. 

legacy, 17. Torah has to be learned, acquired, by a man’s own effort, even though God gave Torah to Israel as 
a permanent possession. 
to the name of Heaven, for the sake of. Cp. Col. iiysst7- 

17. ‘Shema’. The first word of Deut. vi. 4, ‘Hear, O Israel,’ &c. The term ‘Shema’ denotes the first of a group 
of three texts, Deut. vi. 4-9, xi. 13-21, Num. xv. 37-41, which may be called the heart of the Jewish liturgy. The 
Shema had to be recited in the morning and evening of every day. Cp. Mark xii. 29. 

fixed form, 3). If this refers to the public prayers, the meaning is that the spiritual intention of prayer is to be 
kept in mind during the recital of prescribed formulae. If it refers to private prayer, then the meaning is that this 

“ should not be a matter of prescribed formulae at all, but the spontaneous utterance of the soul. (See my Pharisatsm, 
p. 305-0. ee 

a sneer ABCD omit. It was perhaps suggested by the proof-text, which itself was probably an editorial 
addition. 

God. The word used here is Dip ‘place’, a frequent designation of the Deity. It might be paraphrased in 
English by ‘the Omnipresent’ ; but it is often used of God without special reference to that one attribute. 

wicked ... Sight, JOY ‘751 yun. The meaning is doubtful. I translate according to the interpretation of 
Maimonides. Taylor translates ‘wicked against thyself’; Geiger (quoted by Strack), ‘wicked when thou art by 
thyself.’ The difficulty, however, is to understand why such counsel should be needed. Bartenora quotes an inter- 
pretation which he had heard, ‘ wicked in standing by thyself,’ i. e. in severing thyself from the congregation (see above 
on ii. 5). If this had been the meaning, a repetition of Hillel’s saying would have been simpler. I suggest that the 
meaning is: ‘Though others call thee wicked, no matter so long as thine own conscience reproach thee not.’ _ 

18. [and know]. ACD omit. BS contain it, and S expressly defends the reading. It has probably crept in from 


the beginning of the following clause ; possibly 771N was also added to supply an object for 911055, and the original 


clause may have run: ‘to learn what to answer,’ &c., DWNY AD TND??. 
Epicurean, i. e. D'S, a free-thinker, from “pb, but with a play on the name of the philosopher. An Epicurean 


might be of any nation, but it Is said that a Jewish Epicurean is more dangerous than a Gentile one (see b. Sanh. 
38%, where R. Johanan, third century, comments on this saying of R. Eleazar). 


697 


PIRKE ABOTH 2, 18—8. 3 


and know before whom thou toilest, and who is master of thy work, [who will pay the hire of 
thy labour]. 

19 KR. Tarphon said: The day is short and the work is great, and the labourers are slow, and the 
hire is much, and the master of the house is urgent. : 
20 He used to say: It is not incumbent on thee to finish the work, and thou art not free to desist 
from it. Ifthou hast learned much Torah, they will give thee much hire ; and the master of thy 
work is faithful who will pay thee the hire of thy labour; and know that the giving of the reward of 

the righteous is for the time to come. ; 

1 Akabia b. Mahalalel said: Keep in view three things, and thou wilt not come into the clutches 
of sin ;—know whence thou comest, and whither thou goest, and before whom thou art to give strict 
account. A zow whence thou comest,—from a fetid drop; and whither thou goest,—to the place of 
dust, worm, and maggot; and before whom thou art to give strict account,—before the King of the 


o) 


kings of the kings, the Holy One, blessed be He. 
2 Kk. Hanina, the deputy of the priests, said: Pray for the peace of the kingdom ; for except for the 
fear of that we should have swallowed up each his neighbour alive. 
3 _ R. Hanina b. Teradion said: When two sit and there are not between them words of Torah, lo, 
this is ‘the seat of the scornful’, as it is said: ‘Nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful’. But when Ps. i. r 
two sit and there are between them words of Torah, the Shechinah rests between them, as it is said: 
“Then they that feared the Lord spake one with another, [and the Lord hearkened and heard, and Mal. iii. 1 
a book of remembrance was written before Him for them that feared the Lord and that thought 
upon His name’). 


who will pay. The phrase is repeated in the next verse, and may be an interpolation here. A omits it ; 
BS contain it. 

19. R. Tarphon had been a priest in the Temple ; probably put to death a.D. 117. He is not to be identified with 
the Tpv¢er of Justin Martyr; the latter probably used his name and perhaps knew it as that of a bitter opponent of Chris- 
tianity. If the two ever met, which is not likely, Justin would be only a boy. There is no resemblance, except in name, 
between Justin’s Tryphon and the real Tarphon. The latter form of the name is the usual one in the Rabbinical 
literature. The form /)5°N is found, Jer. Bikk. iii. 1 ; but the person so named was not the same as the subject of this 
note. His two sayings turn on the same comparison of life to work in a field, cp. Matt. ix. 37, 38; John ix. 4. 

20. learned. See above, v.9; ‘learned’ is the right reading here. 


time to come. Usually, but not always, iad TNY refers to the future life. It does so here. 


III. 1. Akabia b. Mahalalel. As to his date opinions differ; some scholars place him near the time of Hillel 
and Shammai (see on i, 12), others bring him down to the beginning of the second century. Strack holds him to 
have been a contemporary of Gamaliel I. I believe this to be the most probable date. Observe that he is not 
called ‘ Rabbi’. He was excommunicated by his colleagues, and died while under the ban. The first clause of his 
saying is identical with that of Rabbi, ii. 1. 

strict account, lit. ‘judgement and reckoning’; but ‘ judgement’, in English, is what is done upon the accused 
not pleaded by him. 

place of dust. A omits. 

worm, and maggot. Cp. Job xxv. 6. English does not supply a synonym for ‘ worm’, 

King ... kings. An extension of the usual phrase, in order to exalt the majesty of God. 

the Holy One, blessed be He. One of the most frequent modes of referring to God in the Rabbinical literature. 

2. R. Hanina, the deputy of the priests. As his title shows, he had served in the Temple ; but his date cannot be 
further defined. He does not appear to have survived the destruction of Jerusalem. Testimony of his was cited in 
the Assembly at Jabneh (end of the first century A.D.), but apparently only as tradition (Edu. ii. 1-3). The name 
is often written Hananiah. 

peace of the kingdom, literally, of the political, not the spiritual kingdom. It seems natural to connect H.’s 
saying with the rising hostility against the Romans, which broke out in the war of A.D. 68. If so, it would be 
a warning to his countrymen against rebellion, But, in any case, it is quite different in character from the rest of the 
maxims in the book. 

we... swallowed. So ABC, nya ; ES ‘they . . . swallowed’, wa. Founded on Ps. ecxxiv. 3. The 
factions which split up the nation were, according to H., only prevented from destroying each other by the fear of Rome. 


If the reading 1a be adopted, H. regarded himself as a participant; if the alternative reading, as an onlooker. 
The maxim goes to show that H. did not witness the outbreak of the war, since that would have confuted his assertion. 
3. R. Hanina b. Teradion. Date, end of first century and beginning of second ; executed A.D. I 35. His daughter 
Beruria, was the wife of R. Meir. The name Teradion is Greek, but what it represents isuncertain. Krauss suggests 
Theodorion. R. Hanina taught in Sichnin. : 
Torah. See oni. 1. 
“seat of the scornful’. Reference to Ps. i. 1. The relevancy of the quotation only appears when v. 2 is added: 
But his delight is in the Torah of the Lord,’ &c. Talmudic citations of Scripture are very often confined to the 
opening words of a text, the rest being left to be supplied by the reader from memory. So, in the second proof-text 
applied by Hanina, probably only the words, ‘ Then they .. . one another,’ were originally written in the text of the 
book, the remainder being added later. 
Shechinah, lit. ‘dwelling’ (not the place but the act of dwelling), one of the many modes of reference to God. 
The word is not found in the O. T., but is clearly based on the thought expressed, e.g. in Num. xxxv. 34. (Cp. Matt. 


698 


’ 


PIRKE ABOTH 8. 4-8 


4 [I find here only two. Whence 7¢ is proved that when even one sits and is occupied with Torah 
the Holy One, blessed be He, fixes for him a reward? As it is said: ‘ Let him sit alone and be Lam. iii.28 
silent, for he hath taken it upon him.’] 


5 R. Simeon said: Three who have eaten at one table and have not said over it words of Torah, 
lo, they are as if they had eaten sacrifices of the dead, as it is said: ‘For all tables are full of vomit 1sa-xxviii.8 
and filthiness without God.’ But three who have eaten at one table and have said over it words of 


Torah ave as if they had eaten from the table of God, blessed be He, as it is said: ‘And he said Ezek-xli.22 
to me, This is the table that is before the Lord.’ 


6 R. Hanina b. Hachinai said: He who wakes in the night, and he who walks alone by the way and 
turns his heart to idle thoughts, lo, he makes himself guilty against his soul. 

+ RR. Nehunia b. ha-Kanah said: Every one who receives upon him the yoke of Torah, they remove ~~ 
from him the yoke of the kingdom and the yoke of worldly occupation. And every one who breaks 


off from him the yoke of Torah, they lay upon him the yoke of the kingdom and the yoke of worldly 
occupation. 


8 R. Halaphta [b. Dosa] of Chephar Hanania said: When ten sit and are occupied with Torah, 
the Shechinah is among them, as it is said: ‘God stands in the congregation of God.’ [ And Ps. lxxxii.1 
whence és it proved for even five? Asit issaid: ‘He hath founded His troop upon the earth.”]| And Amos ix. 6 


xviii. 20, and Rev. xxi. 3. In the latter passage the Greek is: “Idou, 7) oknvi) TOD Ocod peta Tov avOparrav, kal TKNVOeTEL 
ktX. oxnv7 looks very much like an allusion to ‘Shechinah’. 

4. This clause is certainly not due toR. Hanina. It is found, substantially, in BCDS. A omits ‘I find .. . even’. 
But the formula ‘I find’. . . Whence ...?’ shows that the passage is later than the Mishnah. It represents an 
addition made in the Amoraic period, third to fifth century. Thus it is found in many MSS., but with variations ; 
and some mediaeval commentators are doubtful about it. See Taylor's critical note. Probably there is some con- 
fusion with iii. 7 (last clause). R. Hanina had spoken of the Shechinah resting between two who study Torah. The 
addition does not refer to the Shechinah, but to the fixing of a reward for studying Torah. The proof-text, Lam. iii. 28, 
is only relevant if ‘ hath taken’ be interpreted ‘ hath received (reward) ’. 

5. R.Simeon. This is the famous R. Simeon b. Johai; approximate date A.D. 100-170. He was a disciple of 
R. Akiba ; he escaped the persecution of A. D. 135, and lay hid for thirteen years. Afterwards he taught in Galilee, 
and amongst his disciples was the future ‘ Rabbi’, ii. 1. 

sacrifices of the dead. This is explained by Bartenora as equivalent to idolatry, on the ground of Ps. cvi, 28. 


without God, lit. without place, Dip! $3. Whatever may be the meaning in the passage Isa. xxviil. 8 (or the 
true reading of the text), R. Simeon makes a play upon the word Dip, by taking it as one of the frequent designations 
of God. See on ii. 17, where it occurs in a saying by this same Simeon. 
table of God. The word is again Dip. The combination 817 73 Dp is unusual. CS omit ie 
6. R. Hanina b. Hachinai, contemporary of Simeon b. Johai, but somewhat older. He was a disciple of R. Joshua 
b. Hananiah (ii. 10), as well as of R. Akiba. He lived in Sidon, and thus escaped the persecution in A.D. 135. 
turns ... thoughts, 7252). So ABS; MyaPNVCD. T he difference in meaning is considerable. According to 
the first reading, a man endangers his soul if he gives way to idle thoughts either on waking in the night or when 
walking by himself. According to the second reading, a man endangers his soul when he either (a) wakes in the 
night, or (4) walks by himself, or (c) gives way to idle thoughts. The latter interpretation may have been due to 
a desire to find a threefold division in H.’s maxim, as in so many of the other sayings. Bartenora, who adopts 


the second interpretation, explains that waking in the night is dangerous because of demons, and solitary walking 
because of robbers. The first interpretation commends itself as superior, and has good manuscript authority. 

guilty .. . soul, W522 Anny. Hardly more than ‘ does a wrong to himself’. There is no thought of being 
eternally lost. ; aay te ; 

7. R. Nehunia b. ha-Kanah. Contemporary with R. Johanan b. Zaccai, but not among his disciples. He lived 
toa great age. His life covers the greater part of the first century A.D., and probably extended into the second. 
The epithet ha-Kanah (or Kana) is the same as that which is rendered Zndorjs, Luke vi. 15, and disguised as 
Kavavaios, Matt. x. 4. N.’s father had been of the party of the Zealots. 


yoke of Torah, 7 $y This does not imply that the service of God according to Torah was a burden. The 
yoke is the symbol of obedience ; and ‘to take the yoke upon’ oneself means to devote oneself to the service of the 
authority whose yoke it is. Cp. Mait. xi. 30, where the meaning of the symbol is exactly the same. 

they, the familia caelestis ; see on ii. 2, end. esas : 

kingdom, the actual political kingdom. Its ‘yoke’ took the form of taxes. The meaning is that devotion to 
Torah frees a man from oppression and care by setting his mind on things above ; while if he despises Torah he feels 
all the weight of political oppression and the struggle for existence. _ ; : 

8. R. Halaphta [b. Dosa]: second half of second century, disciple of R. Meir. Possibly the son of R. Jose b. 
Halaphta, the R. Jose of the Mishnah (see below, iv. 8), who had a son of this name. The name Dosa is omitted in 
the printed texts, and has no important manuscript support. It might easily be confused with ‘Jose’. H.'s saying 1s 
a series of Scripture proofs of the presence of the Shechinah. See above, v. 3. : 

ten is the usual number requisite for the worship of a congregation. H. assumes this number, as an axiom, and 
seeks to prove the conclusion for a series of smaller numbers. The clause relating to five is probably a late addition. 
The MSS. and commentaries show much uncertainty about it. AB connect the number five with the proof-text of the 
number three; BCS allot the proof-texts as in the translation. Ifthe ‘five’ clause were not in the original series, it would 
be natural for some later hand to supply it. The proofs from the texts quoted are as follows: For five, 1738 (translated 
‘troop’) is lit. a handful, and the hand has five fingers ; for three, the gods are taken to mean judges, and the smallest 
tribunal consisted of three judges ; for two, because one man talks to another man; for one, because it is said ‘to 
thee’, not ‘ to you’. 


699 


PIRKE’ ABOTH 8. 8-14 


whence even three? As it is said: ‘He judgeth among gods.’ And whence even two? As it is 
said: ‘Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another. And whence even one? As it 
is said: ‘In every place where I record My name I will come to thee and will bless thee.” _ 

9 K.Eleazar b. Judah of Bartotha said: Give Him of what is His, for thou and thine are His. And 
thus the Scripture saith, in the place concerning David, ‘ For all things come of Thee, and of Thine 
own have we given Thee.’ 

to R. Jacob said: He who walks by the way and szudies and breaks off his study and says, ‘How 
beautiful is that tree,’ and ‘how beautiful is that fallow’, the Scripture reckons it to him as if he 
had made himself guilty against his soul. ; ‘ 

rr. Dosthai b. Jannai, in the name of R. Meir, said: A disciple of the Wise who sits and studies 
and forgets a word of his study, the Scripture reckons it to him as if he had made himself guilty 
against his soul; as it is said: ‘Only take heed to thyself and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou 
forget the things which thine eyes have seen.’ It may be that his study has been hard to him. 
Learn to say, ‘Lest they depart from thy heart all ‘the days of thy life.’ Lo! he makes not 
himself guilty until he sits and turns them away from his heart. 

12 Rk. Hanina b. Dosa said: Every one whose fear of sin precedes his wisdom, his wisdom endures ; 
and every one whose wisdom precedes his fear of sin, his wisdom does not endure. 

13 He used to say: Every one whose deeds are more than his wisdom, his wisdom endures. And 
every one whose wisdom is more than his deeds, his wisdom does not endure. 

14 He used to say: Every one with whom the spirit of mankind is pleased, the Spirit of God 
is pleased with him. And every one with whom the spirit of mankind is not pleased, the Spirit of 
God is not pleased with him. 


9. R. Eleazar b. Judah of Bartotha. A contemporary of Akiba, end of first and beginning of second century. 
Some MSS. omit ‘b. Judah’. The name of his place of abode is variously given, and its situation unknown, except 
that it was probably in Upper Galilee. 

Give Him, i.e. God. Eleazar was famous for his charitable gifts. 
in... David, 113. For the form of the phrase cp. Mark xii. 26. 

Io, R. Jacob (see also iv. 21, 22 below). Probably the same as R. Jacob b. Korshai, latter half of the second 
century, contemporary of Simeon III, b. Gamaliel II, and teacher of Judah I, ‘Rabbi’. He was a grandson, on the 
mother’s side, of Elisha b. Abuiah (see iv. 25 below). The name of R. Simeon, or R. Akiba, is sometimes given in 
place of R. Jacob in this passage, but with slight authority. 

study. His mind is to be fixed on Torah. 

How beautiful . . . tree. A repeats this exclamation. 

Scripture reckons. No proof-text is given. The commentators have been rather troubled by J.’s maxim. The 
Mishnah itself provides a formula of praise, to be said on beholding beautiful or wonderful objects of nature (Ber. 


ix. 3). The Scripture proof intended may have been the text quoted in v. 11, Deut. iy. 9. The reading myn 


(‘reckons ’) is supported by all the MSS.; otherwise poy (‘they reckon’) would make the meaning somewhat less 
objectionable. 

11. R. Dosthai b. Jannai: end of the second century, contemporary of ‘ Rabbi’. The name Dosthai (=Aovcibeos) 
was borne by several teachers, and represents either Mattaniah or Nathaniel. Why a Greek form should have been 
preferred is not clear. 

forgets. It should be borne in mind that the teaching in the Rabbinical schools was oral and transmitted from 
memory. The Mishnah, even if written down by ‘ Rabbi ’, was a corpus of decisions whose accuracy of form depended 
on memory alone. To forget was a loss to the learner and possibly a loss to posterity. 

Scripture reckons. Here the proof-text is given (see on preceding verse). 

guilty . . . soul (see on v. 6 above). The idea is that since Torah is the means of spiritual life, to forget what 
it imparts is an injury to the soul. R. Dosthai seems to have uttered his maxim for the sake of putting in a plea on 
behalf of the man who only forgets because his task is hard. The first clause may be a general maxim already 
accepted, which D. wishes to qualify. He contends that only wilful neglect to remember, or even positive rejection, 
incurs the censure of Scripture. 

12. R. Hanina b. Dosa; date, first century A.D.; disciple of R. Johanan b. Zaccai. Chiefly famous as a saint and 
miracle-worker. 

_ precedes, nD 7)p, either in order of time or in order of importance. Fear of sin is the supreme object to be 
aimed at. If wisdom is sought for the sake of becoming a fearer of sin, then wisdom is of enduring worth; otherwise 
not. Taylor conjectures ‘that the negative clause in this verse, and also those in vv. 13, 14, are later interpolations. 
BOL no manuscript support for this conjecture. Aboth di Rabbi Nathan, § 22, has the negative clauses of 

13. He. R. Hanina b. Dosa. 

deeds. Not especially good deeds, but the practical application of Torah. 

14. He. R. Hanina b. Dosa. 

Spirit of mankind . . . pleased, AN) nY3N AN. § This is literal, but too concrete; all that is meant is a 
general opinion held by men, upon any subject or in regard of any person. When it is said that Jesus ‘grew in 
favour with God and men’, Luke ii, 52, the phrase expresses what is meant in ‘the spirit of mankind ... of God is 
pleased’, The truth of H.’s maxim, as a fact of experience, is open to question ; and it appears to make human 
favour the criterion and condition of divine approval. H. was a mystic, and probably he is teaching here the 
doctrine of a correspondence between the things in heaven and the things on earth : 

700 


. 


Ps. 1xxxii. 1 
Mal. iii. 16 
Exod.xx.24 


1 Chron. 


XxixX, 14. 


Deut. iv. 9 


ibid. 








PIRKE ABOTH 8. 15-19 


15 R. Dosa b. Harchinas said: Morning sleep, and midday wine, and children’s talk, and sitting in 
the meeting-houses of the vulgar, drive a man out from the world. 

16 R. Eleazar, the Modiite, said: He who profanes holy things and despises the set feasts [and shames 

his associate in public], and makes void the covenant of Abraham our father, and discloses meanings 

in the Torah which are not according to the Rule, yea, even if he have | Torah and] good works, he 

has no portion in the world to come. 


17 R. Ishmael said: Be light-minded and yielding to forced service, and receive every man with 
gladness. 
18 


R. Akiba said: Laughter and light-mindedness accustom a man to shame. Tradition is a fence 
for Torah. Vows are a fence for separation. A fence for wisdom is silence. 
t9 He used to say: Beloved is man in that he was created in the image of God. [Greater love was 


15. R. Dosa b. Harchinas: born about A.D. 10, died not later than A.D. 90. A teacher of R. Johanan b. Zaccai. 
There was another D. b. H. in the middle of the second century, perhaps grandson of the earlier. The name 
Harchinas (D3°317) must not be confused with Hyrcanus (D771). 

Morning ... wine. ID. was a rich man, and knew the temptations of idle luxury. 


children, ondon, Perhaps, rather ‘ youths’, who should be silent in presence of their elders. 

meeting-houses, NVDI5 ‘NI, synagogues. 

vulgar. The class known as am-ha-aretz; see above, on ii. 6. D.’s objection is probably that in these 
synagogues Torah was not properly taught or duly observed. 

drive ... world. See above, on ii. 15. It is not likely that D., or any other strict Pharisee, would attend 
a synagogue of the am-ha-aretz ; the saying is a general condemnation of them. 

16. R. Eleazar, the Modiite, i.e. of Modiin, where he lived; the former home of the Maccabees. R. Eleazar was 
a chief supporter of Bar Cocheba in the rebellion which ended a.D. 135. Bar Cocheba is said to have been his 
nephew, also to have killed him in a fit of anger. R. E. was a disciple of Tarphon. His dates may be given 
iA. D. §O-A. D. 135. 

E.’s maxim is directed against sectaries and false brethren. The formula against the Minim, i.e, Jewish 
Christians, had been ordained at Jabneh, under Gamaliel II, about A.D. 80. See my Christianity in Talmud and 
Midrash, pp. 126-136. The Minim were open to all the charges in E.’s list, except that of effacing the covenant of 
Abraham. The MSS. vary the order in which the several charges are given. A omits ‘and shames his associate in 


public’, also ‘ which are not according to rule’, nzdns xy, also ‘ Torah’ before ‘good works.’ The latter omis- 
sion is supported by BD. The most important of these omissions is the second, because it affects the sense of 


what is left in. N71NI O35 nds means, as Taylor says, ‘ toact impudently against the Torah.’ But that in itself needs 
explanation. The phrase occurs in Jer. Peah i. 1, where it is explained as the act of one who denies that the Torah is 


from heaven. nzdna xby aayna D2 53 means to reveal meanings in the Torah which are not authorized, to inter- 
pret Torah in ways not sanctioned by approved teachers. This is a definite charge, especially applicable to sectaries. 


nzbn xoy is, no doubt, a gloss, but one added to bring out the right meaning, and to guard against the other 
and more vague interpretation. 

the Rule, Aalachah. See above, on ii. 1. The addition of ‘ Torah’ before ‘good works’ is, perhaps, due to the 
frequent mention of these in conjunction elsewhere. But a man who acts in the ways described by R. Eleazar would 
not naturally be credited with having ‘Torah’. 

portion... world to come. His fate would be to go down to Gehenna, and be destroyed there. On 
Gehenna, see above, 1. 5 a. ; 

17. R. Ishmael. This is R. Ishmael b. Elisha, a disciple of R. Joshua and contemporary of R. Akiba: born about 

A. D. 60; usually said to have been executed A. D. 135, but there is evidence that he lived some years longer. 


light-minded, in the good sense, ‘cheerful.’ The meaning is, however, uncertain. The Hebr. is US) SD and 
by many this is interpreted as ‘courteous to a superior’. This would require wad bp (so CS); and while the b may 
easily have slipped out, YN" is not the usual word for a superior. D has 7WS8) bp, but interprets it of a man who is 


pliant before WYN UN, thus seeking to combine the two meanings of YS. The phrase YN1 mp occurs in the next 
verse, a fact which tends to show that the meaning here is somewhat the same. 

forced service, NWNwN, a rare word whose meaning is uncertain. It is variously translated ‘youth’, ‘age’, 
and ‘forced service’. It occurs Eccles. xi. 10, where the R. V. has ‘ prime of life’. The meaning ‘ forced service’ is 
well supported, and has the authority of Levy, VHW,s.v. See Taylor’s note ; he translates ‘impressment’. For 
the last clause, cp. the saying of Shammai, i. 15. : pry 

18. R. Akiba: b. about A.D. 50; executed in or after A.D. 135. The chief supporter of Bar Cocheba in his 
rebellion, and the most famous teacher of his time. 

light-mindedness. In the bad sense, ‘ frivolity’; see note on v. 17. ihe ie dhe 

Tradition, NW)1DD, the mapddoors (ray mpeoButépov), Mark vii. 3. The principle of tradition was the giving of 
adequate sanction to what was taught. The ‘Torah’ was the divine revelation (see on i. 1), and tradition was afence 
for it, by defending it from wrong interpretation. vet 

separation, Nw" 5. The Pharisees gained their name from their NW} into societies, nan, pledged to the 
observance of rules of ‘clean’ and ‘unclean’, &c. The Talmud is the detailed exposition of the Pharisaic conception 
of religion. See my Pharisaism, p. 107. The last clause explains itself. Cp. i. 17 above. : 

19. He. Again R. Akiba. The clause in brackets, ‘Greater . . . image, omitted by A, is found in BCDS. It 
seems to be required both to give point to the saying, and also by analogy with the similar sayings which immediately 
follow. Its omission, however, may be justified by the consideration that the proof-text merely states that man was 
made in the image of God, not that man was made aware of the fact. This additional knowledge is the additional 

701 


PIRKE ABOTH 8. 19-22 


it that it was known to him that he was made in the image.] As it is said: ‘In the image of God Gen. ix, 6 


he made man.’ . 
Beloved are Israel, that they are called sons of God. Greater love was it that tt was known to 
them that they were called sons of God. As it is said: ‘Sons are ye to the Lord your God. Deut. xiv. 
Beloved are Israel, in that to them was given the precious instrument wherewith the world was 
created. Greater love was 7¢ that it was known to them that there was given to them the precious 
instrument wherewith the world was created, as it is said: ‘For a good doctrine I have given you ; Prov. iv, ; 
forsake not my Torah.’ All is foreseen, and free-will is given, and the world is judged by goodness, 
and all is according to the amount of work. ny 
He used to say: All is given on pledge, and the net is spread over all the living; _and the shop 
is open and the shopman gives credit, and the account-book is open and the hand writes, and every 
one who will borrow comes and borrows, and the collectors go round continually every day, and 
exact payment from man whether with his knowledge or without it ; and they have whereon to lean, 
and the judgement is a judgement of truth; and everything is prepared for the banquet. 
R. Eleazar b. Azariah said: If there is no Torah there is no worldly occupation ; if there is no 
worldly occupation there is no Torah. If there is no wisdom there is no fear; if there is no fear 
there is no wisdom. If there is no knowledge there is no discernment; if there is no discernment 
there is no knowledge. If there is no meal there is no Torah; if there is no Torah there is 
no meal. 
He used to say: Every one whose wisdom is greater than his deeds, to what is he like ? To a tree 
whose branches are many and its roots few; and the wind comes and roots it up and turns it over on 
its face. [As it is said: ‘For he shall be like a tamarisk in the desert, and he shall not see when Jer. xvii. 
good cometh, but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, a salt land undwelt inn [VeBut 
every one whose deeds are more than his wisdom, to what is he like? Toatree whose branches are 
few and its roots many, which, if all the winds that are in the world come and blow upon it, they 
move it not from its place; [as it is said: ‘For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and ib. v. 8 


blessing, the ‘ greater love’ of the two following clauses. In clause 2 God is Diplo, see on ii. 17 above. The proof 
text is a declaration to Israel of their sonship to God. 

wherewith . . . created. The ‘precious instrument? is the ‘ Torah’; not the written record or the oral inter- 
pretation of it, but the divine thought enshrined in it. This is shown by the proof-text. 

All is foreseen, DY 237. Lit. ‘seen’; but ‘all’ includes future things and actions as well as present and 
past ones. 

free-will, Mw77. Lit. ‘authority’, which is explained to mean man’s responsibility for his own actions, The 
Talmudic Rabbis attempted no solution of the philosophical problem ; they were content to affirm the two truths and 
left the reconciliation of them a divine mystery. 

judged by goodness. Either by one who is good, viz. God, or according to the goodness found in it. The 
former is probably meant, because the latter would be hardly more than a variant of the following clause. 

amount of work. So BDS. A omits ‘amount’, 319. But CD have ‘not according to the amount’, and B 
knows of this reading. The difference is that between quality and quantity of human action. The former meaning 
is preferable, but the reading ‘amount’ is the better supported ; and the omission of the word in A, and the addition 
of ‘not’ in CD, may be due to the desire to modify the sense. 

20. He. Again R. Akiba. The whole passage is a rather undignified metaphor to illustrate God’s dealings with 
man. The reader should be careful not to assume that the Jews were, or are, required to believe this or any other 
fanciful exposition of doctrine as an article of faith. The thought conveyed in the passage is mainly that of retribution, 
which follows surely, if slowly, on human actions, 

pledge. A man’s act binds him to accept its consequences, 

met. No one can act apart from or outside the range of God’s knowledge and control. 

account-book, ppp, mivaé. Cp. ii. 1 above. 

borrow, in freedom of action, what he will have to repay in consequences, 

collectors, trials and chastisements which God sends upon him. Man does not always know why they are sent. 

they ...tolean. ‘They’ probably refers to the ‘ collectors’ ; their warrant is the account written in the book. 

prepared ... banquet, my05 tpn. The metaphor does not really change. The ‘ banquet’ is the symbol of 
the world to come, cp. Rev. xix.9; and the idea is that the debtor, having paid his debt and submitted to just 
judgement, is welcomed into Paradise. 

21. R. Eleazar b. Azariah: b. about A.D. 50, d. after A.D. 116, and before a.D. 135. One of the chief men of 
the Assembly in Jabneh; when Gamaliel II was deposed from the presidency, R. Eleazar was elected in his place, 
and was still associated with Gamaliel in that office on the latter’s restoration. The MSS. differ in the order of the 
series of contrasted terms, but not in the substance of them. The terms, so far as they need explanation, have mostly 
been dealt with in previous notes. 

no meal... no Torah, i.e. if a man have nothing to eat he cannot learn Torah ; and wice versa, if he have no 
Torah, his food is worthless. If he have not heavenly things, what profit in earthly things ? 
22. He. R. Eleazar b. Azariah. 
wisdom ... deeds. For the thought, cp. vv. 12, 13 above. 


to what is he like? ADT winnnd = The regular formula for introducing a comparison or parable. Cp. 
Luke xiii. 18. The proof-text may be a later insertion, though it is found in the MSS.  Proof-texts in this book 
are always open to suspicion, because they impair the conciseness of the sayings which they illustrate. The figure 
of the tree may be suggested by Ps. i. 3, though the word for ‘tree’ is not the same. 


702 





23 
4 


2 


3 


4 
5 


PIRKE ABOTH 3. 22—4. 5 


that sendeth out its roots by the river, and shall not fear when heat cometh, but his leaf shall 
be green ; and in the year of drought he shall not be anxious, neither shall cease from yielding fruit ’]. 

R. Eleazar Hisma said: Offerings of birds and purifications, these are the main Rules. Astronomy 
and geometry are mere fringes to wisdom. 


Ben Zoma said: Who is wise? He who learns from every man; as it is said: ‘From all my Ps, cxix. 99 


teachers I get understanding, for thy testimonies are my conversation.’ 


Who is mighty? He who controlleth his evz/ disposition; as it is said: ‘Better is the long- Prov.xvi.32 


suffering than the mighty, and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city.’ 


Who is rich? He that rejoiceth in his portion ; as it is said: ‘ When thou eatest of the labour of Ps.cxxviii.2 


thy hands, happy art thou and it shall be well with thee. ‘ Happy art thou’ in this world, and ‘it 
shall be well with thee’ in the world to come. 


Who is honoured? He who honoureth mankind ; as it is said: ‘For them that honour Me I will 1Sam.ii.30 


honour, and they that despise Me shall be lightly esteemed.’ 
Ben Azai said: Be swift towards a light precept [as towards a weighty one] and flee from sin ; 


for precept leads to precept and sin leads to sin. For the reward of a precept is a precept, and the 
reward of a sin is a sin. 


He used to say : Despise not any man, and be not captious at any thing; for you find no man 
that has not his hour, and no thing that has not its place. 


R. Levitas of Jabneh said: Be exceedingly humble, for the hope of man is ozly the worm. 
R. Johanan b. Berokah said : ‘ Every one who profanes the Name of Heaven in secret, they exact 


23. R. Eleazar Hisma. Date, about the end of the first century and the beginning of the second. He was 
a disciple of R. Joshua (see on ii. Io above). He was a great mathematician, and was said to have been able to 
calculate the number of drops in the sea. 

Offerings of birds, np. Lit. ‘nests’, i.e. the offerings brought in accordance with Lev. v. I-10. Cp. Luke 11. 24. 

purifications, A7) \nnD. This relates to the periods of women. 

Rules, halachoth. See on il. 1 above. 

Astronomy, M\Dpn. Lit. ‘ turnings’, meaning the four points in the ecliptic which divide the seasons. 

geometry, MIN’IDD}. The word is commonly used of a method of interpretation by giving to the letters of 
a word their numerical value. But here, considering the mathematical reputation of the speaker, it may be rendered 
‘geometry’. R. El. means that his mathematics are only pastime in comparison with the study of halachah. Even 
minor portions of the latter are worth more than whole sciences. 

fringes. The word is NINTH, which represents wepupopa or mepipépeca. The comparison is to dishes carried 
round after the main meal is finished. Taylor is. not afraid to translate by ‘after-courses’. I have rendered by 
‘fringes’ so as to keep the thought though not the literal form of it, and also to suggest (in keeping with the 
derivation from repiépeta, ‘ circumference’) that the sciences stand around at a distance while alachah is at the 
centre. R. El. perhaps wished to excuse his favourite studies in the eyes of his less scientific brethren. 


IV. 1. Ben Zoma (Simeon b. Z.). Note that he is not called Rabbi. He was a disciple and associate of R. Akiba, 
but was not ordained. His date may be given as the end of the first century. He is one of the four who were said to 
have entered Paradise, i.e. studied theosophy. He died young. 

From... teachers. Inthe Ps. ‘more than... teachers’; the second clause of the proof-text is not needed. 

evil disposition. See on ii. 15 above; the word ‘ spirit’ in the proof-text represents a different Hebrew word. 
The clause explaining the reference to this world and the world to come has the appearance of a later comment on 
B. Z.’s maxim. In the parallel passage in Aboth di Rabbi Nathan (Schechter), A, § 23, omits it; B, p. 36%, has it. 

honoured. The proof-text does not establish B. Z.’s point. The meaning may be that he who honours mankind 
is really honouring God who made them, and wice versa. Cp. iv. 8 below. 

mankind. Lit. ‘creatures’; see on i. 12 above. 

2. Ben Azai (Simeon b. A.). Like Ben Zoma not called Rabbi, and for the same reason. What is said above of 

the one applies to the other. The two are said to have been judges in Jabneh. Azai = Azariah. 

as... weighty one. Omitted in all the chief MSS., probably inserted from ii. 1; see note on that verse for 
the distinction between ‘light’ and ‘ weighty’ precepts. : 

reward ... precept. In the Rabbinical view, a precept (mitzvah) was simply an opportunity offered of doing 
the will of God; there could be no greater reward than a further opportunity. A mtzvah was never regarded as 
a burden. On ‘reward’ see on ii. 1 above. f 5 

reward ...sin. The just retribution for sin is a further temptation. This is one of the great sayings of the book. 

3. He. Again B. Azai. 


captious, ybap. Lit. ‘a causer of division’, especially in argument. 
you find. Lit. ‘there is not to thee’. For the thought cp. Eccles. iii. 1-8. : ; 
4. R. Levitas of Jabneh. Probably a contemporary of B. Azai. He is not mentioned elsewhere in the Talmud. 
The name represents the Greek Acvirns. Lia - 
His maxim is given by BCDS. By an error A omits it and also the name of the next teacher, thus ascribing 
the saying of the latter to R. Levitas. ; 
hope... worm. Cp. iii. I above; and, for the phrase, Job xi. 20. | ef 
5. R. Johanan b. Berokah. A disciple of R. Joshua b. Hananiah, i. 10, and companion of R. Eleazar 
Hisma, iii. 23; date, about the end of the first century and beginning of the second. 
" profanes ... Heaven. To profane the Name is to be guilty of ‘actions which, if they become known, bring 


shame on the Jew and his religion’ (Levy, NEW, s.v. bbn). Heaven, i.e. God. 
in secret... openly. Cp. Eccles. xil. 14. 
(eX: 


6 


7 


8 


9 


Io 


It 


PIRKE ABOTH 4. 5-11 


punishment of him openly ; the ignorant and the wilful are alike sezners in regard to the profaning 


of the Name. ; ; ; 
R. Ishmael his son said: He who learns with a view to teaching, they give him the opportunity 


to learn and to teach; he who learns with a view to doing, they give him the opportunity to learn 


and to teach and to do. 

R. Zadok said: [Separate not thyself from the congregation, and be not as they who prepare 
the judges]. Make not them a crown wherewith to magnify thyself, nor a dish to eat from. And 
thus Hillel used to say: He who serves himself with the crown passes away. Behold, [thou hast 
learned, | ‘ Every one that makes a profit from words of Torah removes his life from the world.’ 

R. Jose said: Every one who honours the Torah is himself honoured of men. And every one 


who dishonours the Torah is himself dishonoured of men. 
R. Ishmael “zs son said: He who withdraws from judgement gets rid of enmity, theft and perjury ; 


and he who is haughty in his teaching is foolish, wicked and arrogant. 
He used to say: Judge not alone; for there is none save One that judgeth alone. And say not 


to thy colleagues, Receive my opinion ; for they are entitled and thou art not. 
R, Jonathan said: Every one who fulfils the Torah when poor will in the end fulfil it when rich ; 
and every one who makes it vain when rich will in the end make it vain when poor. 


ignorant ... wilful. The meaning is that the guilt of profaning the Name is so great that no account is taken 
of whether it was done in ignorance or intentionally ; both are punished alike. 

6. R. Ishmael his son. Date, middle and end of second century; he is not to be confused with the R. Ishmael 
of ili. 17, nor with the R. Ishmael of v. 9, below. 

learns, i.e. Torah. 

they, the /amzlia caelestis; see on il. 2 above; here, in the meaning of ‘ Providence’. 

7. R. Zadok : date, first century ; contemporary of R. Johanan b. Zaccai, and possibly, like him, disciple of Hillel ; 
he was at Jabneh with R. Joh. b. Z. after the fall of Jerusalem. There was another R. Zadok, grandson of the fore- 
going, and a third later still. 

[Separate . . . congregation, &c.] Does not belong to this context. See on ii. 5 above. 

[prepare . . . judges]. Also out of place here. See the maxim of Judah b. Tabbai, i.8 above. R. Zadok’s own 
saying has a close likeness to that of Hillel in i. 13. 

Make ... them. So ABCDS. Strack and Baer read ‘make .. . it’. The reference is to ‘ words of Torah’ or 
‘Torah’. But the first words of the maxim are evidently lost, and the two interpolations mentioned above are perhaps 
attempts to fill the gap. 

dish .. . eat from. ACD have ‘an axe to eat with (or from)’; BS ‘an axe to cut with’. In order to keep the 
better reading ‘eat with’, and because an axe is not commonly used for that purpose, I render O10") ‘dish’. The 
meaning is clear. The teacher must not make a profit out of the teaching of Torah. 

thus Hillel. May be an editorial note. For a possible interpretation, if it belongs to R. Zadok himself, see 
Introduction, § 2. 2. 

Every . .. makes profit. Lit. ‘eats advantages’. The MSS. nearly all have NiS37 ‘profits’ (noun, not verb). 


This makes no sense, without a verb. S has ‘7 Sawn 25, ACD “7 bs NT, BT Sonn, corrected to Som. This 


gives the clue to the other readings. Soyn was by error divided into b5 NiJ, the verb was lost and had to be supplied 
as in S, or by reading 73M] in place of MINI, After the interjection NM (as it was taken to be), some MSS. and 


printed texts insert N12? ‘thou hast learned’. 

removes ... world. Cp. ii.15 above. R. Joshua may have founded his maxim on that of R. Zadok, whom 
he must often have heard. 
_ 8. R. Jose (b. Halaphta) : born about a.D. 110, died about A.D. 180; a disciple of R. Akiba; one of the six ordained 
in the Terror’ A.D. 135. Rabbi was one of his disciples. 

honours... Torah. Cp.on iv. 1 above. The commentators explain that to ‘honour Torah’ is to honour everything 
connected with it, down to the letters in which it is written. 

himself. Lit. ‘his body’, 1513. 

men. Lit. ‘creatures’, as explained before. 

g. R. Ishmael his son (so BD, om. A. C has R.Simeon). Son of the preceding, and presumably brother of iii. 8; 

date, end of second century and beginning of third. : 

withdraws... judgement. Excuses himself from acting as a judge. 

fear, theft and perjury. Because, if he judges, he displeases the losing party; he may decide wrongly as to 
the ownership of property, and he may lead the witnesses to commit perjury. Cp. i. 9 above. 

teaching. Here the decisions he gives as a judge. On humility see above, iv. 4. 

to, He. Again R. Ishmael b. Jose. 

Note that the maxim turns again on the function of a judge. 

One . . . judgeth alone, i.e. God. For the form of the phrase cp. Mark x. 18. R. I. only means, however, that 
a human judge should share the responsibility with others. : 

entitled. They are in the majority and have a right to enforce their Opinion. 

11. R. Jonathan (so BDS, Johanan A, Nathan C). There is no R, Johanan in the Mishnah without some 
fae evar ’ Po Ouenene would Hee the R. J. of the Gemara, third century. R. Jonathan was a disciple 
or Kk. Ishmael (111, 17) and contemporary of Ben Azai: middle of d : 

Besilc of hkee porary ; of second century. There was another R. Jonathan, 
The meaning of his maxim is that a man who learns Torah when poor gives his mind to it so ear 
; ] \ i tly that he 
will not forget or forsake it when he becomes rich: a rich man is tempted t 1 Pe Saale 
poor would be without the knowledge of it. feeb mip a sue I 


704 


PIRKE ABOTH 4.:-12-19 


12 R.Meir said: Do little in business and be busy with the Torah; and be humble of spirit before all 
men ; and if thou hast been idle 2 respect of the Torah, there will be many idle things in thy way ; 
and if thou hast laboured at the Torah, there will be for Him much reward to give thee. 

13. KR. Eliezer b. Jacob said: He who does one precept gains for himself one advocate ; and he who 
commits one transgression gains for himself one accuser ; repentance and good works are as a shield 
in face of punishment. 


14 RK. Johanan, the sandal-maker, said: Every assembly which is for the sake of Heaven will in the 
end be established ; and ove that is not for the sake of Heaven will in the end not be established. 
15 KR. Eleazar b. Shammua said: Let the honour of thy disciple be dear to thee as the honour of 


thy associate, and the honour of thy associate as the fear of thy teacher, and the fear of thy teacher 
as the fear of Heaven. 


16 ~R. Judah said: Be careful in teaching ; for error in teaching amounts to sin. 

17 R. Simeon said: There are three crowns ; the crown of Torah, the crown of priesthood and the 
crown of royalty ; but the crown of a good mame mounts above them. 

18 R. Nehorai said: Betake thyself to a place of Torah, and say not it shall come after thee; for 
thine associates will fulfil it through thee. And ‘ Lean not upon thine own understanding’. 

19 R. Jannai said: It is not in our hands ¢o explain either the prosperity of the wicked or the 
chastisements of the righteous. 


12. R. Meir. The most famous disciple of R. Akiba, one of the six ordained A.D. 135; married the daughter of 
R. Hanina b. Teradion, iii. 3. His origin is unknown, and it is not certain whether ‘ Meir’ was his real name. His 
work formed the basis of Rabbi’s Mishnah. 

business, PDY. Any occupation other than study of Torah. 

idle things. Trifles that hinder. For the thought cp. iv. 2, the retribution of like for like. 
Him. God. 

reward. See on ii.1, and cp. ii. 18. 

13. R. Eliezer b. Jacob. There were two teachers of this name, the elder a contemporary of R. Johanan b. Zaccai, 
and the younger a disciple of R. Akiba. The younger is probably intended here. Date, middle to end of second 
century. 

cent! mitzvah, any one of the precepts of the Torah; the doing of a mz¢zvah was a service of God. 


advocate... accuser. The two Hebrew words )10P, O2PAD, represent mapdkAnros and karijyopos. 
shield, DIN. Again =a Greek word, Oupeds. 
punishment, N)3~5, divine retribution. Cp. Dan. iv. 24. 
14. R. Johanan, the sandal-maker. A disciple of R. Akiba; date, middle to end of second century. 
assembly. Society, company, or association of persons, for any purpose. For the thought cp. Acts v. 38, 39, and 
even Matt. xviii. 19. 
15. R. Eleazar b. Shammua. SoS; ACD omit ‘b. Shammua’. Disciple of R. Akiba ; one of the six ordained in 
the Terror, A.D. 135 ; one of the teachers of ‘ Rabbi’; lived to a greatage. Date, the greater part of the second century. 


honour ... associate, JV2N. So ABCD; S reads sbv> ‘thine own honour’. ‘The latter is probably due to 
a confusion with the maxim of R. Eliezer (note the similarity of name), ii. 14. In the present passage the reading ‘ thy 
associate’, besides being better supported, is more suitable to the context. 
fear, in the sense of reverence; on the ground that the teacher was the medium by which Torah, the divine 
revelation, is imparted to the disciple. ; ; 
16. R. Judah (b. Illai). Contemporary of the preceding; a disciple of R. Akiba; one of the six ordained in the 
Terror, A.D. 135. Date, most of the second century. 


teaching. The MSS. vary between syobn and 1105. The sense is the same, for synbn had not yet acquired 
the special meaning of Mishnah p/ws Gemara. 


amounts to, mbiy, rises to such a height of seriousness that it becomes sin. There is a contrast between ‘error’ 
and ‘sin’ similar to that in iv. 5. The teacher may err through ignorance; but the consequence of his error may be 
wilful sin on his own part or that of others afterwards. 
17. R. Simeon. Probably R. Simeon b. Johai; see on iii. 5. 
crowns. Symbol of supreme excellence. 
crown... Torah. Cp. Prov. iv. 9. 
crown... priesthood. Lev. viii. 9, and cp. 1 Pet. ii. 9. 
good name. Cp. Prov. xxii. 1, Eccles. vii. 1. ner : 
18. R. Nehorai. Probably among the disciples of R. Akiba; but hardly anything is known of him. His name 
Nehorai is said to be merely an epithet applied to him. Some have identified him with R. Meir or with R. Nehemiah. 
Yet, if so, why a separate name? 


Betake thyself, nbia, generally used of exile. The meaning would seem to be, ‘if you are forced to leave your 
native place, go to a place where Torah is to be found.’ Cp. i. 10 above. } 

fulfil... thee. By going to such a place he will add his share to the fulfilling of Torah by those who are there 
already. [Rather render: ‘establish thee in the possession of it. It is the collective not the individual judgement that 
is to be trusted, as the following words show.— Gen. Editor. ] ae w ¢ ay 

19. R. Jannai; date, beginning and middle of third century; a disciple of ‘Rabbi’. His maxim 1s one of the post- 

Mishnaic additions, like ii. 2. ABS give the name; CD have ‘ He used to say’, ascribing this verse to the preceding 
teacher. : 

in... hands, 0) mown ** 4992 PN, it is not for us. The lit. translation would be, ‘there is not in our hands 
any of the prosperity of the wicked,’ &c. 


1105-2 795 ee: 


Prov. iii. 5 


PIRKE ABOTH 4. 20-29 


zo R. Matthia b. Harash said: Be first in greeting every man; and be a tail to lions and not a head 
to foxes. : 

21 R. Jacob said: This world is like a porch before the world to come. Make thyself ready in the 
porch, that thou mayst enter into the banqueting-hall. ; : ; 

22 He used to say: Fairer is one hour of repentance and good works in this world than all the life 
of the world to come; and fairer is one hour of calmness of spirit in the world to come than all the 
life of this world. ‘ ; 

23 R. Simeon b. Eleazar said: Pacify not thy associate in the hour of his anger, and console him 
not in the hour when his dead is stretched out before him ; and question him not in the hour of his 
vow, and seek not to behold him in the hour of his degradation. ; 

24 Samuel, the small, said: ‘ Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let not thine heart be glad Prov, xxi 
when he is overthrown, [lest the Lord see it, and it displease Him, and He turn away His wrath ib. 18 
from him ’]. : , 

25 Elisha b. Abuiah said: He who learns when a youth, to what is he like? To ink written 
on new paper. And he who learns when an old man, to what is he like? To ink written on erased 

aper. 

26 ‘ R Jose b. Judah, of Chephar ha-Babli, said: He who learns from the young, to what is he like? 
To one that eats unripe grapes and drinks wine from his winepress. He that learns from the old, to 
what is he like? To one that eats ripe grapes and drinks old wine. 

27 Rabbi said: Look not at the pitcher but at what is in it. There is a new pitcher that is full of 
old zw2zze, and an old pitcher in which there is not even new wine. 

28 ~=R. Eleazar ha-Kappar said: Jealousy and desire and ambition drive a man out of the world. : 

29 He used tosay: Those that are born are for death, and the dead for making alive, and the living 


20. R. Matthia b. Harash; date, second century; a disciple of R. Ishmael, iii. 17; settled in Rome, where he 

spent the rest of his life. The name is sometimes written ‘ Heresh’, after 1 Chron. ix. Liss ‘ : 
tail... lions. The meaning is clear; perhaps the maxim is an ironical comment on R. M.’s own situation, 
head of an exiled community in Rome, instead of ‘least among the saints’ in Palestine. 
21. R. Jacob. The same as in iii. to above. Date, latter half of second century. 
porch. The MSS. vary between W105 and 717A, of which neither reproduces the Greek, mpdOupov. 
banqueting-hall, sdpry, triclintum, the world to come; cp. iii. 20. 

22. He. R. Jacob. 
With the general thought of this maxim cp. Luke xv. 7. 

23. R. Simeon b. Eleazar; date, end of second century; son of R. Eleazar b, Shammua, iv. 15 above; disciple 

of R. Meir. 
Pacify ... anger. Give him time to cool down. 
console... not. Cp. /z Memoriam, vi: ‘One writes that other friends remain,’ &c. 
hour . . . vow. When he has made a vow, do not discuss it with him and so perhaps make him regret it. 
degradation. Either brought on himself or by others. 

24. Samuel, the small; date, first century. He died somewhere about A.D. 80, and is usually said to have died 
young. I believe, on the contrary, that he died in extreme old age. For the reasons on which this view is based, see 
my Christianity in Talmud and Midrash, pp. 127-35. The fact that Samuel is not called Rabbi can be explained on 
either theory. The epithet ‘small’ is supposed to indicate his humility. 

His maxim is merely a Scripture text without comment. The second half of the proof-text is given by BCDS, 
but omitted by A. 

25. Elisha b. Abuiah; date, end of first century and up to the middle of the second, say A.D. 90-160. R. Meir was 
his friend, though much younger. El. is not called Rabbi, either because he was never ordained or because he fell 
under the censure of the Rabbis on account of his heretical views. He was one of the four who were said to have 
entered Paradise; and his theosophy may have been the cause of his going astray. The references to him in Rabbinic 


literature are numerous and mostly hostile; yet a certain respect is shown towards him as a teacher. He is the most 
interesting figure in the Talmud and Midrash. 


to ... like? For the phrase cp. iii. 22. 


ink ... paper, 1.3..... 7. The comparison is not with the ink but with the writing. The paper is papyrus. 

erased paper, P\N' 3, palimpsest. The thought needs no explanation. 

26. R. Jose b. Judah, of Chephar ha-Babli; date, end of second century and beginning of third; son of 
R. Judah, iv. 16 above; disciple of R. Eleazar b. Shammua; contemporary of Rabbi. Chephar ha-Babli was 
probably in Galilee. His maxim turns on the same thought as the preceding, with a change of simile. 

wine . . . winepress, wine newly made. Nothing turns on the fact that the winepress is his own. 

27. Rabbi. See on ii. 1 above. 

Taylor points out that this maxim serves to correct the preceding one. Not the age of the teacher but the worth 
of what he teaches is to be regarded. Did Rabbi perhaps regard himself as the ‘new pitcher full of old wine’, and 
R. Jose as the old empty pitcher ? ¢ 

28. R. Eleazar ha-Kappar ; date, end of second century and beginning of third ; contemporary of Rabbi. 

drive ... world. See on ii. TS. 

29. He. R. Eleazar ha-Kappar. 


This long utterance seems intended as the close of the book, or of the collecti f dicta i in i 
police te oe 5 1on of dicta incorporated in it. Was 


for making alive, nynnd, i.e. for God to make them live again. 


706 





PIRKE ABOTH 4. 29—5. 8 


to be judged ; to know and to make known and to be known that He is the maker and He the creator, 
and He the discerner, and He the Judge, and He the witness, and He the adversary, and He will 
judge in whose presence there is neither obliquity nor forgetfulness nor respect of persons nor taking 
a bribe; for all is His; and know that all is according to reckoning. Let not thy nature make thee 
believe that the grave is a place of refuge. For not of thy will wast thou formed, and not of thy 
will dost thou live, and not of thy will dost thou die, and not of thy will art thou to give just 
account and reckoning before the King of the kings of kings, the Holy One, blessed be He. 

1 By ten Sayings the world was created. And why. does the Scripture teach this? Could not the 
world have been created by one Saying? But 7z¢ was ix order to exact penalty from the wicked 
who destroy the world that was created by ten Sayings, and to give good reward to the righteous 
who establish the world that was created by ten Sayings. 


2 Ten generations from Adam to Noah, to make known how much long-suffering is with Him ; for 
all the generations provoked Him, until He brought the flood upon them. 
3 Ten generations from Noah to Abraham, to make known how much long-suffering is with Him ; 


for all the generations provoked Him, until Abraham our father came, and received the reward 
of them all. 


4 Ten trials Abraham our father was tried with, and he bore them all, to make known how great 
was the love of Abraham our father. 


5 Ten wonders were done for our fathers in Egypt, and ten by the sea. 


6 [Ten plagues did the Holy One, blessed be He, bring upon the Egyptians in Egypt, and ten by 
the sea. | 


7 Ten trials did our fathers try God with in the wilderness, as it is said: ‘And they tempted Me Num. xiv. 22 
these ten times, and did not hearken to My voice.’ 


8 Ten wonders were done in the Sanctuary, [for our fathers]. No woman miscarried through 
the smell of the sacred flesh; and the sacred flesh did not ever stink; and no uncleanness befell 
the High Priest on the day of Atonement; and no fly was seen in the slaughter-house; and no 
defect was found in the sheaf, or in the two loaves, or in the shewbread; and rain never quenched 
the fire; and wind never overcame the pillar of smoke; ¢he people stood close together yet had room 
to bow themselves; no serpent nor scorpion did harmin Jerusalem ; and none said to his companion, 
The place is too narrow for me that I should lodge in Jerusalem. 


to know... known... be known, yrindy yoindy yp, Men are to know their relation to God, and 
learn it from others, and impart it to others (so Bartenora). 


adversary, |" bys. In the final judgement, God will be not only judge and witness but the other party in the suit. 

reckoning. Cp. the saying of R. Akiba, iii. 20. 

nature. The 1%‘, and probably the y17 the evil impulse (see on ii. 15 above); the idea is that a man’s lower 
nature will lead him to think that there is no judgement after death, so that he should need to fear. 

grave. Sheol, the underworld. pa 

refuge, a place where the soul can escape from divine justice. ; 

just account ... reckoning. See on iii. 1, where the whole of the concluding phrase, down to ‘blessed be He’, 
occurs. This may indicate that cc. iii-iv formed a separate collection. See Introduction. 


V. This chapter is mainly taken up with groups of related things based respectively on the numbers ten, seven, four, 
and three. A few sayings of teachers are added at the end. sg! ; : es 
1. First group of ten, world... created. The ten ‘ Sayings’ are the divine utterances in Gen. i, ‘And God said,’ Kc. 


why ... teach. This is the meaning of the phrase sab aynbn 9, which occurs numberless times in the 
Talmud. The explanation is that of Bacher ( Zer7inologie, 1, p. 200). ; uy 
But ... penalty ... reward. The meaning is that though God could have created the world by one Saying’, 
He chose to protract His creative work, to linger over it, and thereby enhanced its worth; so much the greater is the 
gu It of those who destroy it by sin, or the merit of those who maintain it by righteousness. 
2. Second group of ten. Him, God. For the thought cp. 2 Pet. iii. 5-9. 5 
3. Third group of ten. It would seem that Noah is included amongst those who provoked God. reward... all. 
The meaning is not clearly expressed; the sinners did not deserve a reward, and Abraham was not punished for their 
sins. Probably the meaning is that God put up with the sinners till Abraham, and that he by his righteousness made 
he sins of his ancestors. ; 
eer group of ten. The ten trials of Abraham are not all scriptural. The list is variously reckoned by different 
commentators. love, i.e. Abraham’s love to God, since he ‘bore them all’ for His sake. 
. Fifth and sixth group of ten. 
z. This clause is ee as doubtful in DS. It is evidently intended as a parallel to No. 5. Possibly the sixth 
group was linked with the fifth, in order to introduce the two sets of plagues. 
7. Seventh (ninth) group of ten. A mere deduction from Num. xiv. 22. 
8. Eighth group of ten. The separate members being specified. _ 
sacred flesh. The carcases of the animals slaughtered for sacrifice. _ ie 
uncleanness. As in Deut. xxiii. 10, which would prevent the High Priest from officiating. 
sheaf, Lev. xxiii. 10-14. loaves, ibid. 17. _ Shewbread, Exod. xxv. 30. vais 
wind ... smoke. It was considered a bad sign if the smoke rising from the great altar was blown aside instead 
isi ight up. ; 
ia ieee re eon: Josephus says (ZB. /. vi. 9. 3) that on one occasion, just before the war, 2,565,000 persons were 
present at the Passover sacrifice in Jerusalem. The reader can believe that, if he will. 
797 Y ia Fae? 


PIRKE ABOTH 5. 9-14 


9 Ten things were created ‘between the suns’. And these are they: The mouth of the earth; 
the mouth of the well; the mouth of the ass of Balaam ; the bow; and the manna, and the rod of 
Moses; and the shamir-worm; and writing ; and the writing; and the Tables. Some say, also the 
evil spirits, and the grave of Moses, and the ram of Abraham our father; and some say also the 
tongs that are made with tongs. } 

Seven things concerning a rude man, and seven concerning a wise man. A wise man does 
not speak in the presence of one who is greater than he in wisdom; and he does not break in upon 
the words of his associate; and he does not hasten to reply; he asks according to the Rule, 
and answers according to the subject; and he speaks on the first thing first, and on the last last ; 
concerning what he has not heard he says, I have not heard; and he acknowledges the truth. The 
opposites of these are found in the rude man. 

Seven kinds of punishment come upon the world for seven main transgressions. When some men tithe 
and some do not tithe, famine from drought comes ; some go hungry and some are full. When they 
have resolved that they will not tithe a¢ al/, famine from tumult and from drought comes. And 
when they have resolved that they will not offer the cake of dough a famine of extermination comes. 
Pestilence comes upon the world for the capital crimes mentioned in the Torah which are not within 
the jurisdiction of the court of justice. Also, for fruits of the seventh year. The sword comes upon 
the world for suppression of justice and for perversion of justice, and for those that teach in the Torah 
not according to Rule. The wild beast comes on the world for false swearing, and for profaning of 
the Name. Exile comes upon the world for false worship, for incest, for bloodshed, and for xot 
giving release to the earth. 

12 At four seasons pestilence increases ; in the fourth year, in the seventh, at the end of the seventh, 
and at the end of the Feast in each year. In the fourth, because of the tithe for the poor in the 
third; in the seventh, because of the tithe for the poor in the sixth; at the end of the seventh, 
because of the fruits of the seventh ; and at the end of the Feast, because of the robbery of the gifts 
assigned to the poor. 

13 Four types of men: He that says, What is mine is mine and what is thine is thine; this is the 
average type, some say it is the type of Sodom. Ae that says, What is mine is thine and what is 
thine is mine, is one of the vulgar ; He that says, What is mine and what is thine are thine, is pious. 
Fe who says, What is thine and what is mine are mine, is wicked. 

14 Four types of character: Easy to provoke and easy to pacify, his gain is cancelled by his loss. 


I 


fe) 


I 


~ 


g. Ninth group of ten. The things here mentioned became of special importance in the later history, but they are 
not specially mentioned in the account of the Creation ; since, it was held, God had created nothing more after He 
‘rested from His labour’, the things here mentioned must have been created last of all. 

‘between the suns,’ NW j*3, i.e. between sunset and sunrise. So all the MSS. C adds “at nightfall’, and 
DS ‘on the eve of Sabbath’. 


mouth . . . earth, that swallowed Korah. Num. xvi. 32. 
mouth ... well. Probably that in Num. xxi. 16-18. 
mouth . . . ass, i.e. the speaking of Balaam’s ass was provided for at the Creation. 


bow, the rainbow. 

shamir, a worm supposed to have the power of gnawing the hardest substances. Moses and Solomon are said 
to have made use of it. 

writing, the forms of the letters ; the writing, either the art of combining letters into words, or the writing on 
the Tables, or the writing instrument, stylus or pen. i 

tongs... tongs. The meaning is, that if the smith uses tongs in order to make tongs, who made the first tongs ? 
Answer, they were made among the last things at the Creation. Presumably meaning that God is the author of all 
unexplained beginnings. 


Io. First group of seven. rude man, ody. Lit. Joetus, the unformed human being. 
Rule, Zalachah. See on ii. 1 above. 
11. Second group of seven. A deduction from Lev. xxvi. 14-22. 
fruits . . . seventh year, Exod. xxiii. 11. So also, release . . . earth. 
12. First group of four. seasons, D'P15. Not in each year, but regularly recurring periods within the cycle of seven 
years. The idea is that pestilence comes by reason of the sins committed in regard to the tithe for the poor, &c 
the Feast, i.e. of Tabernacles. ee 
robbery ... poor. After the harvest has been reaped, the gleaning and the corner of th 
e field and an t 
forgotten were to be left for the poor. Any one who did not so leave them robbed the poor. ce 
he 3. Pewee four. types, nym). Lit. ‘measures’, the same word as in ‘with what measure ye mete’, &c., 
att. vil. 2; here the means by which the character of a man is estimated or measured: ‘type’ c , 
meaning through a different metaphor. pie sities Tos 
Sodom. The reference is to Ezek. xvi. 49. 
vulgar, am-ha-avetz. See on ii. 6 above. The meaning is that he wh ri 
ma, ‘ x g o does not know the Scripture does not 
know ne oF ought only to give and not to receive, Prov. xv. 27. Hence the definition of the pious. m 
14. Ird group of four. gain... loss, 72W2 DAM. The two men described lose by thei i 
by their being pacified; but the second is of a firmer character than 1 eta He tegen ae tk 
) the first, a - 
tioned before loss, and vice versa. Las ieiciia un iis Ose Sai aoe 


708 


PIRKE ABOTH 5. 14-22 


Hard to provoke and hard to pacify, his loss is cancelled by his gain. Hard to provoke and easy to 
pacify, he is pious. Easy to provoke and hard to pacify, he is wicked. 

15 Four types of disciples: Quick to hear and quick to lose, his gain is cancelled by his loss. Slow 
to learn and slow to lose, his loss is cancelled by his gain. Quick to hear and slow to lose, he 
is wise. Slow to hear and quick to lose, this is an evil lot. 

16 Four types of almsgivers: He who is willing to give but not that others should give, his eye is evil 
towards what is theirs ; he who is willing that others should give but does not give himself, his eye 
is evil towards what is his; Le who zs welling to give and that others should give, is pious ; Ze who zs 
not welling that he should give or that others should give, is wicked. 

17 Four types of them that go to the house of learning: He that goes and does nothing, has the 
reward of Ais going ; he that goes not but does something, has the reward of doing ; he that goes and 
does something, is pious; he that neither goes nor does anything, is wicked. 

18 Four types of them that sit before the Wise: A sponge, a funnel, a strainer and a sieve. 
A sponge, because it sucks up everything ; a funnel, because it receives at one end and lets out at 

‘the other ; a strainer, because it lets out the wine and keeps back the dregs; a sieve, because it 
lets out the coarse meal and keeps the fine flour. 

19 All love which depends on something—if the thing ceases, the love ceases. If it does not depend 
on something it ceases not for ever. What love is that which depends on something ? This is the 
love of Amnon and Tamar. And that which does not depend on something? This is the love of 
David and Jonathan. 

20 Every controversy which is for the name of Heaven will in the end be established ; and that which 
is not for the name of Heaven will not in the end beestablished. What controversy is that which is 
for the name of Heaven? The controversy of Shammai and Hillel. And that which is not for the 
name of Heaven? This is the controversy of Korah. 

21 Every one that makes the many virtuous, sin comes not by his means ; and every one that maketh 
the many to sin, they give him not the opportunity to repent. Moses was virtuous and made the many 
virtuous, and the virtue of the many depended on him ; as it is said: ‘ He executed the righteousness 
of the Lord, and His judgements with Israel.’ 

Jeroboam sinned and made the many to sin, the sin of the many depended on him ; as it is said: 
‘For the sin of Jeroboam who sinned and made Israel to sin.’ 

22 Every one who has three things is one of the disciples of Abraham our father. And every one who 
has three other things is one of the disciples of Balaam the wicked. Jf he has a good eye, and 
a lowly soul and a humble spirit, he is of the disciples of Abraham our father. Jf he has an evil 
eye, and a boastful soul and a haughty spirit, he is of the disciples of Balaam the wicked. What is 
the difference between the disciples of Abraham our father and the disciples of Balaam the wicked ? 
The disciples of Balaam the wicked inherit Gehenna and go down to the pit of destruction, as it is 


Deut. xxxiii. 21 


1 Kings xiv.16 


said: ‘ But Thou, O God, wilt bring them down to the pit of destruction. Men of blood and deceit Ps. lv. 24 


shall not live out half their days; but I willtrust in Thee.’ But the disciples of Abraham our father 


inherit the Garden of Eden and inherit the world to come; as it is said: ‘That I may cause them Prov. viii. 2x 


that love me to inherit substance, and that I may fill their treasuries.’ 


15. Fourth group of four. Types of students, of course of Torah. y, 
16. Fifth group of four. Almsgivers. eye... evil. See above on li. 12. ; , 
17. Sixth group of four. Types of students, as in 15, here considered in reference to their going to the School and 
what they do there. 
has... reward. Cp. Matt. vi. 2. 
does something, practises some of the Torah which he learns. 3 ar 
18. Seventh group of four. Similes of students. The four objects described are explained, and it is clear what 
ought to be the effect of the sieve ; but no commentator has explained what kind of a sieve lets the coarse go through 
and keeps the fine. The word is rightly rendered ‘sieve’. 
19. No longer groups but general principles. The contrast between selfish and unselfish love. 


20. Controversy justifiable and unjustifiable. be established, ovpnad MB. It will not establish the contentions 
of both opponents, but it will show that it was right for them to have argued against each other. 
Shammai... Hillel. See oni. 12. It was said in regard to them, ‘ The words of each are the words of the 
living God, but the halachah is according to Hillel’ (Erub. 13°). _ 
a1. A omits the clause about Jeroboam, probably only by a scribal error. 
the many, of roAXoil. 
sin. Taylor compares Rom. v. 19. ; 5 
22. disciples .. . Abraham. Taken as a model, like Aaron, 1. 12 above. 
Balaam. Perhaps a covert reverence to Jesus Is intended. : : 
plood ... deceit. This text is elsewhere used to show that Balaam (Jesus ?) was about thirty-three years old. 
(For the Rabbinical comparison of Balaam with Jesus, see my Christianity in Talmud and Midrash, pp. 64-70.) 
[inherit the Garden of Eden and inherit the world to come. This 1s clearly a conflate text. One of these 
clauses should be excised.—Gen. Editor. ] 


yew) 


PIRKE ABOTH 5. 23—6. 1 


23 Kk. Judah b. Tema said: Be bold as a leopard, and light as an eagle, and swift as a gazelle, 
and strong as a lion to do the will of thy Father which is in heaven. : 

24 [He used to say: The bold-faced man is for Gehenna, and the shame-faced man is for the 
Garden of Eden. May it be Thy will, O Lord our God and the God of our fathers, that Thy city 
may be built speedily in our days; and grant our portion Zo de in Thy Torah. | ; 

25 Ben Bag-Bag said: Turn it, and turn it again, for the whole is in it, and the whole of thee is 
in it; and from it swerve not, for there is to thee no greater good than it. | 

26 |Ben He-He said: According to the toil is the pay. | ; 

27 [He said: At five years old one is fit for the Scripture, at ten years for Mishnah, at thirteen for 
the commandments, at fifteen for Talmud, at eighteen for marriage, at twenty for retribution, at 
thirty for power, at forty for discernment, at fifty for counsel, at sixty for elderhood, at seventy 
for grey hairs, at eighty for strength, at ninety for decrepitude, and at a hundred he is as if he were Ps, xc. 10 
dead and had passed away and vanished from the world. | 


END OF THE TREATISE ‘FATHERS’. 


THE CHAPTER OF R. MEIR, OR, THE ACQUISITION OF TORAH. 


Git The Wise have taught in the language of the Mishnah; blessed is He that made choice of 
them and of their Mishnah. 

R. Meir said: Every one who is occupied with the Torah for its own sake is worthy fo have 
many things ; and not only so, but the whole world, all of it, is his equivalent. He is called friend, 


23. Note the return to maxims of named teachers. 

R, Judah b. Tema; date uncertain; he is once mentioned with R. Meir, middle of second century. 

Father ...in heaven. This term is common in the Rabbinical literature, and is pre-Christian, See my 
Pharisaism, pp. 120-4. The use of it here tends to show that this verse was originally the conclusion of the book. 
D says this expressly, The verses which follow are later additions, and the order of them is variously given. 

24. He. Probably not R. Judah b. Tema. The author is unknown. Whoever added it did so as a further con- 
clusion to the book, for the second clause is a kind of doxology common in the Jewish liturgy. 

25. Ben Bag-Bag. This is not a real name, but an epithet formed from the initials of the words ‘ Ben Ben Ger 
Bath Gerah’; and one explanation is that his father and mother were each the offspring of converts to Judaism. The 
vowels are only supplied to enable the word to be sounded. He is supposed to have been a disciple of Hillel. 

His maxim refers to Torah, as the full and complete divine revelation. 

26. Ben He-He. A name formed like the preceding, and possibly the same person is referred to. The maxim is 
in Aramaic, as are some of those of Hillel. 

27. He. Sometimes is introduced here the saying of Samuel the small, iv. 24, in order to make him the author of 
the saying about the ages of man. But this connexion is quite uncertain. The passage is only placed here as having 
been either added later than the body of the book, or else, as Strack suggests, having been excluded from the book on 
account of its melancholy conclusion. It is a series of descriptive phrases which need little comment. 

twenty ... retribution. Although he is considered to be old enough at thirteen to be able to obey the precepts 
(he is called then a bar-mitzvah), he is not held fully responsible, and therefore liable to divine punishment for sin, 


mrad, until he is twenty. [Better ‘twenty .. . pursuing a calling ’.—Gen. Editor. | 


VI. It is admitted by all that the sixth chapter formed no part of the treatise incorporated in the Mishnah. See 
Introduction. It is only given here because, by long custom, it is read with the rest of the book. Nevertheless the 
material contained, the maxims of particular Rabbis, may be as authentic as what is included in the earlier chapters. 
It is usually called the ‘Chapter of R. Meir ’, or the ‘Acquisition of Torah’, the former title being merely a reference to 
the first teacher mentioned in it. The latter title fairly describes the contents. Taylor, in his edition, merely gives 
a translation from the text contained in a modern prayer-book ; he adds no comment and no critical apparatus. The 
text here translated is that of Strack’s edition. 

1. The Wise, the Talmudic teachers. 

taught, 12’, the special word applied to the authoritative teaching of Torah; the name Mishnah, from the same 
root, denotes the corpus of such teaching, as it was collected and edited by ‘Rabbi’. The intention of this sentence 
which forms a sort of motto for the chapter, is to connect the chapter with the preceding ones as forming with them 
virtually a part of the Mishnah. 

blessed . . . He, i.e. God. 

choice. Implying, as it would seem, some degree of divine guidance in the development of the Mishnah. The 
Talmud says (B. B. 124) that prophecy was taken from the prophets and given to the Wise, meaning the Rabbis. 

R. Meir. See on iv. 12. Date, middle of second century. 

occupied ... Torah. This phrase occurs in R. M.’s maxim, iv. 12, and may have been taken thence to serve 
as the theme for the present exposition. 

worthy to have, 721; the corresponding noun is M31, merit. The term denotes a condition of mind and 
character such as to meet with the divine approval ; it does not imply a claim against God for reward. See my 
Pharisaism, pp. 276-80. For the phrase cp. Rev. v. 9, 12. 


equivalent, % sin "33, and not more; he is worth the whole world. Strack wrongly, as I think compares 
I Cor. iii. 21, ‘for all are yours,’ ‘ 


710 





2 


3 


PIRKE ABOTH 6. 1-3 


beloved, one that loves God and loves mankind, makes glad both God and mankind. And it clothes 
him with humbleness and fear, and purifies him to become righteous, pious, upright and faithful; 
keeps him far from sin and brings him to virtue. Men enjoy from him counsel and sound 


knowledge, discernment and might ; as it is said: ‘Counsel is mine and sound knowledge; I am Prov. viii. 14 


discernment ; I have might. And it gives him sovereignty and dominion and searching out of 
justice ; and they disclose for him secrets of Torah. And he is made like a spring which ceases not, 
and like a stream that goes on getting stronger. And he is modest and longsuffering and forgiving 
of insult. And it makes him great and lifts him above all the things that are done. 

R. Joshua b. Levi has said: Every day a Bath-Qol goes forth from Mount Horeb and 
proclaims and says ‘ Woe to mankind because of thezr insulting of the Torah’ ; for every one that is 


not occupied with the Torah is called reprobate ; as it is said: ‘ As a jewel of gold in the snout of Prov. xi. 2 
a swine, so is a fair woman without sense.’ And Scripture says: ‘And the tables were the work Exod. xxxii. 16 


of God, and the writing writing of God, graven on the tables.’ Read not ‘haruth’ (graven) but 
‘heruth’ (freedom) ; for none is your freeman, but he who is occupied with the study of Torah. 


And every one who is occupied in the study of Torah, lo, he exalts himself, as it is said: ‘ And Num. xxi. 19 


from Mattanah to Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel to Bamoth.’ 
He who learns from his associate one chapter, one rule, one verse, one saying, even one letter, 
must show honour to him ; for thus we find in the case of David, king of Israel, that he learned 


loves God .. . mankind. Observe the unlimited range of the love inspired by the religion of Torah. 

makes glad. Cp. Zeph. iii. 17, but with a finer meaning here. 

it clothes him. ‘It’ is Torah, personified. Cp. 1 Pet. v. 5 for humility as a virtue put on, given from above. 

purifies, makes him WW2, asher, in a fit condition to perform his religious duties. The same word, pronounced 
‘kosher’, is used in Jewish shops to denote food ritually fit for use. 

from him, i.e. from the man who is occupied with Torah. The proof-text, Prov. viii. 14, makes Wisdom say 
‘Counsel is mine’, &c. Torah is identified with wisdom ; therefore the man who has Torah is enabled to give what 
is inherent in wisdom. 

it gives, i.e. Torah gives. 

sovereignty, mbn, moral not political supremacy. 
oe a Speak . - » justice. Solomon, the wise king, was able to find out what true justice required, 1 Kings 
ill, 16-28. 

they disclose. ‘They’ are the familia caelestis, the angels. 

stream, &c. For the phrase cp. ii. 10; the simile used there is expanded here. 


And... is. Strack reads 7M (participle) for the common reading ‘Vfl, imperative, which, as he says, makes no 


sense. But 77 is very unusual, and it would be simpler to read N37 ‘he (is)’. The structure of the whole passage 
is very clumsy, with its frequent changes of subject; it may be a cento of phrases from different sources. 
things . . . done, meaning that he is not the slave of circumstance but spiritually free. 

2. R. Joshua b. Levi: date, middle of third century, A.D., a famous haggadist (see note below) and mystic. 
The Mishnah was closed before his time, and with it the Series of Rabbis known as Tannaim. ‘Their successors, who 
commented on the Mishnah, and whose teaching forms the Gemara, were called Amoraim; R. Joshua was an 
Amora, and his mention here is one of the indications that this chapter did not form part of the original book. 

Bath-Qol. Lit. ‘ daughter of a voice’. The term denotes a sound interpreted as a voice from heaven, delivering 
some special message to men, It was said to have been a ‘ Bath-Qol’ which decided on the rivalry between the 
schools of Hillel and Shammai. See on v. 20 above. In John xii. 28, 29, what is referred to is evidently meant for 
a ‘Bath-Qol’. The Rabbis held that since the extinction of prophecy, the ‘ Bath-Qol’ took the place of the ‘ word of 
the Lord’ which came to the prophet, but was an inferior mode of inspiration. 

Horeb. Not that R. J. believed that God dwelt on Horeb, but merely as a scriptural phrase for the seat of divine 
authority. 

reprobate, 511), one who is reproved by God. The word does not occur in the O.T. The proof-text, which 
seems to be wholly irrelevant, is applied after the methods of haggadah (non-literal interpretation of Scripture for 
edification). The text says WM ANI AN OF. R. J. takes 4) and associates it with 4% Dt, by mere similarity of 
letters, and then argues, in effect, that as ‘a fair woman without sense’ is 75112, so a man without Torah is 2. This 
is haggadah ; and the haggadist did not imply that the words of Scripture really gave that meaning, but that the 
lesson he wished to teach could be linked on to Scripture in that way. : 

Read not ‘haruth’ but ‘heruth’. This also is haggadah. For the sake of edification, the text of Scripture 
might be read otherwise than as written ; but this implied no actual criticism of the text, nor any question of ‘ various 
readings’. R. J. reads ‘heruth’ ‘freedom’, for the sake of making his point about the freeman , but he was quite 
aware that ‘ heruth’ would make no sense in-the original text, Exod. xxxil. 16. é : : 

exalts himself. In the previous verse it is Torah which exalts. The proof-text, Num. xxi. 19, 1s again applied 
in the manner of haggadah. The place-names are taken according to their literal meaning, Mattanah = gift; Nahaliel, 
God leads; Bamoth = heights. Thus Torah was given ; God leads the man who studies it to the Aezghts, 1.e. exalts 
him. This exposition is given in the Talmud (Erub. 54) but not in the name of R. J., although he is quoted on the 
same page. 

3. This saying is anonymous. learns, i.e. learns Torah. 

rule, Zalachah. See on ii. I above. 

show honour, as to a teacher of Torah, cp. iv. 15 above. 4 : ’ 

David... Ahithophel. The reference is to a story, not found in the O. T., intended to explain how David came 
to compose the fifteen ‘Psalms of degrees’. The story, too long to quote, occurs in Succ. 53", Macc. 11", and the 
authority for it is said to be R. Johanan (A. D. 199-279). The present passage is thus later than the Gemara. 

II 


PIRKE ABOTH 6. 3-7 


from Ahithophel only two things, du¢ he called him his master, his teacher, his familiar friend ; s it aera 
is said: ‘But thou, a man mine equal, my teacher and my familiar friend’. And mae pate ie s. lv. 13 
things an argument a fortiori? If David, king of Israel, who learned from She : on ie wo | 
things, called him his master, his teacher, his familiar friend, how much more one who learns he 
his associate one chapter or one rule, or one verse, or one saying, Of even -one letter, ae oy ie 
show honour to him: and ‘honour’ simply means Torah; as it is said: ‘The wise shal Anheut on it 3 
honour’; and ‘ The perfect shall inherit good’: and ‘good ’ simply means Torah; as it is said: le xxvii 

‘For I have given thee good doctrine, forsake not my Torah. We bi ib. Be 
4 This is the way of Torah: A morsel with salt thou shalt eat, ‘and thou shalt drin sees Mae iv. 1 

measure’; and thou shalt sleep on the ground, and thou shalt live a life of hardship, and thou s a h 

labour in the Torah. If thou doest thus ‘happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee’; Ps. exxviii 

‘happy’ in this world, and ‘ well with thee’ in the world to come. : 
5 Seek not greatness for thyself, neither covet honour. Perform more than thou hast carne : 

And crave not for the tables of kings; for thy table is greater than their table, and thy crown 

greater than their crown ; and faithful is He, the master of thy work, to pay thee the reward of thy 

labour. : c 
6 Greater is Torah than priesthood and than sovereignty. For sovereignty is acquired through 

thirty qualifications, and priesthood by twenty-four; but the Torah is acquired by forty-eight things. 

And these are they :—‘ By learning, the listening of the ear, the ordering of the lips, the discernment 

of the heart, fear, dread, humility, cheerfulness, purity, attendance on the Wise, discussion with asso- 

ciates, argument with disciples, sedateness, Scripture, Mishnah; by little business, little intercourse 

wath the world, little sleep, little conversation, little luxury, little merriment ; by forbearance, a good 

heart, faith in the Wise, acceptance of chastisements ; by being one that knows his place, and rejoices 

in his portion, and makes a fence for his words, and claims not goodness for himself, that is loved, 

that loves God, that loves mankind, that loves deeds of charity, that loves uprightness, that loves 

reproofs, and keeps himself far from honour, and puffs not up his heart with his learning, and delights 

not in giving decisions, that bears the yoke along with his associate, and judges him with a leaning 

to merit, and establishes him upon truth, and establishes him upon peace, and settles his heart in 

his study, that asks and answers, that hears and adds thereto, that learns with a view to teaching, 

and that learns with a view to action, that makes his teacher wise, that makes sure what he hears, 

and that repeats a word in the name of him who said it. See, thou hast learned: Every one 

that says a word in the name of him who said it brings redemption into the world ; as.it is said: 

‘And Esther said to the king in the name of Mordecai.’ Esther ii. 24 
7 Great is Torah, for it gives to them that practise it life in this world and in the world to = || 

come; as it is said: ‘For they are life to them that find them, and health to all their flesh.’ Prov. iv. 24 












called ... master. This is not in the Talmudic story, but merely an inference from Ps. lv. 13, taken as referring 
to Ahithophel. 
a fortiori, 1)N) bp lit. ‘light and heavy’. The form of the argument is: ‘if J is ZB, how much more Cis &?’ 
This is one of the seven rules which Hillel introduced for the interpretation of Scripture. 
‘honour’... means Torah. There is a confusion of thought here, for the disciple is to show honour to his 
Master because of Torah; he does not show Torah to him. 
good doctrine. The same proof-text is quoted in iii. 19 above. 
4. Anonymous. way. Cp. onii.1 above. The proof-text, Ps. cxxviii. 2, is quoted in iv. 1 above, and even there 
it is probably a later insertion. 
5. Anonymous. Perform... learned. Cp. i. 17, ii. 12 above. 
tables of kings, court favour. 
thy table, the table at which thou sittest, the table of God, see on iii. 5 above. 
thy crown, of Torah. See on iv. 17 above. 
faithful . . . labour. Verbatim from ii. 19. 
6. Anonymous. Torah... priesthood ...sovereignty. Classed together, iv. 17 above. 
acquired, N'P3; but a different word is needed. The dignities referred to are not acquired by the things 
specified, but these are, in the case of kings and priests, privileges enjoyed by the holder of the dignity; in the case of 
the man of Torah they are characteristic features. The privileges of kings and high-priests are given in the Mishnah, 
Sanh. ii. The list of forty-eight ‘ things’ shows variations in the style which point to an origin from different sources. 
Nos. 1-25 are nouns, the remainder verbs describing what the man of Torah does. The total number is fifty, and 
there seems to be little attempt at orderly sequence in the list. The whole passage may be taken as the summary of 
the Pharisaic ideal; see my Pharisaism, pp. 327-30. Various parallels with phrases in the earlier part of the book 
occur. Detailed comment is unnecessary, as nearly all the ideas have been mentioned before. After the list is closed, 
follows a comment upon the last item, ‘that says a word in the name of him who said it.” The Rabbis attached 
great importance to this, the idea being that he who brought to the knowledge of his fellows some new meaning of 
Torah and rendered explicit part of the divine meaning till then implicit in it, should be held in remembrance for 
having done so, 
See, thou hast learned. The words which follow are a quotation from the Talmud, Chull. 104», another proof 
of the late date of this chapter. The proof-text is less cogent than the reason given above ‘ ; 
7- Anonymous. The life-giving power of Torah. Chiefly a series of Scripture texts. 


712 





PIRKE ABOTH 6. 7-11 


eas sede he a seoreatin be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones.’ And it says : Prov. iii. 8 
; a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her, and happy are they that retain her.’ ib. iii. 18 
Sie vit says: “For they shall be a chaplet of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy ib. 5 
ae : a says: ‘She shall give to thine head a chaplet of grace; a crown of beauty shall she ib. iv. 9 
ae aoe a vitae says: ‘ For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and they shall increase to ib. ix. 11 
4 He SHOR RS IS nd it says: ‘ Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches ib. iii. 16 
and honour. And it says: ‘ For length of days, and years of life, and peace shall they add to thee.’ ib. iii. 2 
subuR. Simeon b. Judah, in the name of R. Simeon b. Johai, said: Beauty, strength, riches 
honour, wisdom, old age, grey hairs, children, are comely for the righteous and comely forthe world : 
as it is said : ‘The hoary head is a crown of glory; it shall be found in the way of righteousness.’ Prov. xvi. 31 
aoe it says: ‘Children’s children are the crown of old men; and the glory of children are their ip. ee 
athers. And it says: “The glory of young men is their strength; and the beauty of old men is ib. xx. 29 
the hoary head.’ And it says: ‘ Then the moon shall be confounded and the sun ashamed ; for Isa. xxiv. 23 
the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before His ancients gloriously.’ 
g9 _R. Simeon b. Menasia said: These seven attributes, which the Wise have assigned to the 
righteous, were all exemplified in Rabbi and in his sons. 
to k. Jose b. Kisma has said: Once I was walking by the way and there met me a man, and 
he greeted me, and | greeted him again. He said to me, Rabbi, whence comest thou? I said 
to him, I am from a great city of wise men and scribes. He said to me, Rabbi, wilt thou dwell with 
us in our place, and i will give thee a thousand thousand gold pieces and precious stones and pearls? 
I said to him, If thou gavest me all the silver and gold and precious stones and pearls which are in 
the world I would not dwell except in a place of Torah. For thus it is written in the book of 
Psalms, by the hands of David, king of Israel: ‘The Torah of Thy mouth is better unto me than Ps. exix. 72 
thousands of gold and silver. And not only so, but in the hour of a man’s death it is not silver 
or gold or precious stones or pearls which accompany him, but Torah and good works alone; as it 
is said: ‘When thou walkest it shall lead thee, when thou liest down it shall watch over thee, Prov. vi. 22 
and when thou wakest it shall talk with thee.’ ‘ When thou walkest it shall lead thee ’"—in this world. 
: When thou liest down it shall watch over thee ’—in the grave. ‘When thou wakest it shall talk with 
ee ae the world to come. And it says: ‘The silver is Mine and the gold is Mine, saith the Lord Hag. ii. 8 
of Hosts. 
i Five possessions hath the Holy One, blessed be He, acquired in His world, and these are they : 
Torah is one possession ; heaven and earth are one possession ; Abraham is one possession ; Israel is 
one possession ; the house of the sanctuary is one possession. Whence zs cis proved concerning 
Torah? That which is written: ‘The Lord possessed me in the beginning of His way, before His Prov. viii. 22 
works of old. Whence concerning heaven and earth? That which is written: ‘Thus saith the Isa. lxvi.t 
Lord of Hosts, Heaven is My throne and the earth the footstool of My feet: what is this house that 
ye build for Me, and what is the place of My rest?’ And it says: ‘How manifold are Thy works, Ps. civ. 24 
O Lord! in wisdom hast Thou made them all: the earth is full of Thy possessions.’ Whence concerning 


8. R. Simeon b. Judah. A contemporary, probably older, of Rabbi; date, middle of second century. He was 
a disciple of R. Simeon b. Johai (see iii. 5); his father was probably (R.) Judah of Chephar Ikos, mentioned in 
connexion with Gamaliel II. This verse is sometimes, wrongly, assigned to R. S. b. Menasia, v. 9. 
in the name of, OW. The regular formula by which one teacher cites the dictum of another, but it does not 
necessarily imply that the later had actually heard it from the earlier teacher. The series of graces, together with all 
the proof-texts except the last, is taken verbatim from Tosephta, Sanh. xi. 8. The relevancy of the text from Isa. xxiv. 23 
is not obvious. 
g. R. Simeon b. Menasia. Also, like the preceding, an older contemporary of Rabbi; date, middle of second 
century. 
His remark, which only gives the personal application of the saying in v. 8, is likewise taken from Tosephta, 
where it follows immediately after the saying of R. Simeon. 
10. R. Jose b. Kisma. Friend of R. Hanina b. Teradion (iii. 3 above) ; date, end of first century and beginning 
of second. 
has said. Note the change of form. The maxims of the various Sages are what they were in the habit of saying ; 
here we have an anecdote which R. Jose once told. 
great city. R. Jose lived in Caesarea Philippi, but that city was not specially remarkable for its ‘ wise men and 
scribes’. Jerusalem cannot be meant ; for though, after the siege, Jews were not forbidden to live there, it was no 
longer a place of learning. The seat of authority had been transferred to Jabneh, and in R. Jose’s time was at Usha. 
Possibly this is the city referred to. 
gold pieces, 12", denarii. ne 
11. Anonymous. This passage has its sources in the Talmud and the older Midrash. In Siphri 134°, three ‘ posses- 
sions’ are mentioned: Torah, Israel, and the Sanctuary. In Mechilta, Beshallah 9, p. 43% , four are given: Israel, 
heaven and earth, the Sanctuary, and Torah. In the Talmud, Pes. 87>, the same four are given. Abraham is 
thus a later addition; the proof-text does not support his inclusion, because it says that God is the possessor, not of 
Abraham, but of heaven and earth. 
733 


I 


tN 


PIRKE ABOTH 6. 11-12 


Abraham? That which is written: ‘And he blessed him and said, Blessed be Abraham of God Gen. xi 
Most High, possessor of heaven and earth.’ Whence concerning Israel? That which is written: 

‘Till Thy people pass over, O Lord, till the people pass over which Thou hast possessed.’ And it Exod. x 
says: ‘As for the saints that are in the earth, they are the excellent in whom is all my delight.’ Ps. xvi. 
Whence concerning the house of the Sanctuary? That which is written: ‘ The place, O Lord, Exod. x 
which Thou hast made for Thee to dwell in, the Sanctuary, O Lord, which Thy hands have founded.’ 

And it says: ‘And He brought them to the border of His Sanctuary, to this mountain which His Ps. Ixxvi 
right hand hath possessed.’ All that the Holy One, blessed be He, created in His world, He created 

it only for His glory; as it is said: ‘Every one that is called by My name, and whom I have Isa. xliii 
created for My glory, I have formed him, I have made him.’ And it says: ‘The Lord shall reign Exod. x 
for ever and ever,’ 


12. Anonymous. Probably continuous with the preceding, the idea being to supplement the statement that God has 
five possessions in the world by the declaration that all which it contains is His because He created it. The passage 
tself is older, being taken verbatim from the Talmud, Joma 38%, and there it is assigned to a date before A.D. 70. 
The compiler of this chapter included it as a well-known ancient saying in praise of God, and added it here both to 
herd the preceding statement about the possessions, and also to serve as a sort of concluding doxology to the whole 
ook. 

The Wilna edition of the Talmud gives, after v. 12, a saying ascribed to R. Hanania b. Akashia (date unknown) 
and taken from Macc. 23, ‘Be pleased, O God, to purify Israel; wherefore increase to them Torah and precepts, 
as it is said (Isa xlii. 21): “It pleased the Lord, for His righteousness’ sake, to magnify the Torah and make it 
honourable.”’ Rashi mentions this verse, but says it does not belong to the treatise of the Fathers. 


714 * 


Moe ohOkY OF AHIKAR 


INERODUCTION 


§ 1. SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE BOOK. 


IN the story of Ahikar we are probably, as in the parallel case of Tobit, in the region of folk- 
lore pure and- simple. It is a tale of Ingratitude and its Just Judgement, much in the same ethical 
manner as Tobit is a tale of a Grateful Ghost, and how he made recompense to his benefactor, who 
had cared for his dead body. We make the acquaintance of the story, first of all, in the supplementary 
pages of the Arabian Nights; we then trace it through the legends of a variety of peoples, with 
a growing sense of the antiquity of the common nucleus which underlies the traditions, and finally, 
as an interesting combination of good luck with good learning, the original story turns up in an 
Aramaic papyrus of the fifth century B.c. among the ruins of Elephantiné; in a language, that is, 
which had been conjectured as its original, and of an antiquity even greater than had been assigned 
to it by any of its investigators. The discovery followed from first suspicions to last achievement is 
itself almost a romance. 

Ahikar, who is the hero of the tale, was Grand-Vizier to Sennacherib, King of Assyria; he was 
a sage, as well as a politician, high in honour, abundant in wealth, and only poor by the curse 
of childlessness which left him without a son whom he might make the heir of his wealth and 
his wisdom. Repeated prayers brought him at last an injunction to take his sister’s son, Nadan, and 
bring him up as his own offspring. The story-teller relates the education of the youth, and how, 
after being deluged with proverbial philosophy, he turned out ill, intrigued against his adopted 
father, and betrayed him, by forged documents of a treasonable character, to the Government. 
Ahikar is condemned to death and Nadan steps into his place ; but, on the way to execution, 
the swordsman is reminded by Ahikar of a previous occasion on which he had saved him from 
a similar danger. A plan is devised by the two friends for the saving of Ahikar’s life, a criminal is 
substituted for him at the place of execution, and Ahikar is hidden away in his own cellarage to wait 
for the evolution of events. At last political circumstances bring the necessary turn to the wheel of 
his fortune The King of Assyria is unable, without his aid, to meet the intrigues and satisfy 
the demands of the King of Egypt; he sighs over Ahikar dead, and is informed, to his delight, that 
the sage is really living. Ahikar is brought out of his hiding-place, a very spectacle, with unkempt 
locks and overgrown nails, and reinstated in his ancient honour. After an interval spent, in the 
typical folk-lore manner, in satisfying the requirements of the King of Egypt, Ahikar returns 
to claim the boon of a due revenge on his adopted son, whom he imprisons, beats, and starves, and 
to whom he talks parables, till the young man dies,—after the manner recorded of another traitor in 
the Acts of the Apostles. 

The story is divided internally into four parts, which need not, all of them, be of equal 
antiquity. There is (1) the narrative itself: (2) the imbedded proverbial philosophy or, as we may 
call it, the Teaching of Ahikar: (3) the journey to Egypt, which may be the expansion of a later 
folklorist and can easily be detached from the main narration ; and (4) the similitudes, with which 
Ahikar completes the education of his nephew ; or as we may call them, the Parables of Ahikar. 


§ 2. THE ANTIQUITY OF THE BOOK. 


The antiquity of the book is demonstrated by the following considerations : 

(a) That Democritus, the Greek proverbial philosopher, is alleged by Clement of Alexandria to 
have incorporated with his writings matter which he had appropriated from the Pillar of Ahikar: if 
this be the real Democritus, and the monument actually contained the Sayings of Ahikar, the latter 
must have been extant in the early part of the fifth century B.c. 

(6) That the story of Ahikar has been made the foundation for the account of the adventures of 
the Greek Aesop at the Court of Lykeros, King of Babylon. 

(c) That the Book of Tobit makes definite allusion to the story of Ahikar and Nadan, the 
deliverance of the former, and the just doom of the latter, in a way that assumes the story to be well 
known to the author of Tobit and to his readers. 

775 


THE STORY OF vrilivew. 


(2) That Theophrastus is said to have composed a book called Ahikar, which suggests some 
account of the hero of our tale. : : 

(e) That Strabo enumerates amongst persons who had mantic gifts a man named Ahaikar 
amongst the people of the Bosporus, where it has been acutely suggested that we should read ‘the 
people of Borsippa’.! ; cis ; 

(f) The names of the leading characters in the story are Assyrian in form, a peculiarity which 
is often conserved in the very latest versions. : ; 

(¢) Ahikar appears to be included amongst the wise men of the world in a mosaic found 
at Tréves, 

(x) And lastly, the story of Ahikar is found in a fragmentary papyrus recently recovered from 
the ruins of Elephantiné, and without doubt belonging to the fifth century before Christ. 

A further confirmation, if confirmation were needed, would lie in the occurrence of definite 
quotations from the recovered story in other early works. The investigation of such quotations is, 
however, complicated by the uncertainty as to whether all parts of the Ahikar-tradition are 
substantially of the same age. If we could assume that they were, then, in view of the great age of 
the Elephantiné-papyrus and the still greater age of the original from which it is derived, we could at 
once infer that the Ahikar story was an influencing factor in a number of Biblical Psalms and 
in certain of the Sapiential books, such as Proverbs and Sirach, as well as in Daniel and in Tobit, in 
the Book of Jubilees and in the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs. Weshall also have a number 
of significant parallels in the New Testament, in the Gospels, the Acts, the first Epistle to the 
Corinthians, and the second Epistle of Peter. It will, probably, be best to present all these 
coincidences as parallels in the first instance, and postpone the decision as to whether they are 
actual quotations until we have further light on the development of the story itself. Over and 
above these Biblical parallels, we have a number of quotations made by Shahrastani, probably 
through the medium of Democritus, a series of adaptations of the proverbs of Ahikar by Mohammed, 
an incorporation of part of the opening sentences in the story of Syntipas, a versification in Old 
French of one of the Parables of Ahikar, and a number of quotations in early Armenian writers. 
Few books have so wide an attestation as the story of Ahikar. For convenience we tabulate 
the above parallels and quotations as follows :— 


Democritus. Matthew. 

Tobit. Luke. 

Psalms. Acts. 

Proverbs. 1 Corinthians, 
Sirach. 2, Peter: 

Daniel. 2 Timothy. 
Jubilees. Koran. 
Testaments of Twelve Patriarchs. Syntipas, and an 


Old French Parable. 


$3. QUOTATIONS AND REFERENCES. 
a. Democritus. | 
Now that the antiquity of Ahikar is so firmly established, there is very little ground for 


questioning the references made to him or his teaching by Democritus or other writers depending 
on Democritus. Here are the principal passages that come under discussion : 


Shahrastani, as from Democrates (ed. Cureton, p. 306) : 


‘The tail of a dog gives him meat, his voice gets him blows.’ 


Cf. Aeth. 2: ‘My son, make fair thy discourse and thy behaviour ; for the wagging of a dog’s tail gives 
him bread, but his jaw brings him stones.’ 


Syr. il. 38: ‘My son, sweeten thy tongue and make savoury the opening of thy mouth ; for the tail of 
a dog gives him bread, but his mouth gets him blows.’ 


It is also found in the Copenhagen Arabic in this form: 

‘The tail of a dog gives him bread to eat, and his mouth gives him a beating with stones to eat.’ 
In Cod. Syr. S, it recurs in this form: 

‘For the tail of the dog gives him bread, but his mouth gives him blows and stones.’ 
In the Armenian sayings it has got into the second group in the form: 


‘(God panies judgement between me and thee). For the tail of a dog gives him bread, and his mouth 
a cudgel.’ 


? Th. Reinach in Revue des Etudes Juives, xxviii, pp. 1-13, and Frankel in Pauly-Wissowa, s. v. Ahikaros. 


716 


INTRODUCTION 


In the Aesop story it comes in this form : 


‘My one ao be accessible to those whom thou meetest, knowing that even to the dog his tail supplies 
read. 


Here then, in every version except the Slavonic, we have the traces of the special proverb. There 
can be no doubt that it formed part of the primitive collection. 


A second example from the same source runs as follows: 

‘Do not allow any one to tread on your heel to-day, lest he tread on your neck to-morrow.’ 
This is almost exactly the Syriac proverb (ii. 39): 

‘My son, suffer not thy neighbour to tread on thy foot, lest he tread on thy neck.’ 
The proverb is also found in the Armenian, Arabic, and Slavonic versions. 


A third example which follows in Shahrastani is as follows : 
‘Be not over-sweet, lest thou be swallowed down: nor over-bitter, lest thou be spit out.’ 


The proverb is found in the Slavonic and Armenian versions (c. ii. 8): it is no doubt to be 
referred to both Democritus and Ahikar. 


The next instance from Shahrastani is as follows: 


‘(Solon) saw a man who stumbled, and said to him: It is better to stumble with the foot than with the 
tongue.’ 
The proverb is found in the Ethiopic, in the Syriac (ii. 53), and in the Slavonic. In the proverbs 
of Maximus it is referred to Socrates: for which I propose to read Democrates (= Democritus). 


The last, and perhaps the most interesting of the maxims of Democritus, will be found in 
Clement of Alexandria, Protrept. 75: 


‘For swine delight in mud more than in clean water, and wallow in a drain, according to Democritus.’ 
The latter half of the sentence is quoted by Plutarch, De twenda sanitate 14, again with reference to 
Democritus. There seems to be little room for doubt that Democritus is quoting from the same 
proverb of Ahikar which we find quoted in 2 Peter ii. 22, and which is current in the Syriac 
(viii. 18), Armenian, and Karshuni versions: e.g. in the Karshuni (viii. 15): 

‘My son, thou hast been to me like the pig, who went to the hot bath with people of quality, and when 

it came out of the hot bath it saw a filthy hole, and it went down and wallowed in it.’ 


These examples will show conclusively the correctness of the tradition that Democritus copied from 
Ahikar, and issued the proverbs of the latter under his own name. 


b. The Tobit Parallels. 


The parallel passages in the Book of Tobit, and the supposed references to Ahikar, have occupied 
the leading place in the criticism of the text, partly because it was by their means that the antiquity 
of Ahikar was, in the first instance, established, and partly because around these parallels the 
question of relative priority was, in the first instance, debated. Now that the antiquity of Ahikar 
has been vindicated in an extraordinary manner, we need not hesitate to mark quotations in Tobit, 
only reserving such cases as may properly be referred to a more recent manipulation of the text 
of Ahikar. 

The following are the principal parallels, as given in the Vatican Codex, with which, however, 
the Sinaitic text should be carefully compared: 


Tob. i. 21 seq.: ‘And Esarhaddon * his son reigned in his stead, and he appointed Achiachar the son of 
Anael my brother over all the fisc of this Kingdom, and over all the administration. And Achiachar 
asked on my behalf, and I came to Nineveh. And Achiachar was Cupbearer and Great Seal, and 
Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Esarhaddon appointed him a second time:* and he was my 
cousin.’ < 

Tob. ii. 10: ‘And I (Tobit) went to the physicians, and they could not help me. And Achiachar 
maintained him until the time that he went to Elymais’ (where an acute conjecture suggests to 
read ‘his hiding-place’ for ‘ Elymais’). 

Tob. xi. 17, 18: ‘And there was great joy to all the brethren in Nineveh, and Achiachar and Nasbas his 
cousin (?) came (to the wedding festival).’ . 


1 It is difficult to say if this is the original form; it looks as if SayepSovds were a misplaced genitive, and the 
original reading ‘the son of Esarhaddon’, which would mean that Tobit had repeated the blunder of the versions of 
Ahikar, by making Sennacherib later than Esarhaddon. ; ; ‘ +e 

“2 Exactly, but unintelligibly, ‘Sacherdonos, a son ex Sevrépas’, which again looks like an original ‘Son of 
Sacherdon’. 


717 


THE STORM OF aA niki 


For ‘ Nasbas’ the Sinaitic text has ‘Nabad’, which can hardly be right, and it makes Achiachar 
and Nabad to be both of them cousins of Tobit. Perhaps the obscure Nasbas covers the name of 
Nadan’s younger brother. , 
Tob. xiv. ro: ‘My child, consider what Nadab did to Achiachar that brought him up, how from the 
light he led him to the dark and what recompense he made him: and Achiachar (God) saved, but 
to the other the just reward was made, and he went down to the dark. Manasses (vead Ahikar) did 
alms, and he was saved from the snare of death which he laid for him, but Nadab fell into the snare 
and perished.’ 
I have corrected some obvious transcriptional blunders, and made one bold but necessary emenda- 
tion. For the almsgiving of Ahikar, see also Tob. iv. 10,‘ Alms doth deliver from death, and will 
not suffer thee to come into darkness’. See also Ahikar (viii. 2, viii. 37 Syr.). 
Tob. xiv. 15: ‘And he heard before his death of the destruction of Nineveh, which Nebuchadnezzar and 
Ahasuerus took captive ;’ 
where the Sinaitic text expands, and explains that Nineveh was taken captive by Achiakar, the 
King of Media. ee 
Ahasuerus is a mere blunder for ‘Nineveh and Az¢hur’ in the Ahikar story: the Sinaitic 
expansions have made the confusion worse confounded. Tobit’s history and his geography are out 
of the reach of justification. 
Tob. iv. 17: ‘ Pour out thy bread on the graves of the righteous and do not give it to sinners :’ 
with which cf. Ahikar RF, 
(Arab. il. 13): ‘O my son, pour out thy wine on the tombs of the just, and drink not with ignorant, 
contemptible people.’ ca 
(Syr. 1. 10): ‘My son, pour out thy wine on the graves of the righteous, rather than drink it with 
evil men.’ 


[On this question see I. 189-192.—Gen. Editor. ] 


c. Parallels in the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs. 
See p. 291 of this volume.? 


2. Some Old Testament Parallels. 


The parallels with the O.T., especially with the Sapiential books, are constant, and it is not 
always easy to say certainly on which side antiquity lies. As a general principle the Ahikar 
sentences are older than their parallels in Sirach. A few places may be noted: 

Ahikar (c. 11. 45 Syr.): ‘My son, I have carried salt and have removed lead; but I have not seen anything 

heavier than that a man should pay a debt that he did not borrow,’ &c. 
Cf. Sirach xxii. 14, 15: ‘What is heavier than lead, and what is the name thereof, but a fool? Sand 
and salt and a mass of iron are easier to bear than a man without understanding.’ 
Some traces of a similar proverb will be found in the papyrus: 


Ahikar (c. i. 65 Syr.): ‘My son, strive not with a man in his day, and stand not against a river in its 
flood.’ 


Cf. Sirach iv. 26: ‘Do not stand up against a river’ (cf. the Syriac version). 
Ahikar (c. ii, 2 Syr.): ‘My son, if thou hast heard a word let it die in thy heart.’ 
Cf. Sirach xix. 10 (Syr.). 


Ahikar (c. 1. 19 Arab.): ‘O my son, be not neighbour to the fool, and eat not bread with him,’ 
GiePs, .cxliz 4, 


Ahikar (c. ii. 61 Arab.): ‘O my son, let the wise man beat thee with a rod: but let not the fool anoint 


thee with sweet salve.’ 
Cia so xii: 5 (LXX). 


Ahikar (c. vii. 38 Arab. ; cf. viii. 41 Syr.): ‘For he who digs a pit for his brother, falls into it 3; and he 
who sets traps shall be caught in them.’ 
Cr Ps exh no: 


For coincidences with Daniel we may take: 
Ahikar c. i. 3 (Arab.) with Dan. ii. 2 127, Ve Bs 
Ahikar c. i. 7 (Arm.) with Dan. v. 16. 


Ahikar c. v. 4 (Arab.) with Dan, ii. 11. 
Ahikar c. v. rz with Dan. iv. Be. 


7 In Jub. xxxvii. 23 the words “When the raven becomes white as the raza (i.e. a | i i 
-€. a large white bird), then k 
that I have loved thee? may be an echo of Syriac A 62 ‘ And the raven become white as a *.—[Gen. Balter Se 


718 


INTRODUCTION 


e. Coincidences and Parallels with the New Testament. 
Ahikar, c. iv. 14, has the account of Nadan’s revelry, after he has got rid of his uncle, and of his 
beating the menservants and the women-servants, &c. We have to compare carefully Matt. xxiv. 


48-51, and Luke xii. 43, 46, and it will be seen that the language of Ahikar has coloured one of our 
Lord’s parables. 


Perhaps the same thing is true of the parable of the Prodigal Son; for we have in the 
Syriac (viii. 34) : 
‘Forgive me this my folly; and I will tend thy horses and feed thy pigs which are in thy house.’ 
and in the Armenian (viii. 24) : 
‘Father, I have sinned against thee. Forgive me, and I will be a slave unto thee henceforth and for ever.’ 
Cf. Luke xv. 19. 
Nor should we neglect to compare the story of the unfruitful fig-tree in the Gospel with : 


Ahikar, c. viii. 35 (Syr.): ‘My son, thou hast been to me like the palm-tree that stood by a river, and 
cast all its fruit into the river ; and when its lord came to cut it down, it said to him, “ Let me alone 
this year, and I will bring thee forth carobs.” And its lord said unto it, “Thou hast not been 
industrious in what is thine own, and how wilt thou be industrious in what is not thine own ?”’ 


for which we compare Luke xiii. 6-9. 
For Ahikar, c. viii (death of Nadan), cf. the death of Judas in Matt. xxvii. 5,in Acts i. 18, 19, and 
in the traditions of Papias. 
For the rest of the N.T. compare 
Ahikar, c. ii. 16 (Syr.): ‘ My son, it is not proper even to eat with a shameless person.’ 
mith © Cot.v2 11; 


Ahikar, c. ii. 59 (Syr.): ‘Visit the poor in his affliction, and speak of him in the presence of the ruler, 
and do one’s diligence to save him from the lion.’ 
with. 2° Tim. iv..17 5 
and Ahikar, c. viii. 18 (Syr.), viii. 15 (Arab.), viii. 24 (Arm.) (the pig that went to the bath), with 
the ‘true proverb’ in 2 Peter ii. 22, noting that the proverb in Ahikar can be traced back to him 
through Democritus. 


f. Parallels in the Koran. 


The Koran knows Ahikar by the name of Loqman, and makes allusion to him and his gnomic 


sayings. ; 
The 31st Sura of the Koran is, in fact, named after him, and we may compare: 
‘O my son... be moderate in thy pace, and lower thy voice, for the most ungrateful of all voices 


surely is the voice of asses.’ 


The passage becomes intelligible when we put by the side of it Ahikar, c. ii. 45 (Arm.), ii. 8 (Syr.), 
ie Pisco tab.): 
‘My son, cast down thy eyes and lower thy voice . . . for ifa house could be built by a high voice, the 
ass would build two houses in one day.’ 


§ 4. MATERIALS FOR THE DETERMINATION OF THE PEXT: 


a. The Aramaic Papyrus. 


The first and only authority for the original text of Ahikar is the Aramaic papyrus, discovered 
at Elephantiné by Dr. Rubensohn in the excavations of 1906-1908, and published by Sachau in 
git as part of his Aramaische Papyrus und Ostraka aus Elephantiné. The MS. is unfortunately 
imperfect, but it is clear, from comparison with a number of dated documents with which it was 
found, that it was written somewhere between 420 B.C. and 400 B.C. It is thus the earliest example 
of either Biblical or Apocryphal literature. The book itself cannot have been composed very much 
earlier than its copy, and Sachau suggests that it was produced somewhere between 550 and 450 B.C. 
We should say that the upper limit is more likely, for even if the book were at once popular (as it 
almost certainly was) it would take time for it to be carried from Mesopotamia to the outlying 
Jewish colony at the first cataract of the Nile. Suppose we say that it was written about 500 B.C., 
or a little earlier. It should be somewhat later than the Aramaic inscriptions from Zinjerli, for in 
these the name of Assyria is still written Asshur, whereas the Ahikar book has Athur. The 


749 


“THE STORY OF AHIKAR 


Aramaic, then, is the original language: there is no sign of Hebraism anywhere in the book. We 
are as near to the first form of an ancient book as we are ever likely to be. 

It is unfortunate, therefore, that the papyrus is so incomplete. There is nothing preserved of 
the narrative portion after the condemnation of Ahikar, and not very much of what leads up to the 
condemnation ; while the fragments of the proverbs and parables are so difficult to reconstruct, that 
we are hardly able to read a single unbroken sentence. It appears as if the proverbial philosophy 
and the parabolic admonitions were mixed up together, and that there was little agreement between 
what is contained of them in the papyrus and the two collections which are exhibited in our 
extant versions. 

Moreover, as the latter part of the narrative is not extant, which must at least have contained 
the account of Ahikar’s recovery, we cannot be certain whether the Egyptian episode is a part of the 
missing matter or whether it is the addition of a later folklorist. We can, however, make certain 
things quite clear. 

First of all, the papyrus makes the story fall under Sennacherib and Esarhaddon, his son; and 
it does not make the mistake which occurs in most of the later versions, of calling Sennacherib the 
son of Esarhaddon, and putting all the story in his reign. It is nearer to history even if it is not 
exactly history. We understand, too, what used to be a difficulty, why Tobit, which certainly 
follows Ahikar, does not make the mistake of inversion with regard to the kings which we find in 
Ahikar, according to the later versions (though there are suspicions that Tobit has corrected 
an original mistake). 

If, however, the papyrus in certain points discredits the later versions, there are other points in 
which it accredits even the youngest of them. Thus the Arabic version has the correct Assyrian 
form, NabuSumiskun, for the executioner of Ahikar; and M. l’Abbé Nau, in his valuable book on 
Ahikar, has pointed out that one of the youngest copies of the Syriac text is free from the historical 
blunder over Sennacherib and Esarhaddon. Further, amongst the few proverbial sentences that can 
be reconstructed from the papyrus fragments there is one which is preserved in the Armenian 
version, and apparently nowhere else. So that even late versions are not to be despised in the 
reconstruction of the original legend. 

On the other hand, there can be no doubt that the story has been treated very freely by many 
generations of transcribers. Even if it should be maintained that there was an original historical 
nucleus (which seems very unlikely in view of the manner in which the story is told) there can be no 
doubt that it was handled as a folk-tale from the earliest times. For example, in the opening of the 
story, Ahikar explains his unsuccessful wedlock with sixty wives, for whom he built sixty castles or 
palaces. That is genuine folk-lore. When he adopts his sister’s son, Nadan, he hands him over to 
eight wet-nurses that they may bring him up; and the boy grows up like a cedar under their 
assiduous fostering. If any one doubts whether this is folk-lore or not, he may consult the following 
openings of Tibetan tales from the collection of von Schiefner and Ralston : 


Story of Sudhana Avadana, p. 2s 


The boy Sudhana was handed over to eight nurses, two to carry him, two to suckle him, two to cleanse 


him, and two to play with him. As those eight nurses fed him and brought him up on milk, &c.: . . . he 
shot up like a lotus in a tank, &c. 


An exactly similar story concerning the rearing of Visvantara on P- 257; again, on p. 273, The 
Story of the Fulfilled Prophecy, the same description is given of the rearing of Saryanteat iA on 
p. 279, Lhe Story of the Two Brothers, the same description will be found for the early years 
of Kohemankara. 

In the same way, whether the Egyptian episodes of the story are a part of the original document 
or not, they are neither more nor less than folk-lore. For instance, the demand of the Pharaoh that 


‘King Janaka sent a messenger to Pirna, the head-man of the village Piirnakatshtshha 
order to send a rope made of sand one hundred ells long,’ &c. 

These examples, taken from a single collection of Eastern folk-tales, will be sufficient to show 
to any one who is unfamiliar with Eastern story-telling, that the Ahikar legend is not meant to be 
taken for history. It is an ethical folk-tale, with Ingratitude for its theme of reprehension. To try 


to turn it into history is to do the original composer a literary injusti 
oo : injustice. We n 
description of the leading versions. 5 y inj ow turn to the 


720 


INTRODUCTION 


b. The Syriac Version (S). 


There are not many copies of this version, and those that do exist are late. The following are 
the chief texts: 

S,: a single leaf of the twelfth or thirteenth century in the British Museum (Cod. Add. 7200). 

S,: a MS. in the Cambridge University Library, formerly in the possession of the Society for Promoting 
Christian Knowledge, dated a.p. 1697 (Univ. Cant. Add. 2020). 

S,: a MS. in the Sachau Collection at Berlin (Cod. Sach. 336), written in 1883. This is the MS. to 
which M. Nau attaches so great importance, that he has made it the basis of his text. The main 
thing in its favour is that it has escaped the inversion of Sennacherib and Esarhaddon. 


S,, 5,, 5, are three transcripts in the American Mission Library at Ooroomiah, none of them of any 
importance. 
 S, is a fragment of the fifteenth century at Berlin (Cod. Sach. 162). 
S, in the British Museum (sixteenth or seventeenth century) = Cod. Or. 2213, contains the latter part of 
the story of Ahikar. 


S, is a MS. in the Chaldean convent which Nau describes as ‘ Notre-Dame des Semences, 4 neuf heures 
au nord de Mossoul’, written in 1883. 


Of these S,, S,, S;, Sg are the only ones that require attention. 
There is also a translation into modern Syriac (dialect of the Jebel Tar) in the Berlin MS., Cod. 
Sach. 339; it is accompanied by an Arabic text, of which it appears to be a direct translation. 


c. The Arabic and Karshuni Versions (A and K). 


We have the text of Ahikar in Arabic, printed by Salhani in his Contes Arabes (Beyrout), and 
there are also a number of MSS. either in Arabic script, or in Karshuni (Arabic in Syriac characters) : 
of these the principal are :— 

K,: a Cambridge MS. (Cod. Add. 2886) dated 1783. 

K,: a British Museum MS. (Cod. Add. 7209). 


The former of these MSS., with the latter as an occasional supplement, is the base of Mrs. Lewis’s 
translation of Ahikar in the Cambridge volume. 
K,: a Gotha MS. (no. 2652), which was employed by Cornill in editing an Arabic counterpart to his 
Ethiopic text of the Sayings of Ahikar. 
K,: a Vatican MS. from Aleppo, referred to by Assemani. ey 
K,: the Arabic half of the Berlin MS. (Cod. Sach. 339) described above as containing a modern Syriac 
version and a Karshuni original. 


The Arabic MSS. proper must be fairly numerous. There are examples in Copenhagen and in the 
Vatican and at Paris. 
A,: Copenhagen (Cod. Arab. 2 36), written in 1670. 
»: Vatican (Cod. Arab. rz), from the collection of Pope Innocent XIII, written in 1766. 
: Vatican (Cod. Arab. 55). 
: Paris (Cod. Arab. 3637), from which Caussin de Perceval made his translation. 


eo 


PPP 


d. The Ethiopic Version (Aeth.). 


A complete Ethiopic version has not yet been found ; but in the Book of the Wise Philosophers 
fifteen maxims of Ahikar are extant, translated from an Arabic original. They were published by 
Cornill in 1875. 

e. The Armenian Version (Arm.). 


This version is of peculiar importance. It is at least as early as 450 A.D., and is extant in 
numerous copies, most of which are unfortunately late. It was also frequently printed in Constanti- 
nople in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Mr. Conybeare has noted the following MSS. :— 


Arm., in the Bodleian Library at Oxford. 
Arm., at Venice, no. 482 in the Library of San Lazaro: fifteenth or sixteenth century. 
Arm., at Paris (Cod. Arm. no. 92), in the National Library: dated a. D. 1619. 

Arm., at Paris (Cod. Supp. 58), seventeenth century. 

Arm., at Paris (Cod. Arm. 131), late seventeenth century. 

Arm., at Paris (Cod. Arm. 69), seventeenth century. 

Arm., at Oxford (Bodl. Can. Or. 131), A. D. 1697. 

Arm., at Edjmiatzin (Cod. 2048), about A.D. 1600. 

Arm., at Edjmiatzin (Cod. 1633) in A.D. rGo4. 


A 
1105.2 721 3 


THE SPORY OF saturn 


Arm.,, at Edjmiatzin (Cod. 1995) in a. D. 1605. 

Arm.,, at Edjmiatzin (Cod. 1986) in a. p. 1623. 

Arm.,, at Edjmiatzin (Cod. 51) in a. p. 1642. : 

As we have said, this version is early, its text inspires confidence. For example, the saying 
‘Son, rejoice not thou in the number of thy children, and in their deficiency be not thou distressed 
is found only in the Armenian and in the newly-found papyrus. ; : 

The translation of the Armenian version is made from Mr. Conybeare’s Armenian text which 
is published in The Story of Ahikar, Cambridge, 1898, and is based on the above MSS. 


J. The Greek Version (Aeés.). 


All that we at present know of the Greek version is contained in the Greek lives of Aesop, which 
are modelled upon the story of Ahikar, and which may conveniently be studied in Eberhard’s 
Fabulae Romanenses Graece conscriptae, in which the part that corresponds to Ahikar runs from 
p. 285 to p. 297. 

g. The Slavonic Version (S1.). 


This version is made from the lost Greek, and is translated by Jagi¢ in Byzant. Zettschr., 
pp. 107-126. We have not thought it worth while to give a translation of this version. hae 

It is probable that other versions will come to light before long: in particular we consider it very 
unlikely that there should be no traces of the story in Latin. 


SUMMARY OF THE PRINCIPAL EDITIONS, VERSIONS, AND TRANSLATIONS 
OF THE TEXT OF AHIKAR. 


1. The original text will be found in Sachau, Avamdische Papyrus und Ostraka aus Elephantiné (Berlin, 1911), 
and in Ungnad, Aramiische Papyrus aus Elephantiné ( Leipzig, 1911). * : : 

z. The Armenian, Syriac, and Arabic versions in Zhe Story of Ahikar, edited by Conybeare, Harris, and Lewis 
(Cambridge, 1898). : : 

3. The Slavonic version translated into German by Jagi¢, in Byzantinische Zeitschrift, i, pp. 107-26 (1892). 
This translation is repeated in English in the Cambridge edition wt supra. 


4. The Ethiopic fragment was published by Cornill in the Boo of the Wise Philosophers, and Cornill’s translation 
is repeated in English in the Cambridge edition uz SUPA. 
5. The Arabic version was published by Salhani in Contes Arabes (Beyrout) and in the Cambridge edition x 
Supra. 


6. The Arabic version was translated in not a few editions of the Arabian Nights, beginning with Chavis et 
Cazotte (Cabinet des Fées), t. xxxix. 


7. A neo-Syriac version, accompanied by an Arabic text, was published by Lidzbarski in 1894 (Die neuaraméischen 
flandschriften der Kiniglichen Bibl. zu Berlin), Weimar. A German translation accompanies this work. 

8. English translations of the chief texts are found in the Cambridge edition w¢ supra; and the Syriac version 
was translated by E. J. Dillon in the Contemporary Review for March, 1808. 

9. A French translation of the Syriac versions is given by M. Nau, Astorre et Sagesse @’ Ahikar (Paris, 1909). 

to. The Greek version, so far as it is involved in the text of Aesop, may be consulted in Eberhard, Faéulae 


Romanenses Graece conscriptae; the principal parts of the parallel story being reproduced in the Cambridge edition 
ut supra. 


_,i1- The Armenian version has often been printed. The first attempt at a critical edition is found in the Cambridge 
edition w¢ supra, accompanied by a translation; the earlier editions have been chronicled for the following dates: 


1708, 1731, 1807, 1834, 1850, 1861 (see Nau, p. 15). The book appears to have been very popular in the Armenian 
community. 


COMPARATIVE ARRANGEMENT OF THE SAVINGS OF AHIKAR IN DIFFERENT VERSIONS. 
I. Proverbs of Ahikar. 


The numbers below refer to the verses in Chapter II. 


Syriac. Arabic. Eth. Arm. Syriac. Arabic. Eth. Arm. 

Ave 8 jena 

I 1 I Gf. Arm, ceil 11a 45a 
at end. 8 9 11d 4 456 

2 2 2 1b Ia ELG 

3 2 ae ic 9 IO i2 i; 4 

4 4 6 1d 10 1 7 

5 7 9 2 Cf. Syr. A 19, | “17 II 5 
Wien 12 t2 14 6 

6 39 13 13 16 6 9 

7 ge) 3 14 14 17 7 10a 


722 


Syriac. 


A 


i5 
16 


17 
18 


19 


20 


B 

T5 
16 
18 


19 
7a, 20 


21 


Syriac. 


I 
2a 


20 


3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
igo) 
II 
12 
13 
4 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20a 


206 
206 


Arabic. 


18 
19a 
58 
8 


9b, 586 
21 
22 
23 
24 


? 


= 


26 


a 
28, 29 
Sta 


Arabic. 


120 


14 
T5 
ua 
18 
19 


Eth. 


10 14 


INTRODUCTION 


Arm. 


100d 
Io¢? 
It, 97 


aS 


Cf “Arm, 27, 


Ch SyrA. §; 
2. 


I2 


MO 


14 


17 
18, 78 
19 
20, 21 
22a 
220 
23 





4I 
42 
85 
3 
44-a—— Ci Syr. A 56. 
2 Parab. 26¢ Greek 11. 
47 
64? 
65 
66 Cf. Syr. A 47 
and Arm. 
nie 
67 
68 
69a 


Il. Parables of Ahtkar. 


Syriac. 
B 


A 


45 
46 
47 


48 


49a 
490 
50a 
506 


51 
52 
55 
54 
55 
56 
Di 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 


ty 
ty 


Arabic. 


7) 47 


Eth. Arm, 
69 4 
69¢ 

15 Ch Syr, Aa 
Arm. 66. 

51 

736 

50 


12 


56 


Wh 
60 


28 


14 83 


80a 
28, 81a 

816 
15 
82 


Cf. Syr. A 5, 
19. 


84 
26, 27 


The numbers below refer to the verses in Chapter VIII. 
Syriac. 


Arm. 


I 
2 


3,5, 7 -Cf. Syr. 23, 39-2. 
8 


9 
10 


18 
r26¢ 


17 
15 


2a 


Il 





19 
24a 


14@ 
14¢ 
146 
773 


21 
22 


23 


24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 


Arabic. 


29 


32 
33 


34 


38 


Arm. 


Cf. Syra 2, 30=>2. 


12a 
13 
20 
21 


4 
22 


246 
25 


16 
23 
26 Cf. “Arm: 7. 
2016s 27 


3ZA2 


PET Tag gle) Isa 


SYRIAC VERSION A. 
from MS. Syr., 


AGAIN, by the divine power, I write the 
proverbs, to wit, the story of Ahikar, sage and 


la 


secretary of Sennacherib the king of Assyria and | 


Nineveh. 


In the twentieth year of Sennacherib, son of 


Sarhadum, king of Assyria and Nineveh, I, | 


Ahikar, was the king’s secretary. 

2 And it had been said to me when I wasa boy, 
that no son will be born to thee!: and the wealth 
that I had acquired was too vast to tell. Sixty 
wives had I wedded: and sixty castles did I 
build them: and I had no son. 


3 Thereupon I, | 


Ahikar, built me a great altar, all of wood; and 


kindled fire upon it, and laid good meat thereon. | 


and thus I spake: 


4 ‘QO Lord, my God; when I shall die and leave | 
no son, what will men say of me? they will say | 


that this, then, is Ahikar the just and good and 
God-serving: he is dead, and has left no son to 
bury him, no! nor a daughter: and his posses- 
sions, as if he were accursed, no man inherits. 
5 But I ask of Thee, O God, that I may havea male 


child ; so that when I shall die, he may cast dust | 


on my eyes:’ 


6 and this voice was heard by me, 
‘O Ahikar, wise scribe, all that thou hast asked of 
me I have given thee; but as to my having left 
thee childless, let it suffice thee: perplex not 
thyself: but behold! Nadan thy sister’s son: he 
shall be ason unto thee: so that with the growth 
of his stature thou shalt be able to teach him 
everything.’ 


? Presumably, this was said by the astrologers. 





OF AHIKAR 


SYRIAC VERSION B. 
from MS. Syr., 


... And it was said to me, ‘[There will be no 1: 
son to thee].’, And I had much wealth; I wedded 
me sixty wives, and built me sixty castles: and 
from none of these women had I a son. 


Then I 3 
built me a great altar of incense and vowed a 
vow, and said, 


‘O Lord God, give me a male 5 
child, that when I shall die he may cast dust on 
my eyes.’ 


Thereupon there was heard by me 6 
this voice, saying, ‘O Ahikar, vex not thyself 
overmuch ; there is no son for thee; but behold 
Nadan thy sister’s son; make him thy son; so 
that as he grows up, thou mayst be able to 8, 15 
teach him everything.’ Then when I heard this, 

I took Nadan my sister’s son, and he became my 
son. 


724 


li 


Pris FORY ‘OF AHIKAR ‘1. 1-6 


ARABIC VERSION 


IN the name of God the Creator, the Living 
One, the Source of Reason, we hereby begin with 
the help of the Most High God?! and His best 
guidance, to write the story of Haiqar the Wise, 
Vizier of Sennacherib the King, and of Nadan, 
sister’s son to Haiqar the Sage. 

There was a Vizier in the days of King Sen- 
nacherib, son of Sarhadum, King of Assyria and 
Nineveh, a wise man named Haiqfr, and he was 


2 Vizier of the king Sennacherib. He had a fine 


3 who might be his heir. 


fortune and much goods, and he was skilful, wise, 
a philosopher, [in] knowledge, [in] opinion and 
[in] government, and he had married sixty women, 
and had built a castle for each of them. But 
with it all he had no child by any of these women, 
And he was very sad on 
account of this, and one day he assembled the 
astrologers and the learned men and the wizards 
and explained to them his condition and the 
matter of his barrenness. And they said to him, 
‘Go, sacrifice to the gods and beseech them that 
perchance they may provide thee with a boy.’ 


4 And he did as they told him and offered sacrifices 


5 his heart. 


to the idols, and besought them and implored 
them with request and entreaty. And they 
answered him not one word. And he went away 
sorrowful and dejected, departing with a pain at 
And he returned, and implored the 
Most High God, and believed, beseeching Him 
with a burning in his heart, saying, ‘O Most High 
God, O Creator of the Heavens and of the earth, 
© Creator of all created things! I beseech Thee 
to give me a boy, that I may be consoled by him, 
that he may be present at my death, that he may 
close my eyes, and that he may bury me.’ 


Then 


6 there came to him a voice saying, ‘ Inasmuch as 


thou hast relied first of all on graven images, and 
hast offered sacrifices to them, for this reason 
thou shalt remain childless thy life long. But 
take Nadan thy sister’s son, and make him thy 
child and teach him thy learning and thy good 
breeding, and at thy death he shall bury thee. 


1 Literally ‘God, may He be exalted !’ passim. 


ARMENIAN VERSION 


THE maxims and wisdom of Khikar, which i 
the children of men learn. 


In the times and in 
the reign of Senegerim King of Nineveh and of 
Asorestan, I, Khikar Notary of Seneqerim the 
King, took! sixty wives and builded me sixty 
palaces. And I, Khikar, was sixty years of age, 2 
and I had not a son. 


Then I went in to the 3 
gods with many offerings; I lit a fire before the 
gods and cast incense* upon it, and presented 
my offerings and sacrificed victims, kneeled down 
and prayed, and thus spake in my prayer. 


O my lords and gods, Belshim and Shimil and 4 
Shamin, ordain and give to me male seed. For 
lo, Khikar dieth alive. And what say men? 
That Khikar though alive and wise and clever 
is dead, and there is no son of his to bury him, 
nor daughter to bewail him. I have no heir after 
my death. Not even if a son should spend ten 
talents in the last day, would he exhaust my 
riches. But (I ask merely) that he may cast 5 
dust with his hands upon me, in order that I 
may not remain unremembered. 

Then there was a voice from the gods and 6 
they said: 

Khikar, there is not ordained seed for thee. 
But thou shalt take Nathan®, thy sister’s son, 
and bring him up as thy son, and he shall pay 
thee back thy cost of rearing him *. 


1 Can. thus: ‘acquired me slaves and handmaids and 
many possessions. I builded,’ &c. 

2 Add ‘ of sweet odour’ 58 and Edjm. 

3 So the better Arm. MSS. The inferior read ‘ Nadan’, 

4 So Canon. Others have ‘ pay thee back thy name’. 
See note on Arm. text. 


725 


THE STORY OF AHIKAK GS yaa, 


Syr. A 


7 And when I heard these things, I 
was grieved again, and said, ‘O Lord God! is 
it that Thou wilt give me as a son Nadan my 
sister's son, so that when I die, he may throw 
dust on my eyes?’ And no further answer was 

8 returned to me. And I obeyed the command 
and took to me for a son Nadan, my sister’s son: 
and because he was yet young, I furnished him 
with eight wet-nurses: and I brought up my son 
on honey, and made him lie on choice carpets, 

9 and clothed him in fine linen and purple; and 
my son grew and shot up like a cedar, and when 
my son was grown big, I taught him book-lore 

To and wisdom; and when the king came from the 
place to which he had gone, he called me and 
said to me, ‘O Ahikar, the wise scribe and master 
of my thoughts, when thou shalt wax old and 
die, who is there to come after thee and to serve 
me like thyself?’ 


II And I answered and said to 
him, ‘O my lord the king, live for ever! I have 
a son, wise like myself, and book-learned like 
myself, and educated.’ 

12 And the king said to me, 
‘Bring him and let me see him. If he is able to 
stand before me, I will release thee in peace, and 
thou shalt spend thy old age in honour, until 

13 thou shalt end thy days.’ Then I took my son 
Nadan and set him before the king, and when my 
lord the king saw him, he said, ‘ This day shall 
be a blessed day before God, so that like as 
Ahikar walked! before my father Sarhadum, and 
before me also, he shall be rewarded? and I will 
set his son in my gate in his lifetime, and he shall 
depart his life [in peace].’ 


14 Thereupon I, Ahikar, 
bowed down before the king and said, ‘My lord 
the king, live for ever! And like as I walked 
before thy father and before thyself even until 
now, so do thou also extend thy forbearance to 
the youthfulness of this my son, that thy grace 
which was toward me may be found multiplied 

15 towards him.’ Then when the king heard this, 
he gave me his tight hand, and I, Ahikar, bowed 
down before the king. 


Nor did I cease from the instruction of my son, 
until I had filled him with instruction as with 
bread and water. And on this wise was I dis- 
coursing to him: 


maleite rane. 
* Reading a qady. 


726 


Syvr. B 


Pires TORY OF AHIKAR 1.-7-15 


ARABIC ARMENIAN 


And when I heard this from the gods, I took 7 
Nathan my sister's son; one year old was he, 
and I clad him in byssus and purple; and a gold 
collar did I bind around his neck; and like a 
king’s son I decked him out with ornaments. 
And I gave him to drink milk and honey, and 8 







- Thereupon he took Nadan his sister’s son, who 
was a little suckling. And he handed him over 


to eight wet-nurses, that they might suckle him 
g and bring him up. And they brought him up 
with good food and gentle training and silken 
9 clothing, and purple and crimson. And he was 
seated upon couches of silk. And when Nadan 
grew big and walked, shooting up like a tall cedar, 
he taught him good manners and writing and 
science and philosophy. 
10 And after many days 
King Sennacherib looked at Haiqar and saw that 
he had grown very old, and moreover he said to 
him, ‘O my honoured friend, the skilful, the 
trusty, the wise, the governor, my secretary, my 
vizier, my Chancellor! and director; verily thou 
art grown very old and weighted with years ; 
and thy departure from this world must be near. 
Tell me who shall have a place in my service 
11 after thee. And Haiqar said to him, ‘O my 
lord, may thy head live forever! There is Nadan 
my sister’s son, I have made him my child. And 
I have brought him up and taught him my 
12 wisdom and my knowledge.’ And the king said 
to him,‘ O Haiqar! bring him to my presence, 
that I may see him, and if I find him suitable, 
put him in thy place; and thou shalt go thy way, 
to take a rest and to live the remainder of thy 
13 life in sweet repose. Then Haiqgar went and pre- 
sented Nadan his sisters son. And he did 
homage and wished him power and_ honour. 
And he looked at him and admired him and 
rejoiced in him and said to Haiqar: ‘Is this thy 
son, O Haigaér? I pray that God may preserve 
him. And as thou hast served me and my father 
Sarhadum so may this boy of thine serve me 
and fulfil my undertakings, my needs, and my 
business, so that I may honour him and make 
14 him powerful for thy sake. And Haiqar did 
obeisance to the king and said to him, ‘May thy 
head live, O my lord the king, for ever! I seek 
from thee that thou mayst be patient with my 
boy Nadan and forgive his mistakes that he 
may serve thee as it is fitting.’ Then the king 
swore to him that he would make him the greatest 
of his favourites, and the most powerful of his 
friends, and that he should be with him in all 
rg honour and respect. And he kissed his hands 
and bade him farewell. And he took Nadan his 
sister’s son with him and seated him in a parlour 
and set about teaching him night and day till he 
had crammed him with wisdom and knowledge 
more than with bread and water. 


1 Literally ‘ the sealer of my secrets’, pass. 





laid him to sleep on my eagles and doves, until 
he was seven years of age. 
teach him writing and wisdom and the art of 
knowledge and the answering of dispatches, and 
the returns of contradictory speeches. And by 
day and by night I ceased not to instruct him ; 
and I sated him with my teaching, as it were 
with bread and water. 

Then saith the king unto me: Khikar, my 
Notary and wise one, I know that thou art 
grown old; and after thy death, who is there to 
discharge ably and wisely the affairs of our 
kingdom? And I am very grieved at this 
thought. 


And I said to him: O King, live for 
ever. There is my son, who is superior to me 
and is more clever. 


And the king says: Bring 
him unto me, that I may behold him. And 
when I had brought him and stood him before 
the king, he beheld him and said: In his days 
may Khikar be blessed, because in his lifetime 
he hath led and stood before me his son, and 
may he himself be at rest. 


I bowed my head to my lord, and taking 
Nathan I led him into my dwelling and thus 
spake in my teaching’. 


1 Canon adds: ‘give ear to my conversation and pre- 
cept. Write it on thy seal, and forget it not; that the 
years of thy life may be plentiful, and that in glory and 
wealth thou mayst reach old age. No other Arm. source 


727 


Then I began to 9 


to 


Le] 


I 


THE 'STORVIOFUAHIKARS2Z eo 
The Proverbs of Ahikar 


Syr. A 
21 ‘Hear,O my son Nadan, and come to the under- 


standing of me, and be mindful of my words, as 
the words of God?: 


2 My son Nadan, if thou hast heard a word, let 
it die in thy heart, and reveal it to no man; lest 
it become a hot coal in thy mouth and burn thee, 
and thou lay a blemish on thy soul, and be 
angered against God. 

3 My son, do not tell all that thou hearest, and 
do not disclose all that thou seest. 


4 My son, do not loose a knot that is sealed, and 
do not seal one that is loosed. 


5 My son, lift not up thy eyes and look upon a 
woman that is bedizened and painted; and do 
not lust after her in thy heart ; for if thou shouldst 
give her all that is in thy hands, thou findest no 
advantage in her; and thou wilt be guilty of sin 
against God. 


6 My son, commit not adultery with the wife of 
thy neighbour; lest others should commit adultery 
with thy wife. 

7 My son, be not in a hurry, like the almond- 

tree whose blossom is the first to appear, but 

whose fruit is the last to be eaten; but be equal 
and sensible, like the mulberry-tree whose blossom 
is the last to appear, but whose fruit is the first to 
be eaten. 
My son, cast down thine eyes, and lower thy 
voice, and look from beneath thine eyelids: for 
* Cf. Teaching of Apostles, c. iv, ‘Him that speaketh 


to thee the word of God, thou shalt remember night and 
day, and thou shalt honour him as the Lord’. 


8 








SYR. B 
And on this wise I was saying to him?: 

‘Hear my teaching, my son Nadan; and come 21 
to my understanding, and be mindful of my 
words, according to the following sayings:’ and 
thereupon Ahikar* began to teach Nadan his 
sister’s son, and answered and said to him: 

‘My son, if thou hast heard a word, let it die in 2 
thy heart ; and reveal it to no man; lest it should 
become a hot coal in thy mouth, and burn thee; 
and thou shalt lay blemish on thy soul, and shalt 
be hated on earth, and be angered against God 3. 

My son, do not tell all that thou seest, and do 3 
not disclose all that thou hearest. 


My son, do not loose a knot that is sealed, 4 
and do not seal one which is loosed. 

My son, sweeten thy tongue, and make savoury 5 
the opening of thy mouth; because the tail of 
the dog gives him bread, and his mouth gets 
him blows. 

My son, the eye of man is a fountain, and is 6 
not satisfied with riches until [filled with dust]. 


(My son), lift (not) up thine eyes (and look 7 
upon a woman bedizened) and beautified, lust 
not after her in thy heart; for if thou shouldst 
give her all [that thou hast, advantage]* in her 
thou wilt not find; and thou wilt be guilty of 
sin before God. 

My son, stand not in the house of those that 8 
are at strife: because from a word there comes 
a quarrel, and from a quarrel is stirred up 
vexation ; and from vexedness springs murder ®. 


My son, if a house were built by loudness of 9 
voice, the ass would build two houses in a single 


* The account of the earlier years of Nadan’s bringing 
up 1s omitted; if indeed it existed in the first form of the 
story. 

* The text is double; a copy which had the primitive 
‘I, Ahikar, took my son’ having been compounded with 
one that had ‘ Thereupon Ahikar’, A comparison with 
the Tobit-parallels shows that the second clause is a 
modification of the first. 

° We expect ‘And God shall be angry with thee’. 

* A slight correction has been made in the Syriac text. 

° Cf. Teaching of the Twelve Apostles, ‘ My child, be 
not angry, for anger leads to murder,’ which is a simpler 
and more archaic form of the same precept. 


728 


21 


2 


3 


4 


= 


9) 


6 


fi 


8 


9 


10 


Il 


‘Wribeo PORY- OF AHIKAR: 2. t-r1 
The Proverbs of Ahikar 


ARABIC 
Thus he taught him, saying: 
‘O my son! hear my speech and follow my 
advice and remember what I say. 


O my son! if thou hearest a word, let it die in 
thy heart, and reveal it not to another, lest it 
become a live coal and burn thy tongue and 
cause a pain in thy body, and thou gain a re- 
proach, and art shamed before God and man. 

O my son! if thou hast heard a report, spread 
it not; and if thou hast seen something, tell it 
not. 

O my son! make thy eloquence easy to the 
listener, and be not hasty to return an answer. 

O my son! when thou hast heard anything, 
hide it not. 

O my son! loose not a sealed knot, nor untie 
it, and seal not a loosened knot. 

O my son! covet not outward beauty, for it 
wanes and passes away, but an honourable re- 
membrance lasts for aye. 

O my son! let not a silly woman deceive thee 
with her speech, lest thou die the most miserable 
of deaths, and she entangle thee in the net till 
thou art ensnared. 

O my son! desire not a woman bedizened with 
dress and with ointments, who is despicable and 
silly in her soul. Woe to thee if thou bestow on 
her anything that is thine, or commit to her what 
is in thine hand and she entice thee into sin, and 
God be wroth with thee. 


O my son! be not like the almond-tree, for 
it brings forth leaves before all the trees, and 
edible fruit after them all, but be like the mul- 
berry-tree, which brings forth edible fruit before 
all the trees, and leaves after them all. 


O my son! bend thy head low down, and 
soften thy voice, and be courteous, and walk in 
the straight path, and be not foolish. And raise 
not thy voice when thou laughest, for if it were 
by a loud voice that a house was built, the ass 











ARMENIAN 


Son, if thou hear any word in the royal gate, 21 


make it to die and bury it in thy heart, and to 
no one divulge it. The knot that is sealed do 
thou not loose, and that which is loosed do thou 
not tie. And that which thou dost see, tell not ; 
and that which thou hearest, reveal it not. 


Son, raise not up thine eyes to look on a 
lovely woman, rouged and antimonied. Desire 
her not in thy heart. For if thou shouldst give 
her all thy riches, thou dost get nothing the 
more out of her; but art condemned by God 
and by mankind. For she is like unto a 
sepulchre which is fair on the upper side and 
below is full of the rottenness and bones of the 
dead. 


Son, be not like the olive-tree, which is first 3 
to bloom and last to ripen its fruit. But be like 
the mulberry, which is last to bloom and first to 
ripen its fruit. 


has such an addition, which however distantly resembles 
the Slavonic and Syriac. 

1 Bodl. =‘thou art not in any way benefited by her 
more than to be condemned by the God of just judge- 
ments and by mankind’. Canon = ‘thou wilt not get 
anything more than thy own sin and shame from men and 
judgement from God’, omitting the rest. 


THE STOR aer 


SYR. A 

ifa house could be built by a high voice, the ass 
would build two houses in one day: and if by 
sheer force the plough was guided, its share 
would never be loosed from the shoulder of the 
camel. 

9 Myson, it is better to remove stones with a 
wise man than to drink wine with a fool. 


My son, pour out thy wine on the graves of 
the righteous, rather than drink it with evil men. 


Io 


11 My son, with a wise man thou wilt not be 
depraved, and with a depraved man thou wilt 
not become wise. 

My son, associate with the wise man, and thou 
wilt become wise like him; and associate not 
with a garrulous and talkative man, lest thou be 


numbered with him. 





12 


My son, while thou hast shoes on thy feet, 
tread down the thorns and make a path for thy 
sons and for thy sons’ sons. 


13 


14 My son, the rich man eats a snake, and they 
say, “He ate it for medicine.” And the poor man 


eats it, and they say, “For his hunger he ate it.’ 


My son, eat thy portion, and despise not thy 
neighbours. 

My son, it is not becoming even to eat with a 
shameless man.! 


15 


16 


17 My son, envy not the prosperity of thy enemy; 


and rejoice not at his adversity.2 
18 My son, draw not near to a woman that is a 
whisperer, nor to one whose voice is high. 
19 My son, go not after the beauty of a woman, 
and lust not after her in thy heart because the 
beauty of a woman is her good sense, and her 
adornment is the word of her mouth. 

My son, if thine enemy meet thee with evil, 
meet thou him with wisdom.? 

My son, the wicked falleth and riseth not Dut 
the just man is not moved, for God is with him. 


20 


2I 


Cf. I: Corvin b eqparic ee 


pnd cvvecbiey. 
2 


- I) Wépvos ... T® TOLOUT® 
, Cf. Prov. xxiv. 17 dav néon 6 €xOpds cou, ml) emtyapys 
auT®,. ; 

> He does not mean ‘ overcome evil with good’, which 
would be a sentiment foreign to the action of the story, 
but ‘ get the better of him’. 





AHIKAR 2. 821 


Syr. B 


day: and if by sheer force the plough was 
directed, the ploughshare would never be worn 
away under! the shoulder of the camel. 


Better to remove stones with the wise man 
than to drink wine with the fool. 


My son, in the company of the wise thou wilt 
not be depraved; and in the company of the 
depraved thou wilt not become wise. 

My son, make companion of the wise person, 
and thou wilt become wise like him; and make 
not a companion of the foolish person, lest thou 
be reckoned like him. 


While there are shoes on thy feet, tread down 
the thorns and make a path for thy sons and thy 
sons’ sons. 


My son, the rich man eats a snake, and 
they say, “ For his medicine he ate it”: the poor 
man eats it, and they say, “ Because of his hunger 
he ate it.” 

My son, eat thy portion, and stretch not out 
thy hand over that of thy neighbour. 

My son, do not eat bread with a man that is 
shameless. 


14 


My son, if thou seest thine enemy fallen, do 
not mock at him; lest he should rise up and 
repay thee. 

My son, be not envious at the good fortune of 18 
thine enemy; and do not rejoice at his mis- 
fortune. 

My son, do not approach a woman who is 
hateful and talkative, and one whose voice is 
high. 

For the beauty of a woman is her good sense 20 
and the word of her mouth is her adornment. 


17 


19 


My son, if thine enemy meet thee with evil, 
meet thou him with good. 


My son, if thou seest a man who is stronger 22 
than thyself, rise up before him... .’ 
End of Fragment. 


J: Ro Hare: 


21 


* This difficult expression is replaced in S, by the 
easier term ‘ would never be loosed from’. In either case 
the meaning is obscure. Quaere, ‘if brute force were 
sufficient, the camel might go on ploughing by himself? ? 


73° 


Grito ORY OF 


ARABIC 


would build many houses every day ; and if it 
were by dint of strength that the plough were 
driven, the plough would never be removed from 
under the shoulders of the camels. 
12 Omy son! the removing of stones with a wise 
man is better than the drinking of wine with 
a sorry man. 
O my son! pour out thy wine on the tombs 
of the just, and drink not with ignorant, con- 
temptible people. 


T3 


14 © my son! cleave to wise men who fear God 
and be like them, and go not near the ignorant, 
lest thou become like him and learn his ways. 

O my son! when thou hast got thee a comrade 
or a friend, try him, and afterwards make him 
a comrade and a friend; and do not praise him 
without a trial ; and do not spoil thy speech with 
a man who lacks wisdom. 

O my son! while a shoe stays on thy foot, 
walk with it on the thorns, and make a road for 
thy son, and for thy household and thy children, 
and make thy ship taut before she goes on the 
sea and its waves and sinks and cannot be saved. 

[O my son! if the rich man eat a snake, they 
say “It is by his wisdom”, and if a poor man eat 
it, the people say “ From his hunger ”.] 

O my son! be content with thy daily bread 
and thy goods, and covet not what is another’s. 


15 


16 


17 


18 


O my son! be not neighbour to the fool, and 
eat not bread with him, and rejoice not in the 
calamities of thy neighbours. If thine enemy 
wrong thee, show him kindness. 

O my son! a man who fears God do thou fear 
him and honour him. 

O my son! the ignorant man falls and stumbles, 
and the wise man, even if he stumbles, he is not 
shaken, and even if he falls he gets up quickly, 
and if he is sick, he can take care of his life. But 
as for the ignorant, stupid man, for his disease 
there is no drug. 

O my son! if a man approach thee who is 
inferior to thyself, go forward to meet him, and 
remain standing, and if he cannot recompensc 
thee, his Lord will recompense thee for him. 


19 


20 


21 


22 


AHIKAR 2. 11-22 


ARMENIAN 


Son, it is better with a wise man to carry 4 
stones, than with a foolish man to drink wine. 

Son, with wise men be not a fool, and with 5 
fools be not thou wise. 

Son, be thou the companion of a wise man, 6 
so that thou become wise as he is; but do not 
become the companion of a senseless man and 
of a fool, lest like them thou be called a fool. 

Son, pour out thy wine, and drink it not with 7 
the senseless and with the lawless, lest thou be 
despised by them’. 

Son, be thou not over-sweet, so that they 8 
swallow thee down, nor over-bitter, so that they 
spit thee out. But do thou be gentle, tranquil 
in the works of thy paths and in all thy words. 








Son, while the boot is on thy foot, tread down 9 
the thorns and make a path for thy sons *. 


Son, a rich man hath eaten a serpent, and ro 
they say it is medicine for him. A poor man 
hath eaten it, and they say that he ate it out of 
hunger. Eat thy own portion in peace 3, and 
cast not thy eye on that of thy companion; and 
with one that is without fear go not on a journey ; 
and with the senseless do thou not eat bread. 


Son, if thou seest thy enemy fallen, do not r1 
make a scoff at him; for if he get up again, he 
requiteth thee evil *. 

Son, the lawless man falleth by his evil deeds, 12 
but the just man is raised by his good deeds. 

Son, go not near a senseless and backbiting 13 
woman, that thou be not despised by her’; and 
thou art made a mock of, and she robs thee. 


‘ despised like them’. 


1 Canon and Edjm. = 
the other MSS. have ofz¢z, ‘for 


2 So Canon, orvdotz: 
thy feet ’. 

3 Ven. and Canon add ‘in peace’: Bodl. and 58 omit. 

4 Ven. adds: ‘and there is continual ill-will,’ 

5 The Arm. =‘by them’. If that be read we should 
turn ‘ woman’ into the plural. 


22 


23 


24 


25 


26 


THE STORY'OP AnligNivin 22=27 


SvR. A 
My son, withhold not thy son 
from stripes ; for the beating of 
a boy is like manure to the 
garden, and like rope to an ass 
[or any other beast],! and like 
tether on the foot of an ass. 


My son, subdue thy son while 
he is yet a boy, before he wax 
stronger than thee and rebel 
against thee,and thou be shamed 
in all his corrupt doing. 


My son, get thee an ox that 
[is fat and] lies down, and an 
ass that has good hoofs, but do 
not get thee a slave that is run- 
away nor a maid that is thievish; 
lest they destroy all that thou 
hast gotten. 

My son, the words of a liar 
are like fat sparrows; and he 
that is void of understanding 
eateth them. 

My son, bring not upon thee 


_ the curses of thy father and of 


27 


thy mother, lest thou rejoice 
not in the blessings of thy 
children. 


My son, walk not in the way 


' The bracketed words are a gloss. 





23 


24 


25 


26 


27 


ARABIC 


O my son! spare not to 
beat thy son, for the drub- 
bing of thy son is like manure 
to the garden, and like tying 
the mouth of a purse, and 
like the tethering of beasts, 
and like the bolting of the 
door. 

O my son! restrain thy 
son from wickedness, and 
teach him manners before he 
rebels against thee and brings 
thee into contempt amongst 
the people and thou hang 
thy head in the streets and 
the assemblies and thou be 
punished for the evil of his 
wicked deeds. 

O my son! get thee a fat 
ox with a foreskin, and an 
ass great with its hoofs, and 
get not an ox with large 
horns, nor make friends with 
a tricky man, nor get a 
quarrelsome slave, nor a 
thievish handmaid, for every- 
thing which thou committest 
to them they will ruin. 


O my son! let not thy 
parents curse thee, and the 
Lord be pleased with them ; 
for it hath been said, “He 
whodespiseth his father or his 
mother let him die the death 
(I mean the death of sin); 
and he who honoureth his 
parents shall prolong his days 
and his life and shall see all 
that is good.” 

O my son! walk not on 





ARMENIAN 


Son, spare not the rod to thy 
son ;. for the rod is to children 
as the dung in the garden; and 
as the tie and seal fastening the 
packet, and as the tether on the 
feet of the ass, so is the rod 
profitable to the child. For if 
thou strike him with a rod once 
or twice, he is rendered clever 
quietly, he does not die?. But 
if thou leave him to his own 
will, he becomes a thief; and 
they take him to the gallows 
and to death, and he becomes 
unto thee a reproach and break- 
ing of heart ?. 

Son, train thy son in hunger 
and thirst, in order that in 
humility he may lead his life. 

Son, receive not any who 
shall repeat to thee the (word) 
of an enemy, for they will 
repeat thy word. 

Son °, at first thou art fond of 
a false man+, but in the end he 
becomes hateful to thee. For 
a false word is like a fat quail; 
but he that is foolish swallows 
it down. 

Son, love the father who 
begat thee, and earn not the 
curses of thy father and mother; 
to the end that thou mayst 
rejoice in the prosperity of thy 
own sons. 


Son, without a weapon go 


? Bodl. = ‘once or twice, he is 
quieted, but does not die’. I render 
the Venice text which is attested by. 
Canon. 

? Canon here adds in agreement 
with the Syriac and Slavonic these 
two precepts: ‘Son, make thy child 
obedient, while he is small and pliant, 
lest he come into open conflict with 
thee, and thou be undone by his 
injury, and win the curses of strangers 
because of his disobedience. Son, 
acquire for thyself a sturdy ass and 
a strong-hoofed horse and an ox short 
In neck. And desire not a runaway 
Slave, or one petulant of tongue, or 
a quarrelsome thief.’ 

* Paris 58 omits this adage. 

* So Bodl., 58: Ven. = “at fret 
(one) loves a false man’. 


14 


rE 


Syr. A 


unarmed; because thou knowest 
not when thy enemy shall come 
upon thee. 


28 My son, even as a tree is fair 
in its branches and fruit, and a 
bosky mountain in its trees, so 
is a man fair in his wife and 
weans; and he that hath not 
brethren, nor wife nor weans, 
is despised and contemptible 
before his enemies; and he is 
like unto a tree by the roadside, 
from which every passer-by 
plucketh, and every beast of the 
weald teareth down its leafage.' 


29 My son, say not, “ My lord is 

a fool, and Iam wise”; but take 

hold of him in his faults and thou 

shalt obtain mercy. 

My son, count not thyself to 
be wise, when others count thee 
not to be wise. 

31 My son, lie not in thy speech 
before thy lord, lest thou be con- 
victed, and he shall say to thee, 
“ Away from my sight!” 

32 Myson, letthy words be true, 

in order that thy lord may say 

to thee, ‘‘ Draw near me,’ and 
thou shalt live. 

My son, in the day of thy 
calamity revile not God; lest 
when He hear thee, He should 
be angered against thee. 


3° 


33 


34 My son, treat not thy slave 

better than his fellow; for thou 

knowest not which of them thou 

wilt have need of at the last. 

33 Myson, smite with stones the 
dog that has left his own master 


and followed after thee. 


fUC@t. RS. Cxxvil. 5: 


STORY OF AHIKAR 2. 27-35 


ARABIC 


the road without weapons, 
for thou knowest not when 
the foe may meet thee, so 
that thou mayst be ready 
for him. 

28 Omy son! be not like a 
bare, leafless tree that doth 
not grow, but be like a tree 
covered with its leaves and 
its boughs ; for the man who 
has neither wife nor children 
is disgraced in the world and 
is hated by them, like a leaf- 
less and fruitless tree. 

29 Omyson! be like a fruit- 

ful tree on the roadside, 

whose fruit is eaten by all 
who pass by, and the beasts 
of the desert rest under its 
shade and eat of its leaves. 

O my son! every sheep 
that wanders from its path 
and its companions becomes 
food for the wolf. 

31 Omy son! say not, “My 
lord is a fool and I am wise,” 
and relate not the speech of 
ignorance and folly, lest thou 
be despised by him. 


30 


32 Omy son! be not one of | 


those servants, to whom their 
lords say, “Get away from 
us,” but be one of those to 


whom they say, “ Approach | 


and come near to us.” 


(O my son! caress not thy 
slave in the presence of his 
companion, for thou knowest 
not which of them shall be 
of most value to thee in the 
end.) , 
34 Omy son! be not afraid 


33 


733 





ARMENIAN 
not on a journey by night’, lest 
thy enemy meet thee, and thou 
be destroyed. 


Son, as a tree is enjoyable to 20 
see for its fruit and branches, 
and the mountains are wooded 
with the cedars, in the same 
way are enjoyable to see man 
and wife? and son and brother 
and kinsman and friend, and all 
families. 

Son, one who hath not wife 21 
or son or brother or kinsman 
or friend is in the long years 
despised, and is like unto a tree 
that is in the crossways, and all 
who pass by it pluck off her 
leaves and break down her 
branches. 


Son ®, say not thus: My lord 22 
is foolish and I am wise, but 
bear with him in his folly ; and 
thou wilt keep thyself with a 
wise man, until some other one 
shall praise thee. 


Son, say ill to no one; and 23 
be thou not evil-tongued in the 
presence of thy lord, that thou 
be not contemned by him. 

Son, turn not aside at the day 24 
of thy sacrifice, for fear lest the 
Lord be displeased with thy 
sacrifice *. 

Son, quit not the scene of 25 
mourning and repair unto the 
wedding; for death lies ahead of 
all, and the punishment is great. 

Son, put not on thy finger a 26 
gold® ring which is not thine; 
nor clothe thee in byssus and 
purple that isnot thine. Neither 
mount a horse that is not thine, 
since the onlookers who know 
it will make mock at thee ®. 

1 Canon adds ‘by night’ with the 
Slavonic. The other sources. omit 
with the Syriac. 

2 Ven. omits ‘and wife’. The other 
sources with Canon add it. 

$ Paris 58 omits this adage. 

4 Paris 58 adds ‘which thou of- 
ferest’. 

5 Paris 58 adds ‘or silver’. 

6 Bodl. and Paris 58 add ‘when 
they recognize it’. 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 2. 


SYR. A 

36 Myson, the flock that makes 
many tracks becomes the por- 
tion of the wolves. 

37 My son, judge upright judge- 
ment in thy youth, in order that 
in thy age thou mayst have 
honour. 

38 My son, sweeten thy tongue 
and make savoury the opening 
of thy mouth; for the tail of a 
dog gives him bread, and his 
mouth gets him blows. 

39 My son, suffer not thy neigh- 
bour to tread on thy foot, lest he 
tread on thy neck. 

40 Myson, smite the [wise] man 
with wise word, that it may be 
in his heart like a fever in sum- 
mer; [but know] that if thou 
smite the fool with many blows, 
he will not understand. 


41 My son,send a wise man and 
give him no orders; but if thou 
wilt send a fool, go rather thy- 
self and send him not. 


42 My son, test thy son with 
bread and water, and then thou 
canst leave in his hands thy pos- 
sessions and thy wealth. 

43. My son, withdraw at the first 
cup, and tarry not for lickerish 
draughts: lest there be to thee 
wounds in thy head. 

44 My son, he whose hand is full 
is called wise and honourable ; 
and he whose hand is scant is 
called foolish and abject. 

45 My son, I have carried salt 
and removed lead; and I have 
not seen anything heavier than 


Lit. ‘heats’, But perhaps we 
should change the reading slightly 
(cf. the 73rd proverb), and translate 
‘tarry not for sweet unguents ’. 





ARABIC 
of thy Lord who created 
thee, lest He be silent to 
thee. 


35 O my son! make thy 
speech fair and sweeten thy 
tongue; and permit not thy 
companion to tread on thy 
foot, lest he tread at another 
time on thy breast. 


36 Omy son! if thou beat a 
wise man with a word of 
wisdom, it will lurk in his 
breast like a subtle sense of 
shame; but if thou drub the 
ignorant with a stick he will 
neither understand nor hear. 

37. Omy son! if thou send a 
wise man for thy needs, do 
not give him many orders, 
for he will do thy business 
as thou desirest ; and if thou 
send a fool, do not order 
him, but go thyself and do 
thy business, for if thou order 
him, he will not do what thou 
desirest. If they send thee 
on business, hasten to fulfil 
it quickly. 

38 O my son! make not an 
enemy of a man stronger than 
thyself, for he will take thy 
measure’, and his revenge on 
thee. 

39 O my son! make trial of 
thy son, and of thy servant, 
before thou committest thy 
belongings to them, lest they 
make away with them wor 
he who hath a full hand is 
is called wise, even if he be 
stupid and ignorant, and he 
who hath an empty hand is 
called poor, ignorant, even if 
he be the prince of sages, 

40 O my son! I have eaten 
a colocynth, and swallowed 
aloes ?, and I have found no- 
thing morebitterthan poverty 
and scarcity. 


* Literally ‘he will weigh thee’, 
? Or ‘myrrh’, 


734 






30-45 


ARMENIAN 


Son, eat not bread that is not 27 
thine own, even though thou be 
very hungry. 


Son, if a man be stronger 28 
than thyself, have no  con- 
troversy with him, lest he slay 
thee. : 

Son, crush and consume the 29 
evil out of thy heart, and it is 
well for thee with God and man, 
and thou art holpen by the will 
of God. 

Son, if thy doorposts be loftily 30 
built to heaven as it were seven 
ells, whenever thou enterest, bow 
thy head. 

Son, take not from others 31 
with a big weight and give back 
to them with a little weight, and 
say: I have madea profit. For 
God allows it not, but will be 
wroth; and thou wilt die of 
starvation. 

Son, swear not false, that of 32 
thy days there be no fail}, 

Son, give ear unto the laws 33 
of God, and be not afraid of the 
evil (one), for the command- 
ment of God is the rampart of 
man, 

Son, rejoice thou not in the-34 
number of thy children, and in 
their deficiency be not dis- 
tressed, 

Son, children and possessions 35 
are bestowed by God. The 
rich man is made poor, the poor 
man is enriched ; the humble is’ 
exalted, and the exalted js 
humbled. 

Son, if lofty be the lintels of 36 
thy house, and thy friend be 
sick, say not: What shall I send 
him? but go on foot and see 
him with thy eyes ; for that is 
better for him than a thousand 
talents of gold and silver. 

Son, in reward for evil-speak- 3 
ing receive not gold and silver, 
for it is a death-fraught deed 


? Bodl. and Paris 58 add ‘upon the 
earth ’. 


ES 


SYR: A. 
that a man should pay back a 
debt when he did not borrow.t 

My son, I have carried iron 
and removed stones; and they 
were not heavier on me than a 
man who settles in the house of 
his father-in-law. 

My son, teach hunger and 
thirst to thy son, that according 
as his eye sees he may govern 
his house. 


46 


47 


My son, better is he that is 
blind of eye than he that is 
blind of heart ; for the blind of 
eye straightway learneth the 
road and walketh in it: but the 
blind of heart leaveth the right 
way and goeth into the desert. 


48 


My son, better is a friend that 
is at hand thana brother who is 
far away; and better is a good 
name than much _ beauty: 
because a good name standeth 
for aye, but beauty wanes and 
wastes away. 


49 


50 My son, death is better than 
life to a man that hath no rest: 
and better is the voice of wail- 
ing in the ears of a fool than 


music and joy.” 


51 My son, better is a drumstick 
in thy hand than a wing [?] in 
the pot of other people; and 


better is a sheep that is at hand 


1 Cf. Sirach xxii. 14, 153 Prov. 
XXVil. 3. 
2 Cf. Eccles. vii. 1,2. Apparently 


the sentiments of Ecclesiastes are 
contradicted. 





SLORY OF AHIKAR: 2. 


ARABIC 


O my son! teach thy son 
frugality and hunger, that he 
may do well in the manage- 
ment of his household. 

O my son! teach not to 
the ignorant the language of 
wise men, for it will be bur- 
densome to him. 

O my son! display not 
thy condition to thy friend, 
lest thou be despised by 
him. 

O my son! the blindness 
of the heart is more grievous 
than the blindness of the 
eyes, for the blindness of the 
eye may be guided little by 
little, but the blindness of 
the heart is not guided, and 
it leaves the straight path, 
and goes in a crooked way. 

O my son! the stumbling 
of a man with his foot is 
better than the stumbling of 
a man with his tongue. 

O my son! a friend who is 
near is better than a more 
excellent brother who is far 
away. 

O my son! beauty fades 
but learning lasts, and the 
world wanes and becomes 
vain, but a good name neither 
becomes vain nor wanes. 

O my son! the man who 
hath no rest, his death were 
better than his life; and the 
sound of weeping is better 
than the sound of singing ; 
for sorrow and weeping, if 
the fear of God be in them, 
are better than the sound of 
singing and rejoicing. 

O my child! the thigh of 
a frog in thy hand is better 
than a goose in the pot of 
thy neighbour; and a sheep 
near thee is better than an 
ox far away; and a spar- 
row in thy hand is better 
than a thousand sparrows 
flying; and poverty which 


735 


41 


42 


43 


44 


46 


47 


48 


49 








45-51 


ARMENIAN 


and very evil. And shed not 
just blood unrighteously, lest 
thy blood be shed in return for 
his blood. 

Son, keep thy tongue from 38 
evil-speaking and thine eye 
from immodest glances, and thy 
hand from stealing ; and it will 
be well for thee with God and 
man. For whether it be gold 
or little things that one steals, 
the punishment and the slaying 
is one and the same. 

Son, commit not adultery with 39 
thy friend’s wife, lest God be 
angry and others commit adul- 
tery with thy wife. 

Son, take not a widow to wife, 40 
for whenever there is any word 
between you, she willsay: Alas, 
for my first husband! and thou 
art distressed. 

Son, if retribution overtake 41 
thee from God, flee not nor 
murmur; lest God be angry and 
with other harsher stroke destroy 
thee untimely. 

Son, love not thy son better 42 
than thy servant, for thou 
knowest not which of them will 
be useful to thee. 

Son, the sheep that stray 43 
from the flock become the por- 
tion of the wolves. 

Son, pass a just judgement 44 
in thy mind, and honour the 
aged; to the end that thou 
mayst receive honour from the 
great judge, and that it may be 
well with thee. 

Son, incline thine eyes and 45 
soften the utterance of thy 
mouth, and look under thine 
eyes; that thou mayst not 
appear senseless to men, for if 
a temple were built by halloo- 
ings, an ass would build seven 
palaces' every day and... 

1 So Ven. which has afarans. The 

other MSS. with Canon have dardas, 
a word not given in lexicons, but 
which must have the same sense. 
The meaning of the word ‘tchardakhs’ 
is unknown and I leave it blank 
[? cottages]. Canon omits it, perhaps 
rightly. Canon has this precept 45 
after no. 2 of our series and adds to 
it in that context this: ‘Son, if the 
oxen by sheer strength drew along, 
the yoke would not diminish from the 
neck of the camel.’ 


THE STORY OF AIIVARE. 


Syr. A 

than a heifer that is far off: and 
better is poverty that gathers 
than wealth that scatters; and 
better one sparrow in thy hand 
than a thousand on the wing: 
and better is a woollen coat on 
thy back than fine linen and 
silks on the backs of others. 


52 My son, restrain a word in thy 
heart, and it shall be well with 
thee ; because when thou hast 
exchanged thy word, thou hast 
lost thy friend. 

53 My son, let not a word go 
forth from thy mouth, until thou 
hast taken counsel within thy 
heart: because it is better for a 
man to stumble in his heart 
than to stumble with his tongue. 

54 My son, if thou hear an evil 
matter, put it seven fathoms 
deep underground. 

55 My son, tarry not where there 
is contention: for from strife 
arises murder.} 

56 My son, every one who does 
not judge right judgement 
angers God. 


57 Myson, remove? not from thy 
father’s friend, lest perchance 
thy friend come not near to thee. 

58 My son, go not down into 
princes’ gardens, and draw not 
near to princes’ daughters. 

59 My son, aid thy friend before 
the ruler, that thou mayst find 


* Cf. Teaching of Apostles, ‘Be not 
angry: for anger leads to murder: 
nor contentious ’. 

? A slight textual correction. 





ARABIC 

gathers is better than the 
scattering of much provision ; 
and a living fox is better than 
a dead lion; and a pound of 
wool is better than a pound 
of wealth, I mean of gold and 
silver ; for the gold and the 
silver are hidden and covered 
up in the earth, and are not 
seen; but the wool stays in 
the markets and it is seen, 
and it isa beauty to him who 
wears it. 

50 Omyson! asmall fortune 
is better than a scattered 
fortune. 

51 Omy son! a living dog is 
better than a dead poor man. 

52 O my son! a poor man 
who does right is better than 
a rich man who is dead in 
sins. 

53. O my son! keep a word 
in thy heart, and it shall be 
much to thee, and beware 
lest thou reveal the secret of 
thy friend. 

54 Omyson! let not a word 
issue from thy mouth till 
thou hast taken counsel with 
thy heart. And stand not 
betwixt persons quarrelling, 
because from a bad word 
there comes a quarrel, and 
from a quarrel there comes 
war, and from war there 
comes fighting, and thou wilt 
be forced to bear witness; 
but run from thence and rest 
thyself. 

55 O my son! withstand not 
a man stronger than thyself, 
but get thee a patient spirit, 
and endurance and an up- 
right conduct, for there is 
nothing more excellent than 
that. 

56 O my son! hate not thy 
first friend, for the second 
one may not last. 


57 O my son! visit the poor 
in his affliction, and speak of 
him in the Sultan’s presence, 
and do thy diligence to save 
him from the mouth of the 
lion. 


736 











ea oS) 


ARMENIAN 

Son, boast not in the day of 46 
thy youth, lest thy youth be 
thy destruction. 

Son, suffer not thy companion 47 
to tread on thy feet, lest he 
should presume and tread on 
thy neck?! as well. 

Son, speak not in wrath with 48 
thine adversary before the judge, 
lest thou be called senseless 2 
and foolish. But whatever he 
asks thee, answer him with 
sweetness ; and thou wilt heap 
up his judgement on his head. 

Son, if thou petitionest God 49 
for good, first fulfil His will 
with fasting and prayer, and 
then are fulfilled thy petitions 
unto thy good. 

Son, a good name is better 50 
than a face that excites longing. 
For beauty is destroyed 3, but a 
good name endureth for ever. 

Son, it is better to be blind 51 
of eye than blind of mind; for 
he that is blind of eye is quick 
to learn the coming and going 
of the road. But the blind in 
mind forsakes the straight road, 
and walks according to his will. 

Son, a side-bone in thy own 52 
hand is better than a fat lamb 
in the hand of others. A sparrow 
in thy hand is better than a 
thousand fluttering in the air. 
A kid for a feast* in thy own 
house is better than a steer in 
the house of others. 

Son, it is better to garner with 53 
poverty ° than to squander with 
riches. 

Son, curse not thy son, until 54 
thou seest his end; and reject 
him not in scorn, until thou 
behold his latter end and earn- 
ings, 

Son, examine the word in thy 55 
heart and then utter it. For if 
thou alter the word, thou art a 
fawner. 


 Bodl. add ‘and head’. 

* Bodl.: ‘lest thou appear sense- 
less and unprofitable’ 

° Bodl. ‘ passes’. 

* So Bodl. and Canon: Ven. has 
‘a fat kid in’, &c., where Jarart ‘fat’ 
is a corruption of Zatarag, which is 
the Aotior lectio and better attested. 

* Canon: ‘Better is poverty with 
repose than .. .” 


miro bOrny OF AHIKAR’ 2; 59-65 


SYR. A 

out how thou mayst help him 

from the lion. 

My son, rejoice not over thy 
enemy when he dieth. 
é1 My son, when thou seest a 
man who is stronger than thy- 
self, rise up before him. 

My son, if the waters should 
stand up without earth, and the 
sparrow fly without wings, and 
the raven become white as snow, 
and the bitter become sweet as 
honey, then may the fool become 
wise. 

63 _ Myson, if thou art a priest of 

God, be thou ware of Him and 

enter His presence in purity, 

and from His presence remove 
not. 

My son, him that God pros- 
pers do thou also honour. 

My son, strive not’ with a 
man in his day, and stand not 
against a river in its flood.” 

My son, the eye of man is 
like a fountain of water, and it 
is not satisfied with riches until 
filled with dust. 

6, My son, if thy will is to be 
wise, refrain thy tongue from 
lying, and thy hand from theft, 
and thou shalt become wise. 


60 


62 


64 


65 


66 


68 My son, have no part in the 
espousal of a woman; for if it 
shall go ill with her, she will 
curse thee; and ifit shall go well 
with her, she will not remember 
thee. 

69 My son, he that is elegant in 
his dress is elegant also in his 
speech, and he that is con- 


1 Lit. ‘judge not ’. 
2 Cf, Sirach iv. 26. 


1105.2 


58 


59 


ARABIC 


O my son! rejoice not in 
the death of thine enemy, 
for after a little while thou 
shalt be his neighbour, and 
him who mocks thee do thou 
respect and honour andbe be- 
forehand with himin greeting. 

O my son! if water would 
stand still in heaven, and a 
black crow become white, and 
myrrh grow sweet as honey, 
then ignorant men and fools 
might understand and_be- 
come wise. 


O my son! if thou desire 
to be wise, restrain thy 
tongue from lying, and thy 
hand from stealing, and thine 
eyes from beholding evil ; 
then thou wilt be called wise. 

O my son! let the wise 
man beat thee with a rod, 
but let not the fool anoint 
thee with sweet salve. Be 
humble in thy youth and 
thou shalt be honoured in 
thine old age. 

O my son! withstand not 
a man in the days of his 
power, nor a river in the days 
of its flood. 

O my son! be not hasty 
in the wedding of a wife, for 
if it turns out well, she will 
say, ‘My lord, make pro- 
vision for me’; and if it turns 
out ill, she will rate at him 
who was the cause of it. 

(O my son! whosoever is 
elegant in his dress, he is the 
same in his speech; and he 


737 


ARMENIAN 


Son, if thou hearest an evil 56 
word about any one, hide it in 
thy heart seven fathoms deep; 
so that the evil die and the good 
be fulfilled. 

Son, do thou not scoff frivo- 57 
lously ; for the frivolous scoff is 
a quarrel, and the quarrel is 
slaying and death. 

Son, the false word and the 58 
false conversation is heavy as 
lead; but after a few days it 
floats upon the waters, like the 
leaf of a tree. 

Son, reveal thy lesser counsel 59 
to thy friend, and after days 
irritate him and flout him. 
And! if he does not reveal that 
counsel, then reveal to him thy 
greater counsels, and thou keep- 
est him a trusty friend. 

Son, in the presence of kings 60 
and judges, be helpful to thy 
comrade; for, as it were from 
the mouth of a lion, dost thou 
rescue him; and he becometh 
to thee a good name and a 
glory. 

Son, if thy enemy come to 61 
thy foot, grant him pardon and 
laugh with joy to his face and 
receive him with honour. 

Son, where thou art not in- 62 
vited, go not unto a festival ; 
and where they ask thee not, 
give no answer. 

Son, over a river frozen and 63 
swollen pass thou not, lest thou 
die a sudden death. 

Son, ask of a wise man words 64 
of advice?, and thou shalt be 
made wise. But if thou ask a 
foolish man, in spite of many 
words, he is not wise. 

Son, if thou sendest a wise 65 
man to give any command, he 
himself fulfils the matter. But 
if thou sendest a fool, give the 
command in the presence of 
many men. And do thou either 
go thyself or not send him. 

Son, test thy son in hunger 66 
and thirst; and if he is able to 
bear it, then give thy riches into 
his hands. 


1 Bodl. ‘and see, if’? and below 
‘and keep him’, &c. 
2 Bodl. ‘ words of wisdom ’. 


3B 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 2. 69-75 (78 Arm.) 


ARABIC 


who has a mean appearance 
in his dress, he also is the 
same in his speech.) 

O my son! if thou hast 
committed a theft, make it 
known to the Sultan, and 
give him a share of it, that 
thou mayst be delivered 
from him, for otherwise thou 
wilt endure bitterness. 

O my son! make a friend 
of the man whose hand is 
satisfied and filled, and make 
no friend of the man whose 
hand is closed and hungry. 
67 There are four things in 
which neither the king nor 
his army can be secure: 
oppression by the vizier, and 
bad government, and per- 
version of the will, and 
tyranny over the subject; 
and four things which can- 
not be hidden: the prudent, 
and the foolish, and the rich, 

and the poor.’ 


SYRIAC 
temptible in his dress is con- 
temptible also in his speech. 


7° My son, if thou shalt find a | 65 
find before an idol, offer the idol 
its share of it. 

71 My son, the hand that was 
satisfied and is now hungry will 
not give, nor the hand that was 
hungry and is now satisfied. 

72 My son, let not thine eyes | 66 
look upon a woman that is beau- 
tiful ; and be not inquisitive into 
beauty that does not belong to 
thee: because many have 
perished through the beauty of 
woman, and her love has been 
as a fire that burneth. 

73. My son, let the wise man 
strike thee with many blows, 
and let not the fool salve thee 
with sweet salve.” 

74 My son, let not thy foot run 
after thy friend, lest he be sur- 
feited with thee and hate thee. 

75 My son, put not a gold ring 
on thy finger, when thou hast 
not [wealth] *, lest fools make 
mock of thee.’ 

This is the teaching which 
Ahikar taught to Nadan_ his 
sister’s son. 








' This sentence cannot be of 
Christian or Moslem origin. 

? Cf. Ps. cxli. 5, ‘ Let the righteous 
smite me,’ &c. 


3 Or ‘when it is not thine’. 


ARMENIAN 


71 Son‘, love thy flesh and thy wife. 
extreme labour she nurtures thy son.® 





ARMENIAN 


Son, from the house of invi- 67 
tation and from the wedding 
go first before thy fellow, and 
return not again‘; that thou 
mayst get thy boon fragrant ? 
and mayst get no wounds on 
the head. 

Son, a man who has many 68 
possessions and chattels, they 
call him wise and virtuous; but 
one who has few chattels they 
call a fool and of no account, 
and no man honoureth him. 

Son, I have eaten endive and 69 

I have drunk gall, and it was 
not more bitter than poverty. 
I have lifted salt, and I have 
lifted lead, and it was not heavier 
than is debt. For though I ate 
and drank, I could not rest ?. 
I have lifted iron and I have 
lifted stones upon my shoulders, 
and it was better for me, than 
to dwell with the ignorant and 
the fool. 

Son, if thou be poor among 70 
thy fellows, reveal it not; lest 
thou be despised by them, and 
they hearken not unto thy 
words. 


' Perhaps the sense is ‘and stay 
not till the last’. 

* Canon: ‘that thou mayst be 
anointed with fragrant oil, &c. 
Compare the Syriac. Other texts 
read: ‘that thou mayst get a good 
name.’ 

* Canon adds: ‘until I repaid the 
debt.’ 


For she is thyself and the companion of thy life, and even by 


72 Son, if thy lord send thee to bring a dunged grape, bring it not to him; for he will eat the 


grape, yet not let thee off punishment for the dung. 


73 _ Son, the word of a wise man in drink is better than the word of a fool that is thirsty or sober.° 


Better is an upright slave than one free but false. 
far away. 

74 Son, reveal not thy secret counsel to thy wife. 
it to the powerful, and thou art despised. 


Better is a friend near at hand than a brother 


For she is weak and small of soul, and she reveals 


75 Son, if thou drinkest wine, keep thy tongue from much speaking, and it is well for thee and 


thou art called wise. 


76 Son, without a schedule and witness, give not up thy property, lest the other deny it and thou 


regret it. 


77. Son, forsake not thy friend, lest thou find not another sharer of thy counsel and friend.” 
78 Son, love thy father who begat thee, and incur not the curse of thy father and mother, so that thou 


mayst rejoice in the prosperity of thy sons. 


: This precept, no. 41 in the series of Paris 58, is not in Ven. 
: Paris 58 here repeats precept 15. 
Nos. 77 and 79 are only given in Paris 58. 


738 


° The Armenian text must be faulty here. 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 2. 79-101 (Arm.) 


ARMENIAN 


79 Son, it is better if they steal thy goods, than that they detect theft in thee. 

80 Son, if God prosper a man in his undertakings, do thou honour him. And whenever thou 
beholdest an aged man, do thou rise and stand up before him and magnify him. 

8: Son, oppose not thyself to a wealthy man and to a river in flood. For the eyes of a grasping 
man are not filled! except with dust *. 

82 Son, do thou not bring about a betrothal match, for they see the good to be from God and from 
luck; but the bad is traced to thee, and they call thee an intriguing person’. 

83 Son, if the rivers pause in their courses or the sun in its career, or if the gall become sweet as 
honey, or the raven turn white as the dove, even so will the senseless man abandon his want 
of sense and the fool become sensible. 

84 Son, go not on foot * too often to the house of thy friend, lest he hate thee. 

85 Son, a dog that leaves his master and follows after thee, pursue him with stones °. 

86 Son, good deeds and a pure offering are pleasing to God; and do thou fear shame as thou 
fearest God. 

87 Son, the taking of an evil counsel into thy heart is the antagonism of the dev®; and endurance is 
the foundation of deeds and the rampart of faith. 

88 Son, that which seems evil unto thee do not to thy companion; and what is not thine own, 
give not unto others. 

89 _ Son, love the truth and hate lawlessness and” falsehood. Give ear unto the commandments of 
God, and fear not the evil one. For the commandment of God is the rampart of man. 

go Son, flee from a man that is evil and speaketh falsely; for avarice is the mother of all evils, 
and all evils are engendered of impudence. 

gt Son, love not judgement*; for even if thou get the better of thine adversary, yet be in fear 
of the judgement of God. 

92  Son,he that is upright in mind is the sun giving light, and he that is treacherous in heart is 
gloomy with darkness, and he that is generous in heart is full of pity. He that is grasping, 
even though he has aught, is nevertheless dull of wit. 

93  Son®, into the house of a drunkard enter not ; and if thou enter, tarry not ; for in thy habits thou 
remainest empty and idle. 

94 Son, malign not thy fellow whether near or at a distance ; for evil words will quickly reach the 
master and lead to quarrels?°. 

95 Son, God hath ordained wine for the sake of gladness, but in the place of a brothel or in any 
other low and unsuitable place, it is better to drink muck than wine. 

96 Son, a drunken man thinks in his mind thus: I am brave, and everything that I say, I say 
wisely. He does not know that if he meets with a man of courage, he will throw him at the 
first touch of his hands flat on the ground and drag him. 

97 (Son, if thou behold thine enemy fallen, do thou sorrow over him, that thou mayst make a friend 
of him; but if thou mock at him, when he gets up again he will requite thee with evil 1%.) 

98 Son, a drunken man thinks that the earth whirls round; in his going he knows not that his head 
is deranged ; for as the earth is the mother of all plants and fruit-bearing things, so wine is the 
mother of all evils; it doth cause men to be sick with divers sicknesses, and to slay others without 
mercy; it deranges the man and changes his nature into that of a brute. 

99 Son, flee from guaranteeing ; but if thou become a guarantor, make up thy mind that thou must 
give away out of thy purse; and not thy purse only, but the hair off thy chin ™*. 

zoo Son, be thou not false in speech ; for if they find thee to be once false, then when thou speakest 
the truth, they will reckon thee false and will not believe thee ™*. 
sot And I say to Nadan: Son, receive into thy mind my precepts and forget them not. 


1 Paris 69 adds ‘ with treasure’. : 
2 Paris 58 om. 81. Paris 69 has ‘ are not filled with treasure, but are filled with dust’. 
3 The Armenian is obscure here. aa 
4 Canon adds ‘ on foot’. 5 Bodl., Ven. add: ‘ which is not.’ Canon omits. 
® Or to the dev, a Persian word which in Old Armenian usually means a demon. 
7 Ven. om. ‘ lawlessness and’. 

® Nos. 93-100 are only given in Codex Paris 58 and Venet. ; ; 
10 Codex Paris 58 gives this precept in late and obscure Armenian, and its text 1s clearly faulty. — 

U Ven. adds this: ‘A drunken man is like an arrow in the hollow (lit. ‘palate ”) of a bow, which strikes no one 

else, but bruises its own head.’ ; : ; 

12 This precept has already come as no. II, in almost identical language. 
13 This precept is in bad late ‘Armenian and I give the sense of the last clause conjecturally. 


14 This precept also is in late Armenian. 
hoe 3B2 


8 Canon adds ‘ of injustice’. 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 2. 101 (Arm.)—3. 1 


ARMENIAN 


The questions! of the king’s sons and the answer of Khikar. : 

Houday and Baliayn asked questions of Khikar, and Khikar said to Nathan: There are four 
things that increase the light to man’s eyes,—to look upon flowers, to tread with naked foot on 
the green, to walk upon the water, and to see one’s friend. : ‘ 

102 Four things are there which make a man fat and keep him healthy,—to wear linen and to 
hear such things as seem to him pleasant; in the house an amiable and healthy spirit, and to see 
one’s remote (friend) well off. 

103 And four things are there which improve a man’s banquet,—at all times to converse well, not to 
give answer to every word, to be humble, to talk little, modesty in small matters and big ones, 

104 And four things are there which bring shame to one’s face—domination of love, to talk too 
much and to boast that one knows what one does not know, (to conceal everything, to weave 
a snare and fall into it) ?, and false-speaking. ; 

105 _ They asked the sage and said: What is the most pleasing thing on earth? He replied: Modesty. 
He that hath a modest face is pleasing. For all evils are born of impudence and folly. 

‘ The passage which follows until the resumption of the narrative is written in vulgar Armenian. Ven. gives 


the names thus: Shoutay and Bayilan. 
* Ven. omits the words in brackets. 


31 


SYRIAC 
But I, Ahikar, supposed that 
everything which I had been 
teaching Nadan he took hold of 
in his heart, and that he stood 
in my stead in the king’s gate; 
and I knew not that Nadan 
listened not to my words, but 
scattered them, asit were to the 
wind, and returned and said that 
‘my father Ahikar is grown old, 
and stands at the door of his 
grave; and his intelligence has 
withdrawn and his understand- 

ing is diminished’ ; 


, 
* What follows is in MS. Canon given in a form which often m 
the better Armenian copies, as below : 





ARABIC 


3 1 Thus spake Haiqar, and 


when he _ had finished 
these injunctions and pro- 
verbs to Nadan, his sister’s 
son, he imagined that he 
would keep them all, and he 
knew not that instead of that 
he was displaying to him 
weariness and contempt and 
mockery, 

Thereafter Haiqdr sat still 
in his house and delivered 
over to Nadan all his goods, 
and the slaves, and the hand- 
maidens, and the horses, and 
the cattle, and everything 
else that he had possessed 
and gained; and the power 
of bidding and of forbidding 
remained in the hand of 
Nadan; and Haigar sat at 
rest in his house, and every 
now and then Haiqar went 
and paid his respects to the 
king, and returned home. 
Now when Nadan perceived 
that the power of bidding 
and of forbidding was in his 
own hand, he despised the 
positionof Haiqar andscoffed 
at him, and set about blam- 





ARMENIAN 


And? thiswastheadvicewhich 3 1 


I taught to Nathan my sister’s 
son. All this I taught to Nathan 
my sister’s son, I, Khikar, chief. 
Notary of Seneqerim the king. 
And so I supposed in my mind 
that the teaching and advice 
which I taught to Nathan would 
abide and remain and that he 
would preserve it in his mind. 
And I knew not that he despised 
my words, and scattered them 
like the chaff before the wind, 
supposing in his mind that 
Khikar his father was grown 
very old and had arrived at the 
door of his tomb. His mind 
(he said) is distraught and his 
thoughts are deficient and he 
knows nothing. 


ore nearly resembles the Syriac than do. 


All this I taught to Nathan my sister’s son, thus thinking that what I taught he kept in his heart and 


would live in the royal gate. 


maidservants nor even my darlings and my friends, but bound and ill 
blows and destroyed my steeds continually. 


740 


And I knew not that he scorned my words, and scattered them like dust before 
the wind. Forthwith he began to waste my chattels and my possessions. 


He spared not my slaves and 


-treated them; wounded with violent 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 38. 2-6 


SYRIAC ARABIC ARMENIAN 
ing him whenever he ap- 
peared, saying, ‘My uncle 
Haiqar is in his dotage, and 


2 and my son | 2 he knows nothing now’; and Nathan began to dissipate 2 
Nadan began [to ill-treat] my he began to beat the slaves | my property to its loss, and 
servants by beating them and and the handmaidens, and to | spared not my servants and 
slaughtering them and destroy- sell the horses and the camels | handmaids. But he tormented 
ing them; and he showed no and be spendthrift with all | them and killed them, and cut 
mercy on my servants and my that his uncle Haiqdr had | about my horses and mules, and 
handmaidens though they were owned. my steeds, and destroyed the 
industrious and well-beloved and very pick of the flock. 


excellent; and my horses he 
slew and my good mules he ham- 


strung. 

3 So when I beheld me | 3 And when Haiqdar saw that And when I saw Nathan my 3 
that my son Nadan was doing he had no compassion on his | sister's son, that he was trans- 
detestable things, I answered servants nor onhis household, | forming my affairs and dissi- 
and said to him, ‘My son Nadan, he arose and chased him from | pating my property, I began to 
touch not my property; my son, his house, and sent to inform | speak with him and I said: 
it is said in the proverb, “ What the king that he hadscattered | Keep away from my property, 
the hand did not acquire, the his possessions and his pro- | and come not near itfor-it 1s 


9 


vision. written in the Proverbs that, 
whereon hands have not la- 
boured, that thing his eye 


eye did not spare. 








4 Moreover | 4 And the king arose and | spareth not. And I went and 4 
I showed to Sennacherib my called Nadan and said to | told Seneqerim my lord. And 
lord all these matters; and my him: ‘Whilst Haiqar re- | he called Nathan and said: As 
iord spake on this wise: ‘As long mains in health, no one shall | long as Khikar is alive, thou 
as Ahikar lives, no man shall rule over his goods, nor over | shalt not touch his property. 
have power over his wealth.’ his household, nor over his 

5 Then when my son Nadan saw | 5 possessions. And the hand | In that season Nathan saw 5 
his brother Nebuzardan stand- of Nadan was lifted off from | Boudan! his brother, who had 
ing in my house, he was very his uncle Haigdr and from | been brought up in my house, 
irate and he spake on this wise: all his goods, and in the | and said: Khikar my father is 
‘My father Ahikar is grown old meantime he went neither in | grown old and his words have 
and his wits have waned; [and nor out, nor did he greet | lost their savour. 
as for his wise words, he despised him. 
them]!; hath he given his pos- 
sessions to Nebuzardan my 
brother, and hath he removed 
me from his house?’ 

6 When I, Ahikar, heard these | 6 Thereupon Haiqdrrepented And when I 6 
things, I said, ‘Alas for thee, him of his toil with Nadan | heard this, I cast him out from 
my wisdom, that my son Nadan his sister’s son, and he con- | all my belongings. 
has made insipid ; and as for my tinued to be very sorrowful. 
wise sayings, he has contemned And Nadan had a younger eg 
them.’ a _ brother named Bennededaa, * In Bodleian MS. Baudan. 


so Haiqar took him to him- 
self in place of Nadan, and 


7 oe 
Probably a repetition from three brought himup and laenoured 


lines lower down. 


When I saw that Nathan counterfeited (07 metamorphosed) my affairs, then 1 spared my chattels lest he . 
should ruin them. And I said to Nathan: Come not near my chattels, for it is said in the wise ones, that 
hands which have not been hard worked, the eye shall not spare. And I went and told my lord Seneqerim. 
And the king ordered Nathan and said: As long as thy father Khikar is alive, go not near his possessions, 
but remain in the royal gate, and let thy father Khikar remain in his gate, and rest in his old age. 

I, Khikar, when I saw all this that Nathan did, I said in my heart: Alas! How hath Nathan despised my 
sweet advice, and all my wisdom hath he set at naught and quite despised. 


741 


THE STORY OF Mihi Ro. 


SYRIAC 


7 Now when my son Nadan 
heard thereof, he was angry and 
went to the gate of the king, and 
devised evil in his heart; and 
sat down and wrote two letters 
to two kings who were enemies 
of Sennacherib my lord; one to 
Akhi, the son of Hamselim, king 
of Persia and Elam, as follows: 


8‘From Ahikar the Secretary 
and Great Seal of Sennacherib 
king of Assyria and Nineveh, 
greeting. When this letter 
reaches thee, arise and come to 
Assyria to meet me; and I will 
bring thee into Assyria,and thou 
shalt seize the kingdom without 
war.’ 


9 And he wrote another 
letter, as follows: ‘To Pharaoh, 





ARABIC 
him with the utmost honour. 
And he delivered over to him 
all that he possessed, and 
made him governor of his 
house. 

7 Now when Nadan perceived 
what had happened he was 
seized withenvy and jealousy, 
and he began to complain to 
every one who questioned 
him, and to mock his uncle 
Haiqar, saying: ‘My uncle 
has chased me from his 
house, and has preferred my 
brother to me) “buteit “the 
Most High God give me the 
power, I shall bring upon 
him the misfortune! of being 
killed.” And Nadan con- 
tinued to meditate as to the 
stumbling-block he might 
contrive for him. And after 
a while Nadan turned it over 
in his mind, and wrote a 
letter to Achish, son of Shah 
the Wise, king of Persia, say- 
ing thus; 

8 . “Peace-and health? and 
might and honour from Sen- 
nacherib king of Assyria and 
Nineveh, and from his vizier 
and his secretary Haiqdrunto 
thee,O greatking! Lettherebe 
peace between thee and me. 
And when this letter reaches 
thee, if thou wilt arise and 
go quickly to the plain of 
Nisrin?, and to Assyria and 
Nineveh, I will deliver up 
the kingdom to thee without 
war and without battle- 
array.’ 

9 And he wrote also another 
letter in the name of Haiqar 


epivite 
fortune’. 

* Nisrin may either mean ‘the 
eagles’ or ‘the wild rose’. I prefer 
the latter, because the usual plural of 
Nasr iS nushY OY ansur. 


‘cast him into the mis- 








ARMENIAN. 


But Nathan 7 
formed a plan of wickedness in 
his heart. He wrote in myname 
a letter! to the enemy of 
Senegerim, the King of Nineveh 
and Asorestan; and it was as 
follows : 


I, Khikar, chief Notary of 8 
Senegerim the king, have sent 
to the King of the Egyptians to 
this effect: When this writing 9 
reaches thee, thou shalt muster 
thy forces, and come to the plain 
of the Eagles on the twenty- 
fifth day of the month Hrotitz, 
and I will put in your power the 
land of the Asores, and will give 
the throne of Seneqerim into 
thy hand without trouble, for 
thee to hold it. 


And he had made his hand- 10 


writing to resemble my hand- 


? There is evidently a lacuna here 
to be filled up from the Bodley MS. 
as follows: ‘to Pharaoh, king of 
Egypt.’ 


Then Nathan went into the house of the king and planned very great evils for me. For he wrote two 


letters. 
written as follows: 


One he sent to Pharaon, king of Egypt, since he was an enemy of my lord Senegerim, and it was 


I, Khikar, notary of Seneqerim king of Asorestan and N ineveh, to Pharaon king of Egypt write. Be it in 


thy cognizance, when this dispatch reaches thee, 
of Eagles on the twenty-fifth day of the month H 


trouble. 


And again a letter which had this form: 
From Senegerim, king, health (or peace) to Khikar, notary of my tribunal. When there shall come to 


742 


at once shalt thou muster thy forces and come to the plain 
rotitz, and I will lead and make thee king over these without 


Io 


II 


I2 


The SrORY OF AHIKAR 8. 


SYRIAC 

king of Egypt, from Ahikar, 
Secretary and Great Seal of the 
king of Assyria and Nineveh, 
greeting. When this letter shall 
reach thee, arise and come to 
meet me at Eagles’ dale, which 
lieth to the south, on the twenty- 
fifth day of the month of Ab. 
And I will bring thee into 
Nineveh without war and thou 
shalt seize the kingdom.’ And 
he made these writings of his 
like to my own handwriting ; 
and he sealed them in the king’s 
palace, and went his way. 

And he wrote further another 
letter to me, as if from my lord 
the king Sennacherib; and on 
this wise he wrote it: 


‘From Sennacherib the King, 
to Ahikar, my Secretary and 
Great Seal, greeting. When this 
letter reaches thee, gather all 
thy forces together, to the rock 
that is called Sis: and come 
forth from thence and come to 
meet me at Eagles’ dale, which 
lieth to the south, on the twenty- 
fifth day of the month Ab. 


And 
when thou seest me approaching 
to thee, array thy forces against 
me, like a man that is ready 
for battle: for ambassadors of 
Pharaoh the king of Egypt are 


thee this dispatch, thou shalt prepare my forces which are under thy han 
month Hrotitz thou shalt come to meet me on the plain of Eagles. : 
face to face against my forces, as if it were being prepared against thine enemies. 











Io 


HOA 


12 


ARABIC 


to Pharaoh king of Egypt. 
‘Let there be peace between 
thee and me, O mighty king! 
If at the time of this letter 
reaching thee thou wilt arise 
and go to Assyria and 
Nineveh to the plain of 
Nisrin, I will deliver up to 
thee the kingdom without 
war and without fighting.’ 
And the writing of Nadan 
was like to the writing of 
his uncle Haiqar. 


Then he folded the two 
letters, and sealed them with 
the seal of his uncle Haiqar ; 
they were nevertheless in the 
king’s palace. 


Then he went 
and wrote a letter likewise 
from the king to his uncle 
Haiqar: ‘Peace and health 
to my Vizier, my Secretary, 
my Chancellor, Haiqar. O 
Haigar, when this letter 
reaches thee, assemble all the 
soldiers who are with thee, 
and let them be perfect in 
clothing and in numbers, and 
bring them to me on the 
fifth day in the plain of 
Nisrin, and when thou shalt 
see me there coming towards 
thee, haste and make the 
army move against me as 
an enemy who would fight 
with me, for I have with me 


are come unto me to see our forces and tremble. 


And this letter Nathan sent to me as 1 
before the king and said: King, live for ever. 


I should deceive my king. 


For my father Khikar, whom th 
to the command of your kingship, but 
letter to certain trusty men of the king, 
and said: Read. And Nathan read it before the king ; 
Who gave into your hands this letter? 
Travellers that were going into Egypt. 
And when we asked them: 


who gave him the letter: 
answered with one mind, saying: 


servants found them and took them by force. 


We are native slaves of Khikar. 


And the king was troubled and sai 
Wh 
Be not troubled, O mighty king. But let us go tot 


hath devised such a snare for me? 


hath played fals 





Q-12 


ARMENIAN 


writing, and had sealed it with 
my seal. And when the forces 
of the king asked to go home 
to their homes, Nathan alone 
remained before the king, and 
said: O King, live for ever. I 
that have eaten bread and salt 
in thy house, God forbid that I 
should see evils before thee. 
Khikar my father, who was in 
honour and greatness before 
thee, hath lied to me and to 
thee, and hath taken the side 
of thy enemies. And the letter 
which Nathan had written in 
my words, and had likened his 
handwriting to my handwriting 
therein, he took, and read the 
dispatch which he himself had 
sealed, before the king. 

And when the king heard it, 
he was very much distressed, 
and said: What wrong have I 
done to Khikar, that he has so 
behaved to me? And at once 
Nathan wrote by the command 
of the king a letter thus con- 
ceived : 


When thou readest this 
writing, thou shalt muster thy 
hosts and shalt come to the 
plain of the Eagles on the 
twenty-fifth day of the month 
Hrotitz. And whenever thou 


d; exactly on the twenty-fifth day of the 
And when thou comest near draw up 


For the envoys of Pharaon 


f by the command of the king. And he himself, Nathan, stood 
I have eaten bread and salt in thy house. 


God forbid that 


ou didst send unto rest, unto honour, unto glory, hath not done according 
e to God and your kingship. And he had given the 
and they gave it to the sovereign ; and the sovereign gave it to Nathan 
and the king was sorely troubled, and asked those 
And as Nathan had charged them, they 


They had the letter, and we thy 
Whence are ye? they answered, 


d to the trusty men: What harm then have I done to Khikar, that he 


erefore hath he returned evil for good? Nathan replied and said: 


let us see if it is so; then let thy behests be done. 


743 


he plain of the Eagles, as is written in the dispatch, and 


La 


I 


THE. STORY OF AMIKAK a. irs 


SYRIAC 
come to me, that they may see 
what forces I have.’ 


And my son Nadan sent this 
letter to me by the hands of two 
of the king’s servants. 

And thereupon my son Nadan 
took the letters that he had 
written, as if he had actually 
found them ; and he read them 
before the king ; and when my 
lord the king heard them, he 
lamented and said, ‘O God, 
wherein have I sinned against 
Ahikar, that he should do unto 
me on this fashion ?’ 


And my 
son Nadan answered and said to 
the king, ‘ My lord, do not fret 
nor rage. Arise and let us go 
to Eagles’ dale on the day that 
is written by him in the letter. 
And if it be true, then all that 
thou commandest shall be done.’ 

So my son Nadan took the 
king my lord,and they came to 
me at Eagles’ dale: and they 
found me having with me great 
forces that were gathered there. 
And when I saw the king, I put 
my forces in array against him, 
as it was written in the letter. 
And when the king saw it, he 
was much afraid. 





ARABIC 
the ambassadors of Pharaoh 
king of Egypt, that they may 
see the strength of our army 
and may fear us, for they 
are our enemies and they 
hate us.’ 

13 Then he sealed the letter 
and sent it to Haiqar by one 
of the king’s servants. And 
he took the other letter which 
he had written and spread it 
before the king and read it 
to him and showed him the 
seal. And when the king 
heard what was in the letter 
he was perplexed with a 
great perplexity and was 
wroth with a great and fierce 
wrath, and said, ‘Ah, I have 
shown my wisdom! what 
have I done to Haiqar that 
he has written these letters 
to my enemies? Is this my 
recompense from him for my 

14 benefits to him?’ And Nadan 
said to him, ‘ Be not grieved, 
O king! nor be wroth, but 
let us go to the plain of 
Nisrin and see if the tale be 
true or not.’ 


15 Then Nadan 
arose on the fifth day and 
took the king and thesoldiers 
and the vizier, and they went 
to the desert to the plain of 
Nisrin. And the king looked, 
and lo! Haiqar and the army 
were set in array. And when 
Haiqar saw that the king 
was there, he approached and 
signalled to the army to move 
as in war and to fight in 
array against the king as it 
had been found in the letter, 
he not knowing what a pit 
Nadan had digged for him. 
And when the king saw the 
act of Haiqar he was seized 
with anxiety and terror and 
perplexity, and was wroth 


And Nathan took the king and went to the plain of the Eagles. 


setting out of the king, prepared my forces and set them over against hi 


by behest of the king. 


When the king saw my forces, h 
mighty presents will I give thee, an 


found a trusty servant before me. 


€ was sore troubled. The kin 
d all the royal affairs shall b 
And the king went back into h 


744 





ARMENIAN 


shalt see me, thou shalt draw 
up in battle array against me. 
For the messengers of Pharaon 
are come to me to see my hosts. 


He brought the letter to me, 
and he himself went to the king. 
He stood before the king and 
said : 


Grieve not, O ruler; but 
come, let us go to the plain 
of the Eagles, and let us see 
whether this be so. Then what 
thou commandest is done. 


And Senegerim took his army 
and came to the plain of the 
Eagles, and found me with my 
army ; and I drew up my forces 
over against him as he had 
commanded. When the king 
saw this, he was very grieved. 


But I, Khikar, when I learned of the 
m, as had been written in the dispatch 


g said: If thou bringest Khikar before me, 
e discharged by thee; for thou hast been 
is palace. 


14 


15 


16 


17 


Ax 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 3. 16—4. 1 


SYRIAC 
Then my son Nadan answered 
and said to him: ‘Let it not 
disturb thee, my lord the king. 
Return and come into thy cham- 
ber! in peace: and I will bring 
Ahikar before thee.’ 
Then my lord the king return- 
ed to his house. 


And my son Nadan came to 
me and said to me, ‘All that 
thou hast done, thou hast done 
finely: and much hath the king 
praised thee ; and he commands 
thee to dismiss thy forces that 
they may go every man to his 
own place and his own district. 
And do thou come to me thy- 
self alone.’ 


Thereupon I came before the 
king, and when he saw me, he 
said unto me, ‘ Art thou come, 
Ahikar, my Secretary and the 
foster-child of Assyria and Nine- 
veh, thou whom I caused to 
come into honour? but thou 
hast turned back and taken the 
part of my enemies.’ 


1 Taking the word as equivalent of 
the Greek xorrava. 


And Nathan came to me and said: My father 
king this preparing of thy cavalry in array. Therefor 
thou hast done well and wisely. So then give orders to thy forces t 


let us make merry together. 








ARABIC 


16 with a great wrath. And 
Nadan said to him, ‘ Hast 
thou seen, O my lord the 
king! what this wretch has 
done? but be not thou wroth 
and be not grievednor pained, 
but go to thy house and sit 
on thy throne, and I will 
bring Haiqar to thee bound 
and chained with chains, and 
I will chase away thine 
enemy from thee without 
toil.’ 

And the king returned to 
his throne, being provoked 
about Haiqar, and did no- 
thing concerning him. And 
Nadan went to Haiqar and 
said to him, ‘W/allah, O 
my uncle! The king verily 
rejoiceth in thee with great 
joy and thanks thee for 
having done what he com- 
manded thee. And now he 
hath sent me to thee that 
thou mayst dismiss the sol- 
diers to their duties’ and 
come thyself to him with thy 
handsbound behind thee, and 
thy feet chained, that the 
ambassadors of Pharaoh may 
see this, and that the king 
may be feared by them and 
by their king’ Then an- 
swered Haiqar and said, ‘To 
hear is to obey.’ And he 
arose straightway and bound 
his hands behind him, and 
41chained his feet. And 

Nadan took him and went 

with him to the king. And 

when Haiqdr entered the 
king’s presence he did obei- 
sance before him on the 
ground, and wished for power 
and perpetual life to the 
king. Then said the king, 

‘O Haiqdr, my Secretary, 

the Governor of my affairs, 

my Chancellor, the ruler of 
my State, tell me what evil 


17 


1 Lit. ‘to the way of their path’. 


745 








ARMENIAN 

Nathan began to speak and 
said: Grieve not, O king, but 
let us go home. And I will 
bring my father Khikar before 
thee. The king said to Nathan : 
If thou bringest Khikar before 
me, I will give thee very great 
presents and I will set thee in 
trust over all my affairs. And 
all the affairs of my kingdom 
shall be transacted by thee with 
ability. 


And the king returned to his 
palace, and Nathan my sister's 
son came to me and said: 
Seneqerim the king hath sent 
me to thee and says, Come to 
me and let us be joyful together. 


And when I went, the king said 
to me: 

Khikar, Notary and wise man, 
thou wast my counsellor and 
ruler, and giver of commands 
of the house of the Asores and 
Ninevites; and thou hast gone 
over to the side of my enemies. 


Khikar, very honourable and pleasing hath seemed to the 
e hath he sent me to thee and saith, All thou hast done 
o go to their place, and do thou come and 


16 


4y 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 4 2-6 


SYRIAC 


And he 
gave me those letters that were 
written in my name and were 
sealed with the seal of my own 
ring. And when I read them, 
my tongue stammered and my 
limbs became faint: and I sought 
for a single word from the words 
of wisdom and I found me none. 


3 And my son Nadan answered 
and said to me, ‘Away with thee 
from the king’s sight, thou 
foolish old man: and give thy 
hands to bonds and thy feet to 
iron fetters.’ 

Then Sennacherib the king 
turned away his face from me, 
and he talked with Nabuse- 
makh?* ... and said to him, 
‘Arise, go slay Ahikar, and 
separate his head a hundred ells 
from his body.’ 


Then I fell on my face on the 
ground and worshipped the 
king, and I said, ‘ My lord the 
king, live for ever. Seeing, my 
lord, that it hath pleased thee 
to kill me, thy will be done. 
I know, however, that I have 
not sinned against thee. But 
5 command them, my lord the 
king, that they kill me at the 
door of my house: and let them 
give my body to burial.’ 


And the king said to Nabuse- 
makh? ..., ‘Go, kill Ahikar 
at the door of his house, and 


?*Yabusemakh Meskin Kanti op 
which I do not understand ; the cor- 
rection of the first part of the name 
is obvious. Possibly it should be 
*NabuSumuSkin, my colleague ’, 
Compare the form as given in the 
papyrus, and in the Arabic. 

2 Ut supra. 


LS) 


ARABIC 


have I done to thee that thou 
hast rewarded me by this 
ugly deed. Then they 
showed him the letters in his 
writing and with his seal. 
And when Haigar saw this, 
his limbs trembled and his 
tongue was tied at once, and 
he was unable to speak a 
word from fear ; but he hung 
his head towards the earth 
and was dumb. And when 
the king saw this, he felt 
certain that the thing was 
from him, and he straight- 
way arose and commanded 
them to kill Haiqdr, and to 
strike his neck with the 
sword outside of the city. 
Then Nadan screamed and 
said, ‘O Haiqar, O black- 
face! what avails thee thy 
meditation or thy power in 
the doing of this deed to the 
king ?’ 

Thus says the story-teller. 
And the name of the swords- 
man was Ibn Samik. And 
the king said to him, ‘O 
swordsman! arise, go, cleave 
the neck of Haigdr at the 
door of his house, and cast 
away his head from his body 
a hundred cubits.’ Then 
Haiqar knelt before the king, 
and said, ‘Let my lord the 
king live for ever! and if 
thou desire to slay me, let 
thy wish be [fulfilled]; and 
I know that I am not guilty, 
but the wicked man has to 
give an account of his wicked- 
ness; nevertheless, O m 
lord the king! I beg of thee 
and of thy friendship, permit 
the swordsman to give my 
body to my slaves, that they 
may bury me, and let thy 
slave be thy sacrifice.’ 

The king arose and com- 
manded the swordsman to do 
with him according to his 


746 


ARMENIAN 


And that letter, which Nathan 2 
had written in my! words and 
had likened therein his hand- 
writing to my handwriting, the 
king gave unto me and said: 
Take and read. 

And when I read it, all my 
limbs were? dissolved, and my 
tongue was shrivelled up as 
parchment ; and I was stupefied 
and became like one of those 
distraught. I sought for a word 
of wisdom and found no answer 
to give. 


Nathan began to speak, 3 
and said to me: Get out of the 
presence of thyking, erey-haired 
one, perverted and inane*. Give 
thy hand for the iron and thy 
foot for the fetter. 

And the 4 
king turned away his face from 
me and said to Abusmag, his 
nayip: Lead away and slay yon 
godless. Khikar, and remove his 
head afar, about one hundred 
ells. 


And I fell on my face and 5 
kissed the earth and said: O 
King, live for ever. Thou hast 
willed me to slaying, and hast 
not hearkened unto my words. 
And I from my heart know that 
I have not in any way wronged 
thee, and in my heart there is 
no guile. [aminnocent. There- 
fore have pity on me and order 
that in my own house they slay 
me and give over my: body for 
burial. 


And the king ordered Abus- 6 
maq, that they should slay me 
in my own house. And when 


1 Ven. omits ‘my’. 

” Bodl. = ‘all the flesh of my limbs 
was’, 

* The Arm. word is obscure. 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 4. 


SYRIAC 


give his body to burial.’ There- 
upon I, Ahikar, sent to Esh- 
fagni my wife that she should 
bring forth from the daughters 
of my tribe maids a thousand 
and one: ‘and let them put on 
raiment of mourning, and let 
them wail and lament and weep 
over me. And let them come 
to meet me, and let them make 
a funeral feast! over me before 
I die. And prepare thou bread 
and a table and a banquet for 
Nabusemakh®. . . and his Par- 
thians that are with him, and 
come to meet them, and receive 
them and bring them into my 
house. And I too will come 
into the house as a guest.’ 

8 And Eshfagni my wife, for 
that she was exceeding wise, 
understood all my message, and 
did whatsoever I had sent to her 
to do; and she came forth to 
meet them, and she brought 
them into my house: and they 
did eat bread, and with her own 
hand she served them, until 
they fell asleep from drunken- 
ness, every man in his place. 


~!I 


9  Thereat I, Ahikar, entered and 
said to Nabusemakh®*, ‘Look 
towards God, and remember the 
love that there was between us. 
brother: and grieve not over my 
death: and remember that thee 
also did Sarhadum the father of 
Sennacherib deliver to me that 
I should slay thee, yet I slew 
thee not, because I was aware 
that there was in thee no ground 
of offence; and I kept thee alive 
until the king desired thee, and 
when I brought thee before him, 


i Lit. ‘a house of weeping’. 
2 Yabusemakh. 
3 Ut supra. 


a The narrative that follows is give 
And they shall make and prepare a tabl 
Thou shalt go out to 
And Arphestan my wife did immedi 


who are with me. 








~r 


ARABIC 


desire. And he straightway 
commanded his servants to 
take Haigar and the swords- 
man and to go with him 
naked that they might slay 
him. And when Haiqar 
knew for certain that he was 
to be slain he sent to his wife 
and said to her, ‘Come out 
and meet me, and let there 
be with thee a thousand 
young virgins,and dress them 
in gowns of purple and silk 
that they may weep for me 
before my death. And pre- 
pare a table for the swords- 
man and for his servants. 
And mingle plenty of wine, 
that they may drink.’ 

And she did all that he 
commanded her. And she 
was very wise, clever, and 
prudent. And she united 
all possible courtesy and 
learning. 

And when the army of the 
king and the swordsman 
arrived they found the table 
set in order, and the wine and 
the luxurious viands, and 
they began eating and drink- 
ing till they were gorged and 
drunken. 

Then Haigar took the 
swordsman aside apart from 
the company and said, ‘O 
Abu Samik, dost thou not 
know that when Sarhadum 
the king, the father of Sen- 
nacherib, wanted to kill thee. 
I took thee and hid thee in 
a certain place till the king’s 
anger subsided and he asked 
for thee? And when I 
brought thee into his presence 
he rejoiced in thee: and now 
remember the kindness I did 








6-9 


ARMENIAN 


I went forth from the king, I 
wrote a letter lamenting to 
Abestan my wife and said: 
When this letter reaches thee, 
do thou send out to meet me a 
thousand virgins; and let them 
put on apparel! of mourning and 
let them mourn for me and 
bewail me, that I may see with 
my own eyes even the wailers 
who bewail me in my lifetime. 
But* thou shalt make large 
loaves, to give to my execu- 
tioners, and dainty viands for 
them to eat and drink. 


And Abestan my wife was 8 
very wise and? fulfilled my 
orders. She went out to meet 
me, and led them into the house, 
and set before them a table; 
and fed them, and gave them to 
drink old wine and unmixt, till 
they were fuddled and were 
drunk and fell asleep. 


Then I 9 
and my wife fell at the feet of 
Abusmagq weeping, and I said 
to him: Abusmaq, my comrade, 
look up to heaven and behold 
God with thy eyes; and re- 
member the bread and salt 
which we have eaten together, 
and remember how that they 
betrayed thee to Seneqerim the 
king’s father; and I took and 
kept thee until the king asked 
for thee, and how, when I led 
thee before him, he gave me 


1 Paris 92 and 58 alone add the 
words ‘was... and’. 


n in MS. Canon in a form more closely resembling the Syriac as below: 
e, adorned with all good things, for Abusmaq and the Parthians 


meet these and shalt lead them into the house. 


I entered with them to eat bread ; and they were fuddled with wine. _ ; 
And I said to Abusmaq my comrade, Look up to heaven and discern God with thy eyes and remember 


the love of our brotherhood. And sin not agains 


747 


ately what I had commanded ; and we set out to my house. 
Abusmaq and the Parthians reclined, and my wife set before them a table, and waited on them. 


t my blood, for thou knowest that I am innocent. 


And 
And 


But 


Io 


II 


13 


THE STORY OF AHIKARM. 


SYRIAC 

he gave me great gifts, and 
many presents did I carry off 
from him. And do thou too, 
now, preserve me alive and 
recompense me this kindness: 
and in order that the word come 
not abroad that I was not killed 
and that the king may not 
quarrel with thee, behold, I have 
in my prison-housea slave, Mar- 
zifan hight, and he is due to die: 
clothe this slave in my raiment 
and rouse up the Parthians 
against him and they will slay 
him: and I shall not die, because 
I have done no wrong.’ 

And when I spake thus, more- 
over Nabusemakh!. . . also 
was sore grieved over me, and 
he took my raiments and clad 
in them the slave that was in 
the prison-house. And he roused 
up the Parthians, and they arose 
in the fumes? of their wine, and 
they slew him and removed his 
head a hundred ells from his 
corse, and they gave over his 
body for burial. 

Then went forth the report 
in Assyria and Nineveh, that 
Ahikar the Secretary is killed. 


And Nabusemakh®. .. rose up, 
and Eshfagni my wife,and they 
made for me a _hiding-place 
underground ; its breadth was 
three cubits and its height five 
cubits, under the threshold of the 
door of my house. And they put 
bread and water with me, and 
went and showed to Senna- 
cherib the king that Ahikar, the 
Secretary, was dead: and when 
the men heard it, they wept; 
and the women disfigured‘ their 


1 Ut supra. 

Zit taste. 

° Ut supra. 

* Lit. ‘scratched ’. 


remember also this, that the sire of Senegerim gave thee into m 
for I knew that thou wast innocent. 


before the king, and the king 





gave me mighty gifts. 
slave whose name is Séniphar, and very like is he 


ARABIC 


to thee. And I know that the 
king will repent him about 
me and will be wroth with a 
great wrath about my exe- 
cution. For I am not guilty, 
and it shall be when thou 
shalt present me before him 
in his palace, thou shalt 
meet with great good fortune, 
and know that Nadan my 
sister’s son has deceived me 
and has done this bad deed 
to me, and the king will 
repent of having slain me; 
and now I have a cellar in 
the garden of my house, and 
no one knows of it. Hide 
me in it with the knowledge 
of my wife. And I havea 
slave in prison who deserves 
to be killed. Bring him out 
and dress him in my clothes, 
and command the servants 
when they are drunk to slay 
him. They will not know 
who it is they are killing. 


I 


Lo 


12 And cast away his head a 
hundred cubits from his body, 
and give his body to my 
slaves that they may bury it. 
And thou shalt have laid upa 
great treasure with me.’ And 
then the swordsman did as 
Haiqar had commanded him, 
and he went to the king and 
said to him, ‘ May thy head 
live for ever!’ 

13 Then Haiqar’s 
wife let down to him in the 
hiding-place every week what 
sufficed for him, and no one 
knew of it but herself. And 
the story was reported and 
repeated and spread abroad 








O=13 
ARMENIAN 

mighty gifts. Now therefore 
keep me and render to me a 
return of the service I rendered 
thee, and to thee there will be 
mighty gifts as thy requital, 
good for good!. I have a man 
in prison, and very like unto me 
is he. He shed blood in my 
house and is under sentence of 
death, and his name is Seniqar. 
Take therefore my garments 
into the prison and dress him 
up in them and slay him; and 
so thou fulfillest the king’s 
command, 


And when I said this, Abus- 
maq had pity on me, and did 
my will and what I told him. 
And the soldiers, fuddled, woke 
up from sleep * at midnight, and 
slew Seniqar my slave, and re- 
moved his head from him. one 
hundred ells. 


And the news 
went forth into the city of 
Asorestan, that Khikar, Notary 
and wise man, was dead. 


Then Abusmaq my comrade 
and Abestan my wife made me 
a house dug out underground, 
its® length seven ells, and its 
height equal to my head’s, hard 
by the door-posts of my house. 
And they shut me in and placed 
beside me bread and water, and 
then Abusmaq went off to the 
king and told him that ‘ Khikar 
the wise is slain’. And all who 
heard of my death beat their 
breasts and were full of regret 


* Bodl. has ‘ will be a requital from 
God’: Paris 92, ‘will be mighty gifts’. 
I render the Ven. MS. 

* So Ven. and Paris 92: the rest = 
‘fuddled with wine, woke up at’. 

* Canon = ‘its height three ells and 
its length seven ells, equal to (ar level 
with) the door-posts of my house’. 


y hands for slaying ; and I wronged thee not, 


And I kept thee until the king made a request ; and then I led thee 


unto me. 


This do thou likewise and slay me not. 


There is my 


And he is in prison, because he is under 


sentence of death. So then lead me into prison and dress him up in my garments and cast him to the 


Parthians, for them to slay him. . 


748 


Io 


14 


16 


17 


THE 
SYRIAC 


faces and said: ‘ Alas for thee, 
Ahikar the wise Secretary, thou 
fence of the breaches of our 
country: for like thee there will 
never be any one to us.’ 


Then Sennacherib the king 
called my son Nadan, and said 
to him. ‘Go make a funeral 
feast! for thy father Ahikar, 
and then return to me.’ 


And 
when Nadan my son came, no 
funeral feast did he make for 
me, nor any remembrance at all ; 
but gathered him the vain and 
lewd folk, and set them down at 
my table, with singing and with 
great joy; and my beloved ser- 
vants and handmaidens he 
stripped and flogged without 
mercy. 


Nor had he any reve- 
rence for my wife Eshfagni, but 
sought to do with her the way 
of man with woman. - 
And I, 
Ahikar, was cast into darkness 
in the pit beneath. And I was 
hearing the voice of my bakers, 
cooks, and butlers as they wept 
and sobbed within my house. 


1 Lit. ‘a house of weeping ’. 


« MS. Canon has the narrative whic 

And Nathan went off to the house o 
collected all his dear ones to drink wine an 
commanded. Using force to the dear ones of Khikar 
of Khikar, nay rather desired to fornicate with her. 

And I, Khikar, was hearing the voice of my stewards whom 
My soul was longing for bread and a morsel of meat. 


tortured in the darkness. 





Spon, OF AHIKART4 


ARABIC 


in every place of how Haiqar 
the Sage had been slain and 
was dead, and all the people 
of that city mourned for him. 
And they wept and said: 
‘Alas for thee, O Haiqar ! 
and for thy learning and thy 
courtesy! How sad about 
thee and about thy know- 
ledge! Where can another 
like thee be found? and 
where can there be a man so 
intelligent, so learned, so 
skilled in ruling as to re- 
semble thee that he may fill 
thy place?’ 

But the king was repenting 
about Haiqar, and his re- 
pentance availed him naught. 
Then he called for Nadan 
and said to him, ‘Go and 
take thy friends with thee 
and make a mourning and a 
weeping for thy uncle Haiqar, 
and lament for him as the 
custom is, doing honour to 
his memory. But when 
Nadan, the foolish, the ignor- 
ant, the hard-hearted, went 
to the house of his uncle, he 
neither wept norsorrowed nor 
wailed, but assembled heart- 
less and dissolute people and 
set about eating and drink- 
ing. And Nadan began to 
seize the maidservants and 
the slaves belonging to Hai- 
qar, and bound them and 
tortured them and drubbed 
them with a sore drubbing. 
16 And he did not respect the 
wife of his uncle, she who had 
brought him up like her own 
boy, but wanted her to fall 
into sin with him. But 
Haiqar had been cast into 
the hiding-place, and he 
heard the weeping of his 
slaves and his neighbours, 
and he praised the Most 
High God, the Merciful One, 


14 


17 


749 








h follows in a form nearer to the Syriac. | 
f Khikar, but with him there was no concern for mourning. And he 
d made great good cheer, instead of mourning as the king 
he tortured them and had no respect for Arphestan wife 


13-17 


ARMENIAN 


and said: Alas for thee ©) 
Notary! Who is there to decide 
the matters of thy kingdom with 
thy ability ? 


Then the king called Nathan 14 
and said to him: Go, make 
lamentations for the house and 
mourning for thy father. 


Na- 15 
than* came, and instead of 
lamenting he gathered together 
actors, and made great cheer ; 
and he very cruelly tormented 
my servants and handmaids. 


And even for Abestan my wife 16 
he had no respect, but desired 
to fornicate with her, that had 
brought him up. And I from 
my subterranean chamber heard 
the weeping and groanings and 
the plaints of my servants. And 17 
I moreover wept and my soul 
longed for a little bread and a 
morsel of meatandacup. And 
I was destitute of all my chattels. 


It is given below: 


Nathan tortured and illtreated. And I was 


18 


19 


iS) 


(oP) 


THE STORY OF AMIKAR 4eio-—on 


SYRIAC 


And after a few days came 
Nabusemakh!. . . and opened 
[my prison] over me? and com- 
forted me; and set before me 
bread and water ; and I said to 
him, ‘When thou goest forth 
from me, remember me before 
God, and say, O God, just and 
righteous, and that showest 
grace upon the earth, hear the 
voice of Thy servant Ahikar,® 
and remember that he sacrificed 
to Thee fatted oxen like sucking 
lambs. And now he is cast 
into the darksome pit where he 
seeth no light. And dost Thou 
not save him that crieth unto 
Thee? O Lord, hear the voice 
of my colleague,' [I pray Thee.’ 

Now when Pharaoh, king of 
Egypt, heard that I, Ahikar, 
had been slain, he was greatly 
rejoiced, and he wrote a letter 
to Sennacherib on this wise: 


‘Pharaoh, king of Egypt, to 
Sennacherib, king of Assyria 
and Nineveh, greeting. I am 
planning to build a castle be- 
tween heaven and earth, where- 
fore seek out and send me from 
thy kingdom a man who is 
a skilled architect, that he may 
give me reply concerning all 
that I shallask him. And when 
thou shalt send me such a man, 
I will collect and send thee the 
revenue of Egypt for three 


' Ut supra. 

? Lit. ‘on my eyes’. 

* Cf. Apoc. vi. 10, ‘ How long, O 
Lord, holy and true,’ &c. 

* This trifling but necessary emend- 
ation confirms our interpretation (vide 
supra) of the corrupt name. 


And when Pharaon heard that Khik 


Senegerim, riddles. 


And the king called Nathan and said: Write an answer to this letter, 
And Nathan said: Difficult is this matter. 
And the king was distressed and said: Alas 
And when Pharaon learned that they could 
they took tribute from Senegerim. And as long 
was multiplied on Asorestan and Nineveh. Tho 
impoverished and all the land laid waste, and the 








ARABIC 

and gave thanks, and he 

always prayed and besought 

the Most High God. 
18 And 
the swordsman came from 
time to time to Haiqar whilst 
he was in the midst of the 
hiding-place: and Haiqar 
came and entreated him. 
And he comforted him and 
wished him deliverance. 

And when the story was 
reported in other countries 
that Haiqar the Sage had 
been slain, all the kings were 
grieved and despised king 
Sennacherib, and they la- 
mented over Haiqar the 
solver of riddles. 


19 


And when 
the king of Egypt had made 
sure that Haiqar was slain, 
he arose straightway and 
wrote a letter to king Sen- 
nacherib, reminding him in 
it “of the ‘peace’ and” the 
health and the might and 
the honour which we wish 
specially for thee, my beloved 
brother, king Sennacherib. I 
have been desiring to build 
a castle between the heaven 
and the earth, and I want 
thee to send mea wise, clever 
man from thyself to build it 
for me, and to answer me all 
my questions, and that I may 
have the taxes! and the cus- 
tom duties of Assyria for 
three years.’ Then he sealed 


iS) 


+ ie. taxes in kind, agricultural 
produce. For this rendering of the 
Arabic word, see Dozy, vol. ii, p. 345. 


Toe 





ARMENIAN 


And all the inhabitants of 
Asorestan and of Nineveh fled 
from me. 


When the king of Egypt 
heard this, of how Khikar the 
Notary was dead, and of the 
Ninevites and all the land (that) 
they were fled, he was very glad. 
And the king of Egypt, Pharaon, 
wrote a letter as follows: 


To Senegerim, king of the 
Asores. Health be to thy Lord- 
ship and Kingship. Be it known 
to thee that I desire to build a 
palace hung betwixt heaven and 
earth. Look and send unto me 
a true and clever and wise man 
who can build, and also give 
answer to any question I ask. 
If however thou shalt neglect 
this request, then I will come 


ar was slain, he was very glad, and wrote a dispatch to the king 


Who is able to give answer thereto ? 

for Khikar my secretary and wise man! 

not give an answer to his writing, he sent puissant forces and 
as Khikar languished in the prison, the burden of Pharaon 
se who were under the hand of Seneqerim also were much 
chambers of the royal treasury were emptied. 


5a 


N 


3 


Uiikes LORY OF ‘AHIKAR 5. 


SYRIAC 


years: and if thou send me not 
a man who shall give me reply 
concerning all that I ask him, 
then do thou collect and send 
me the tribute of Assyria and 
Nineveh for three years, by the 
hands of these ambassadors that 
come to thee.’ 

And when this letter was read 
before the king, he cried out to 
all the nobles and franklins of 
his kingdom, and said unto 
them : ‘ Which of you will go to 
Egypt to give reply to the king 
concerning all that he shall ask 
him? And he shall build him 
the castle that he planneth, and 
bring back the three years’ tri- 
bute of Egypt and come hither.’ 

And when the nobles heard 
this, they answered and said unto 
the king: ‘My lord the king, 
thou knowest that not only in 
the years of thy reign, but also 
in the years of thy father Sar- 
hadum, Ahikar the Secretary 
was in the habit of resolving 
6 questions like these. And now, 
also, behold his son Nadan, he 
is instructed in his father’s book- 
lore and wisdom, And when 
my son Nadan heard these 
things, he cried out before the 
king and said: ‘ The gods them- 
selves cannot do things like 
these; let alone men’? 


And when the king heard 


Cf Dani. Li. 





ARABIC 


the letter and sent it to Sen- 
3 nacherib. He took it and 
read it and gave it to his 
viziers and to the nobles of 
his kingdom, and they were 
perplexed and ashamed, and 
he was wroth with a great 
wrath, and was puzzled about 
4 how heshouldact. Then he 
assembled the old men and 
the learned men and the wise 
men and the philosophers, 
and the diviners and the 
astrologers, and every one 
who was in his country, and 
read them the letter and said 
to them, ‘Who amongst you 
will go to Pharaoh king of 
Egypt and answer him his 
5 questions?’ And they said 
to him, ‘O our lord the king ! 
know thou that there is none 
in thy kingdom who is ac- 
quainted with these questions 
except Haigqar, thy vizier and 
6 secretary. Butas for us, we 
have no skill in this, unless it 
be Nadan, his sister's son, for 
he taught him all his wisdom 
and learning and knowledge. 
Call him to thee, perchance 
he may untie this hard knot.’ 
Then the king called Nadan 
and said to him, ‘ Look at 
this letter and understand 
what is in it’ And when 
Nadan read it, he said, ‘O 
my lIcrd! who is able to 
build a castle between the 
heaven and the earth?’ 
7 And when the king heard 





Pay 


ios) 


ARMENIAN 


and take away thy kingdom and 
will lay waste thy land. 


When 4 
the king heard this he was very 
grieved, and sent and mustered 
his satraps to ask their advice, 
saying: What shall we do? 


The? satraps say: O King, who 5 
else can answer this question 
except Nathan, who hath learned 
of Khikar and knoweth his lore 
and hath been brought up in 
his house? He will be able to 
give an answer to this de- 
mand which the king of Egypt 
hath written. Then the king 
called Nathan and showed him 
the counsel; and he gave him 
the dispatch, and Nathan read 
it. When he had read aloud 6 
the letter, he cried out with a 
loud voice and said: This? is a 
matter which even the gods? 
cannot settle or give answer to. 
How shall I be able to give 
answer ? 


When the king heard, he rose 7 


1 Canon: ‘And they perplexed said: 
To such a matter Khikar would give 
an answer, and now Nathan who is 
in his place.’ 

2 Canon: ‘Such a matter the gods 
cannot answer, much less men. When 
the king heard, he was sorely troubled; 
Nhemosea-memc 

3 The Arm. word used is ag, i.e. 
the devs. 


And the king said: Alas for Khikar, secretary and wise man! One who should give thee to me alive, 
many chattels would I give him, even to the half of my kingdom. 


And Abusmaq revealed it not to the king, 


Khikar. 


And Pharaon sent a dispatch to king Seneqer! 
I desire to build a palace... . 
This when Nathan heard, he cried with a loud voice and said: King, 
the gods could not make answer to. |! 
When the king heard this he was very distressed. He ros 


health. 


Surely then not men? 


Jot 


live for ever. 


that he might be in stress and know the value to him of 


m which had this tenor: From Pharaon to Senegerim, 


Such a matter as that 


e from his throne and sat on sackcloth, beat his 


8 


THE STORY OF AHIKARSS 7-3 


SYRIAC 

these words, he was much per- 
turbed, and he descended from 
his throne and sat on the ground, 
and spake thus:! ‘Alas for 
thee, Ahikar the wise, that I 
destroyed thee for the words of 
a boy! Who will give thee to 
me for such a time as this? I 
would give him thy weight in 
gold.’ 


And when Nabusemakh?... 
heard these words, he fell down 
before the king and said to him: 
‘He who has contemned the 
commandment of his lord, is 
guilty of death ; and I, my lord, 
have contemned the command 
of thy kingship. Command, 
therefore, that they crucify me. 


* Cf. Ezek. xxvi. 16 kai karaBnoovrar 
ano Tay Opdvev avtay raves of apxov- 
Tes... emt yyy KaOeSovvrac.. . Kai 

, »*y Se ‘ ’ ue N 
orevagovow emt oé Kat AnWorrat emt oe 
Opnvov kai €povoly oo. . 


* Ut supra. 


person and said: Alas for Khikar, able notary and wise ! 


is none like thee. 


word of mine is fulfilled in me. 
Khikar, and now he is still alive. 








ARABIC 
the speech of Nadan he sor- 
rowed with a great and sore 
sorrow,andstepped downfrom 
histhroneandsat in the ashes, 
and began to weep and wail 
over Haiqar, saying, ‘O my 
grief! O Haiqar, who didst 
know the secrets and the 
riddles! woe is me for thee, 
O Haigér! O teacher of my 
country and ruler of my 
kingdom, where shall I find 
thy) Jliker OQ Paiqér 
teacher of my country, where 
shall I turn for thee? woe 
is me for thee! how did I 
destroy thee! and | listened 
to the talk of a stupid, igno- 
rant boy without knowledge, 
without religion, without 
manliness. Ah! and again 
Ah for myself! who can 
give thee to me just for once, 
or bring me word that Haiqar 
is alive? and I would give 
him the half of my kingdom. 
Whence is thisto me? Ah, 
Haigar! that I might see 
thee just for once, that I 
might take my fill of gazing 
at thee, and delighting in 
thee. Ah! O my grief for 
thee to all time! O Haigar, 
how have I killed thee! and 
I tarried not in thy case till 
I had seen the end of the 
matter.’ And the king went 
on weeping night and day. 
Now when the swordsman 
saw the wrath of the king 
and his sorrow for Haiqar, 
his heart was softened to- 
wards him, and he ap- 
proached into his presence 
and said tohim: ‘O my 
lord! command thy servants 
to cut off my head.’ Then 


1 B.M. MS. ‘is crucified ’. 


And there is no successor like thee in the royal gate. 
weigh him against gold and buy thee. When 
lord king, he that contemns the behests of hi 


75% 








ARMENIAN 


from his golden throne and sat 
in the ashes, and with his own 
hands he smote his face and 
plucked out his beard and said: 
Alas for thee, Khikar, Notary 
and wise, I have through the 
tittle-tattle of men destroyed 
thee! For thou didst arrange 
the affairs of our kingdom. Now 
if any one gave thee unto me, I 
would give him whatever he 
asked of me, no matter how 
great a treasure of gold and 
silver. 


When Abusmaq my comrade 
heard this, he stood before the 
king and said: O King, live for 
ever. He that doeth not the 
king’s commands is sentenced 
to death, for the commands of 8 
God and of the king are one. 
Thou didst bid slay Khikar, and 
he is still living. 


On the words of a lying man I slew him. There 
If any one gave thee to me, I would 
Abusmaq learned the deep distress of the king, he said: My 
s lord and fulfils them not is guilty of death. Now then this 
For I fulfilled not the behest of my lord. Thou didst make behest to slay 


feat LORY OF WHIKAR 5, ‘810 


SYRIAC 


For Ahikar, whom thou didst 
command me to slay, is yet 
alive.’ 


And when the king heard 
these words, he answered and 
said, ‘Speak on, speak on, 
Nabusemakh?; speak on, thou 
good and clever man, unskilled 
in evil. If it is indeed as thou 
sayest, and thou show me 
Ahikar alive, then I will give 
thee presents of silver, a hun- 
dred talents in weight, and of 
purple, fifty talents in value,’ 2 


And Nabusemakh? answered 
and said, ‘ Swear to me, my lord 
the king, that, if there be not 
found before thee other sins of 
mine, this sin shall not be re- 
membered against me. And 
the king gave him his right 
hand on this matter. 


1 Cod, ‘ Yabusemakh’. 
2 Dan. v. 16. 
3 Cod, ‘ Yabusemakh ’. 


And the king said: Speak, speak, my ser 
many good things hast thou become worthy. 
one hundred thousand talents of gold. 


1105.2 





Io 


1 
2 
3 


ARABIC 

said the king to him: ‘Woe 
to thee, Abu Samik, what is 
thy fault?’ And the swords- 
man said unto him, ‘O my 
master! every slave who acts 
contrary to the word of his 
master is killed!, and I 
have acted contrary to thy 
command. Then the king 
said unto him, ‘Woe unto 
thee, O Abu Samik, in what 
hast thou acted contrary to 
my command?’ And the 
swordsman said unto him, 
‘O my lord! thou didst 
command me to kill Haiqar, 
and I knew that thou wouldst 
repent thee concerning him, 
and that he had _ been 
wronged, and I hid him in 
a certain place, and I killed 
one of his slaves, and he is 
now safe in the cistern, and 
if thou command me I will 
bring him to thee. And 
the king said unto him, 
‘Woe to thee, O Abu Samik! 
thou hast mocked me and I 
amorthy> lord’ ~ And the 
swordsman said unto him, 
‘Nay, but by the life of thy 
head, O my lord! Haiqar is 
safe and alive.’ And when 
the king heard that saying, 
he felt sure of the matter, 
and his head swam 2, and he 
fainted from joy, and he com- 
manded [them] to bring 
[Haigar]*. And he said to 
the swordsman, ‘O trusty 
servant! if thy speech be 
true, I would fain enrich 
thee, and exalt thy dignity 
above that of all thy friends.’ 
And the swordsman went 
along rejoicing till he came 
to Haiqdr’s house. And he 
opened the door of the 
hiding-place, and went down 
and found Haiqar sitting, 
praising God, and thank- 
ing Him. And he shouted 
B.M. MS. ‘ is crucified ’. 


Lit. ‘ his reason flew ’. 
Cod. ‘him’. 


193 





ARMENIAN 


The king 
said: Speak, Abusmaq, my 
servant and trusty one. If thou 
canst show me Khikar alive, I 
will give thee! byssus and purple 
and bestow on thee mighty pre- 
sents. 


And Abusmaq, when 
he heard this from the king, like 
a swiftly flying fowl, came unto 
me, and opened the door of my 
subterranean chamber, and led 
me forth. 


1 Bodl. ‘ will array thee in’. 


vant, well-doing and trusty. For thou hast not sinned. But of 
If thou showest me Khikar, I will give thee royal purples and 


3C 


9 


Ir 


I2 


13 


THE STORY?POFP ANIRARPOr ara. 


SYRIAC 


And 
forthwith the king mounted his 
chariot, and came unto me in 
haste, and opened [my prison] 
over me, and I ascended and 
came and fell before the king; 
the hair of my head had grown 
down on my shoulders, and my 
beard reached my breast ; and 
my body was foul with the dust, 
and my nails were grown long 
like eagles’. 

And when the king saw me, 
he wept and was ashamed to 
talk with me, and in great grief 
he said to me, ‘It was not I 
that sinned against thee, A hikar ; 
but thy son whom thou brought- 
est up, he it was that sinned 
against thee.’ 


Thereupon I 
answered and said to him, 
‘Because I have seen thy face, 
my lord, no evil is in my mind.’ 
And the king said to me, ‘ Go 
to thy house, Ahikar,and shave 
off thy hair, and wash thy body, 
and recover thy strength ? forty 
days; and after that come to 
me.’ 


: Dan. iv. 33. 
* Lit. “let thy soul come into thee’. 





I 


et 


I2 


13 


ARABIC 
to him, saying, ‘O Haiqar, 
I bring the greatest of 


joy, and happiness, and 
delight!’ And Haiqar said 
to him, ‘What is the news, 
O Abu Samik?’ And he 
told him all about Pharaoh 
from the beginning to the 
end. Then he took him and 
went to the king. And when 
the king looked at him, he 
saw him in a state of want, 
and that his hair had grown 
long like the wild beasts’ and 
his nails like the claws of an 
eagle, and that his body was 
dirty with dust, and the 
colour of his facehad changed 
and faded and was now like 
ashes. 


And when the king 
saw him he sorrowed over 
him and rose at once and 
embraced him and_ kissed 
him, and wept over him and 
said: ‘Praise be to God! 
who hath brought thee back 
to me. Then he consoled 
him and comforted him. 
And he stripped off his robe, 
and put it on the swordsman, 
and was very gracious to 
him, and gave him great 
wealth, and made Haigar 
rest. 


Then said Haigar to the 
king, ‘ Let my lord the king 
live for ever! These be the 
deeds of the children of the 
world. I have reared mea 
palm-tree that I might lean 


on it, and it bent sideways, 


14 


and threw me down. But, 
O my lord! since I have 
appeared before thee, let not 
care oppress thee.’ And the 
king said to him: ‘ Blessed 
be God, who showed thee 


* For the text of MS. Canon see below: 


And he sent me to the bath for them to wash and anoint me w 


i And they did so, and brought raiment 
king brought and set me close to him. And all that he had promised 


of the king on this point), 


of 


754 





ith fragrant oil 
great price and clad me in it. 
to Abusmaq he fulfilled amply. 


ARMENIAN 


And the colour of r1 


my face was changed and my 
head! was matted and my nails 
were grown like an eagle’s. 


When the king beheld me?, 
he bent his head and was 
ashamed to look in my face; 
and hardly looked in my face, 
his face being full of shame; 
and®* he said to me: O my loved 
and honourable brother Khikar, 
go to thy house and repair thy 
person for forty days, and then 
come unto me. And I did so. 
And I came back again to the 
king, and the king said: I have 
sinned against thee, father Khi- 
kar. Not I is it that has sinned 
against thee, but Nathan thy 
sister’s son, whom thou didst 
bring up. 

And I fell on my face and 
kissed the earth before the king 
and said: Forasmuch as I have 
seen the face of the king, I am 
alive; and all evils are turned 
for me into wellbeing, foras- 
much as thy servant Khikar has 
found grace. 


The king said: Hast thou 
heard this, O honourable good 
Khikar, to wit, what the Egyp- 


* Canon: ‘the hair of my head.’ 
* Bodl. adds ‘in such plight ’. 


(omitting the direct speech 
And the 


12 


61 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 6.3 


SYRIAC 


Therefore I went to my house, 
and I was in my house about 
thirty days, and when I was re- 
covered !, I came to the king, 
and the king answered and said 
to me: ‘Hast thou seen, Ahikar, 
what a letter Pharaoh, king of 
Egypt, has written me?’ 


1 Lit. ‘my soul was in order upon 


me’. 


Then the king brought the letter of Pharaon and gave it to me, and said: Read and give an answer to 


this letter. 


ARABIC 


mercy, and knew that thou 
wast wronged, and _ saved 
thee and delivered thee from 
being slain. But go to the 
warm bath, and shave thy 
head, and cut thy nails, and 
change thy clothes,and amuse 
thyself for the space of forty 
days, that thou mayst do 
good to thyself and improve 
thy condition and the colour 
of thy face may come back 
15 to thee.’ Then thes king 
stripped off his costly robe, 
and put it on Haiqar, and 
Haiqar thanked God and did 
obeisance to the king, and 
departed to his dwelling 
glad and happy, praising the 
Most High God. And the 
people of his household re- 
joiced with him, and _his 
friends and every one who 
heard that he was alive re- 
joiced also. 

And he did as the king 
commanded him, and took a 
rest for forty days. Then he 
dressed himself in his gayest 
dress, and went riding to the 
king, with his slaves behind 
him and before him, rejoicing 
and delighted. But when 
Nadan his sister’s son per- 
ceived what was happening, 
fear took hold of him and 
terror,and he was perplexed, 
not kncwing what to do. 
And when Haiqar saw it 
he entered into the king’s 
presence and greeted him, 
and he returned the greeting, 
and made him sit down at 
‘his side, saying to him, ‘O 
my darling Haiqar! look at 
these letters which the king 
of Egypt sent to us, after he 
had heard that thou wast 
slain. They have provoked 
us and overcome us, and 
many of the people of our 
country have fled to Egypt 
for fear of the taxes that the 
king of Egypt has sent to 
demand from us. Then 


61 


7595 








ARMENIAN 


tian has sent and that which is 
said, that the inhabitants of 
Nineveh and Asorestan are fled? 
And I said to the king: There- 
fore let a herald proclaim at the 
gate of thy palace, that Khikar 
is alive ; and all who shall hear 
it will return, each man to his 
place. 


And the king com- 
manded a herald to cry, saying : 
Khikar is alive; and that all 
the dwellers in Nineveh and 
Asorestan returned, each man 
to his place. 


3C4 


THE STORY: OF ATITK AIO micas 


SYRIAC ARABIC ARMENIAN 





Haiqar took the letter and 
read it and understood all its 
2 And | 2contents. Then he said to And I said to the king Sene- 6 1 

I answered and said, ‘My lord the king, ‘Be not wroth, O | qerim: Concerning this matter 
the king, let there be no trouble my lord! I willgoto Egypt, | which the Egyptian has sent, 
to thee over this affair. I will and I will return the answers | do thou not be anxious. I will 2 
go to Egypt and build the king to Pharaoh, and I will dis- | go and give him answer and 
a castle: and I will make him play this letter to him, and | will bring to thee the tribute 
answer concerning all that he I will reply to him about the | from Egypt. 
may ask me: and I will bring taxes, and I will send back 
back with me the three years’ all those who have run away ; 
tribute of Egypt.’ and I will put thy enemies to 


shame with the help of the 
Most High God, and for the 
happiness of thy kingdom.’ 


3 And when 3 And when the king heard When the king 3 
the king heard these things he this speech from Haiqar he | heard this he was glad, and 
rejoiced with a great joy: and rejoiced with a great joy,and | established Abusmaq at the 
he gave me gifts: and as for his heart was expanded and | head of the divan. And on the 
Nabusemakh! . . . he set him he showed him favour. And | morrow I wrote to Abestan my 
at the head of all. And after Haiqar said to the king: | wife and said as follows: 
this I wrote a letter to Eshfagni ‘Grant me a delay of forty 
my wife, as follows: days that I may consider 


this question and manage it.’ 
And the king permitted this. 
4 ‘When this letter reaches thee,| 4 And Haigdr went to his When thou readest this 4’ 


command my huntsmen that dwelling, and he commanded writing, do thou have caught 
they catch me two young eagles: the huntsmen to capture two | two nestlings of an eagle ail 
and command the workers in young eaglets for him, and | two children not yet aisle to 
flax, that they make me hempen they captured them and | taj; and two nursing women 
ropes ; the length of each one of brought them to him: and | to nurse the little ones aaa 
them shall be a thousand ells, he commanded the weavers they shall say: Clay, lime 
and their thickness that of one’s of ropes to weave two cables mortar, brick. eine nrticame 
little finger. of cotton for him, each of | stand idle. And have two ropes 


them two thousand cubits spun, the length thereof two 


long, and he had the car- | hundred ells, and the thickness 
penters brought and ordered | thereof one ell. 


them to make two great 
boxes, and they did this. 


5 And bid the car- | 5 Then he took two little lads, And cause a 
penters to make me cages for and spent every day sacri- carpenter to fit together two : 
the young eagles: and deliver ficing lambs and feeding the cages for the Nie and give 
over Ubael and Tabshelim, the eagles and the boys, and food to the eagles he me 
two boys, who do not yet know making the boys ride on the two lambs fe 3 ad ie 
how to talk, and let them teach backs of the eagles, and he children faue bound upon the 
them to say on this wise: “ Give bound them with a firm knot, eagles, and to make little Ai hts 
the builders mud, mortar, tiles, and tied the cable to the until ihe form the habit es 
bricks, for they are idle.”’ feet of the eagles, and let inehie a habituate thers until 


them soar upwards little by they soar aloft two hundred 
little every day, to a distance | gy 


of ten cubits, till they grew 
accustomed and were edu- 
cated to it; and they rose 
all the length of the rope till 
1 Ut supra. they reached the sky ; the 








And I took and read it, and said to the king: Send yon envo s to go to thei i 
out and fulfil the behests of Pharaon. _ : i tt 


And when they were gone, I, Khikar, Secretary, sent and had brought two eaglets, .. . 
756 


THEVSTORY OF AHIKAR "6, 628 


SYRIAC 


And Eshfagni my wife did all 
that I commissioned her: then 
I said to the king: ‘Command, 
my lord,and send me that I goto 
Egypt. And when the king 
commanded me to go, I took me 
a force of soldiers and went. 


7 And when we came to the first 
halting-place, I let out the 
young eagles and bound the 
ropes to their feet and made the 
boys ride on them; and they 
took them and went up to a 
height, and the boys cried out 
as they had been taught, ‘ Mud, 
mortar, tiles, bricks supply to 
the builders who are idle.’ Then 
I pulled them in again. 


And 
when we came to Egypt, I went 
to the king’s gate: and his 
nobles told the king, ‘ There is 
come the man whom the king of 
Assyria has sent.’ And the king 
commanded and gave mea place 
to reside in; and on the follow- 


ing day I came inbefore him and | 


worshipped him and inquired 
after his health’. 


1 Lit. ‘asked after his peace’. 








6 


7 


ARABIC 
boys being on their backs. 
Then he drew them to him- 
self, 

And when Haigqar saw that 
his desire was fulfilled he 
charged the boys that when 
they were borne aloft to the 
sky they were to shout, say- 
ing, ‘ Bring us clay and stone, 
that we may build a castle 
for king Pharaoh, for we are 
idle.” And Haiqar was never 
done training them and exer- 
cising them till they had 
reached the utmost possible 
point (of skill). Then leav- 
ing them he went to the king 
and said to him, ‘O my lord! 
the work is finished accord- 
ing to thy desire. Arise with 
me that I may show thee the 
wonder.’ Sothe king sprang 
up and sat with Haiqdr and 
went toa wide place and sent 
to bring the eagles and the 
boys, and Haigar tied them 
and let them off into the air 
all the length of the ropes, 
and they began to shout as 
he had taught them. Then 
he drew them to himself and 
put them in their places. 
And the king and those who 
were with him wondered 
with a great wonder: and 
the king kissed Haiqar be- 
tween his eyes and said to 
him, ‘Go in peace, O my 
beloved! O pride of my 
kingdom! to Egypt and 
answer the questions of 
Pharaoh and overcome him 
by the strength of the Most 
High God.’ 

Then he bade 
him farewell, and took his 
troops and his army and the 
young men and the eagles, 
and went towards the dwell- 
ings of Egypt; and when he 
had arrived, he turned to- 
wards the country of the 
king. And when the people 
of Egypt knew that Senna- 
cherib had sent a man of 
his Privy Council to talk 
with Pharaoh and to answer 
his questions, they carried 
the news to king Pharaoh, 


757 








ARMENIAN 


And Abestan my wife was 6 
very wise and did everything at 
once which I told her. Then 
the king commanded me to 
depart to Egypt. 


And when I 7 
reached the gate of Egypt, I 
brought the children’s cages, 
even as they were habituated. 
And I bound them upon the 
eagles; they flew up and soared 
aloft, and the children cried out 
and said: Clay, lime, mortar, 
brick. The artisans stand idle. 


And I, Khikar, took a rod, and 8 
I went after all whom | met 
and struck them blows (and 
said): Hurry up, give what the 
artisans ask for. The king of 
Egypt came up and was very 
astonished, and was glad and 
bade us make (the birds) come 
down. And he said: Come, 
rest them from their labours. 
Eat, drink, and be merry, and 
on the morrow come to me. 


Io 


II 


THE, STORY OF “Alii Rear re, 


SYRIAC 


And the king 
answered and said unto me, 
‘What is thy name?’ And I 
said to him, ‘My name is Abi- 
kam: one of the contemptible 
ants of the kingdom.’ And the 
king answered and said to me, 
‘Am I thus despised of thy lord, 
that he has sent me a despised 
ant of his kingdom? Go, Abi- 
kam, to thy lodging, and come 
to me early in the morning.’ 


Then the king commanded his 
nobles, ‘On the morrow clothe 
yourselves in red,’ and the king 
dressed himself in fine linen, 
and sat on his throne. And he 
commanded and I came into 
his presence: and he said to me, 
“To what am I like, Abikam, 
and to what are my nobles like ?’ 
And I answered and said to him, 
‘My lord the king, thou art like 
unto Bel, and thy nobles are like 
unto his priests.’ And again he 
said to me, ‘Go to thy lodging, 
and come to me on the morrow.’ 


And the king commanded his 
nobles, ‘On the morrow clothe 
yourselves in robes of white 
linen, and the king himself 
put on white and sat on his 
throne. And he commanded 
and I came into his presence: 
and he said to me, ‘ To what am 
I like, Abikam, and to what are 
my nobles like?’ And I said 
to him, ‘My lord the king, thou 
art like to the sun, and thy 
nobles to his rays.’ And again 
he said to me, ‘Get thee to thy 
lodging, and come to me to- 
morrow. 





ARABIC 

and he sent a party of his 

Privy Councillorstobring him 

before him?. And he came 

and entered into the presence 
of Pharaoh,and did obeisance 
to him as it is fitting to do 
9 to kings. And he said to 
him: ‘O my lord the king! 
Sennacherib the king hails 
thee with abundance of peace 
and might, and honour ; and 
he has sent me, who am one 
of his slaves, that I may 
answer thee thy questions, 
and may fulfil all thy desire: 
for thou hast sent to seek 
from my lord the king a man 
who will build thee a castle 
between the heaven and the 
earth. 
IO And I by the help of 
the Most High God and thy 
noble favour and the power 
of my lord the king will 
build [it] for thee as thou 
desirest. But, O my lord 
the king! what thou hast 
said in it about the taxes of 
Egypt for three years—now 
the stability of a kingdom is 
strict justice, and if thou win- 
nest and my hand hath no 
skill in replying to thee, 
then my lord the king will 
send thee the taxes which 
thou hast mentioned, and if 
I shall have answered thee 
in thy questions, it shall re- 
main for thee to send what- 
ever thou hast mentioned to 
my lord the king.’ 

And when Pharaoh heard 
thatspeech, he wondered and 
was perplexed by the free- 
dom of his tongue and the 
pleasantness of his speech. 


It 


1 Lit. ‘ betwixt his hands’. 


758 








ARMENIAN 


And when it was dawn the king 
called me and said: What is 
thy name?’ And I said: Abi- 
kam is my name. For I ama 
serf of Senegerim the king. 

And when the king heard, he 
was grieved exceedingly, and 
said: Have I seemed so con- 
temptible in the eyes of Sene- 
qerim the king of Asorestan, 
that he has sent a serf unto 
me to give me answer? And 
he said to me: Go unto thy 
house and to-morrow come to 
me. 

And when on the morrow I 
went, the king gave command 
to his forces to dress themselves 
in scarlet chlamid; and the 
king himself was arrayed in 
purple raiment, and sat on his 
throne, and his forces around 
him. He commanded and called 
me to him and said: Abikam, 
unto whom am I like? Or my 
forces, whom are they like? I 
said, Thou art like to the dig! 
and thy satraps to their priests. 
He said to me: Go to thy lodg- 
ings, and to-morrow come unto 
me. 


When I had gone to my 
house and came the next day 
to him, he had arrayed his forces 
in linen, and he himself was 
arrayed in scarlet, and he said 
to me: Unto whom am I like, 
or my forces, to whom are they 
like? And I said: Thou art 
like the sun and thy satraps are 
like its rays. 


Vie. ‘to God’. The plural aig 
literally = ‘demons’, but is used like 
the Hebrew Elohim as a singular. 
The same use is found in the Arm. 
version of Eusebius’ Chronzcon, Bk. 1. 
In the Arm. O.T. it is used as a 


| plural. 


9 


12 


DrLESOTORY OF AHIKAR 6. 


SYRIAC 


And again the king 
commanded his nobles, ‘ On the 
morrow clothe yourselves in 
black,’ and the king put on crim- 
son. And he commanded, and 
I came into his presence: and he 
said to me, ‘To what am I like, 
Abikam ; and to what are my 
nobles like?’ And I said to 
him, ‘My lord the king, thou 
art like to the moon, and thy 
nobles to the stars.’ And again 
he said to me, ‘ Go to thy house : 
and come to me _ to-morrow.’ 


13 And the king commanded his 


nobles, ‘ On the morrow dress in 
diverse and varied colours, and 
let the doors of the palace! be 
covered with red hangings.’ And 
the king himself was robed in 
fine needlework.?, And he com- 
manded and I came into his 
presence: and he said to me, 
‘To what am I like, Abikam? 
and my nobles, to what are 
they like?’ And I said to him, 
‘My lord the king, thou art 
like to the month Nisan, and 
thy nobles to its flowers. Then 


14 the king said to me, ‘ The first 


15 


time thou didst compare me to 
Bel, and my nobles to his priests. 
The second time thou hast com- 
pared me to the sun, and my 
nobles to its rays. The third 
time thou hast compared me to 
the moon, and my nobles to the 
stars. And the fourth time 
thou hast likened me to Nisan, 
and my nobles to the flowers 
thereof. And now tell me, 
Abikam, to what is ¢hy lord 
like?’ 

And I answered and 
said to him, ‘ Be it far from me, 
my lord the king, that I should 
make mention of my lord Sen- 
nacherib, whilst thou art seated. 


16 My lord Sennacherib is like® 


1 Lit. ‘temple’: but as in Daniel, 
it means palace; cf. Dan. Iv. 4, ols 
Nebuchadnezzar, was at rest In my 
house, and flourishing in my palace 
bon’ ; Dan. vi. 18, ‘ Then the king 
went to his palace 773°.’ Cf. also 
1 Reg. xxi. 1; 2 Reg. xx. 18, &c. 

2 «Dressed in tapestry. 

3 An erasure has been made of two 
words, and these are now illegible. 








ARABIC 


12 And king Pharaoh said to 
him, ‘O man! what is thy 
name?’ And he said, ‘ Thy 
servant is Abiqam, and I am 
a little ant of the ants of king 
Sennacherib.’ And Pharaoh 
said to him, ‘ Had thy lord 
no one of higher dignity than 
thee, that he has sent me 
a little ant to reply to me, 
and to converse with me?’ 


15 And Haiqar said to him, ‘O 
my lord the king! I would 
to God Most High that I 
may fulfil what is on thy 
mind, for God is with the 
weak that He may confound 
the strong.’ 


Then Pharaoh 
commanded that they should 
prepare a dwelling for Abi- 
qam and supply him with 
provender, meat, and drink, 
and all that he needed. And 
when it was finished, three 
days afterwards Pharaoh 
clothed himself in purple and 
red and sat on his throne, 
and all his viziers and the 
magnates of his kingdom 
were standing with their 
hands crossed, their feet close 
together, and their heads 
1s bowed. And Pharaoh sent 

to fetch Abiqdm, and when 
he was presented to him, he 
did obeisance before him,and 
kissed the ground in front 
16 ofhim!. And king Pharaoh 


14 


1 Lit. ‘between his hands’. 


759 








r2—-16 


ARMENIAN 


And again he 12 


said to me: Go to thy lodgings, 
and on the morrow come to 
me. 


And when I went on the 
morrow, he commanded the 
satraps to array themselves in 
dyed raiment, and he arrayed 
himself in raiment of plumes, 
and sat on his throne and said 
to me: To whom am [I like? 
I said: Thou art like to the 
green grass? and thy satraps 
to the blossoms thereof. 


Then the king was glad and 
said: Tell me the truth. Sene- 
qerim the king, to whom is he 
like? I said: God forbid that 
thou shouldst mention Sene- 
qerim the king, since thou art 
sitting down. But stand up, 
and I will tell thee. When he 


13 


had risen up, I said: Senegerim 16 


1 Venice MS. =‘ to the plain’. 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 6, 16 (17-26 Arab.) 





SYRIAC ARABIC ARMENIAN ae 

[the God of Heaven] and his said to him, ‘O Abiqam, | the king is like oer: oo 
nobles to the lightnings that are whom am I like? and the | and hissatraps to the lig mcs 
in the clouds: for when he wills, nobles of my kingdom, to When he willeth, he weavet 
he fashions the rain and the dew whom are they like?’ And | the rain’; and he shooteth out 
[and] the hail ; and if he thun- Haiqar said to him, ‘O my | the dew on high, he sendeth it 
ders, he restrains the sun from lord the king! thou art like | forth in his empery. He thun- 
rising, and its rays from being the idol Bel, and the nobles ders, and imprisons the rays of 
seen; and he will restrain Bel of thy kingdom are like his the sun. And when he willeth, 
from coming in and from going servants. He said to him, | he doth bring hail and grindeth 
forth in the street, and his nobles ‘Go, and come back hither | to dust tree, green herb and 
from being seen; and he will to-morrow.’ So Haiqar went | dry; and he makes the dawn 
hinder the moon from rising and as king Pharaoh had com- | break and smiteth the shoots 
the stars from appearing.’ manded him. of green grass. 

Perhaps the original text was ‘the 1 Bodl. = ‘the material of rain’. 


God of Heaven’, which was erased 
to make way for ‘the idol Bel’, but 
this correction was a stupid one, see- 
ing that Pharaoh has himself been 
compared to the great god Bel; hence 
perhaps a final erasure. The Arabic 
has ‘ my lord is the God of Heaven’, 
which is sufficiently audacious to 
invite correction. Mrs. Lewis by the 
use of a reagent has brought up the 
word Bel, and perhaps the whole 
expression ‘ our god Bel’. 








ARABIC 


17 And on the morrow Haiqar went into the presence of Pharaoh, and did obeisance, and stood before 
18 the king. And Pharaoh was dressed in a red colour, and the nobles were dressed in white. And 
Pharaoh said to him, ‘O Abiqam, whom am I like? and the nobles of my kingdom, to whom 
are they like?’ And Abiqam said to him, ‘O my lord! thou art like the sun, and thy servants 
are like [its] beams.’ And Pharaoh said to him, ‘Go to thy dwelling, and come hither to-morrow.’ 
19 Then Pharaoh commanded his Court to wear pure white!, and Pharaoh was dressed like them and 
sat upon his throne, and he commanded them to fetch Haiqar. And he entered and sat down before 
zohim. And Pharaoh said to him, ‘O Abiqam, whom am I like? and my nobles, to whom 
are they like?’ And Abigdm said to him, ‘O my lord! thou art like the moon, and thy nobles 
are like the planets and the stars.’ And Pharaoh said to him, ‘Go, and to-morrow be thou here.’ 
21 Then Pharaoh commanded his servants to wear robes of various colours, and Pharaoh wore a red 
velvet dress, and sat on his throne, and commanded them to fetch Abiqam. And he entered and 
22 did obeisance before him. And he said, ‘O Abiqam, whom am I like? and my armies, to whom 
are they like ?’ And he said, ‘O my lord! thou art like the month of April, and thy armies are like 
23 its flowers.’ And when the king heard it he rejoiced with a great joy, and said, ‘O Abigdm! the 
first time thou didst compare me to the idol Bel, and my nobles to his servants. And the second 
time thou didst compare me to the sun, and my nobles to the sunbeams. And the third time thou 
didst compare me to the moon, and my nobles to the planets and the stars. And the fourth time thou 
24 didst compare me to the month of April, and my nobles to its flowers. But now, O Abiqém ! 
tell me, thy lord, king Sennacherib, whom is he like? and his nobles, to whom are they like?’ And 
Haiqar shouted with a loud voice and said : ‘ Be it far from me to make mention of my lord the king 
and thou seated on thy throne. But get up on thy feet that I may tell thee whom my lord the 
king is like and to whom his nobles are like.’ 
25 And Pharaoh was perplexed by the freedom of his tongue and his boldness in answering. Then 
Pharaoh arose from his throne, and stood before Haigar, and said to him, ‘ Tell me now, that 
26I may perceive whom thy lord the king is like, and his nobles, to whom they are like.’ And 
Haiqar said to him: ‘ My lord is the God of heaven, and his nobles are the lightnings and the thunder, 
and when he wills the winds blow and the rain falls. And he commands the thunder, and it 
lightens and rains, and he holds the sun, and it gives not its light, and the moon and the stars, and 
they circle not. And he commands the tempest, and it blows and the rain falls and it tramples 
on April and destroys its flowers and its houses.’ 


? Or a dress completely white. 


760 


ATE STORY cOB 


SYRIAC 


And 
when the king heard these 
things he was exceeding wroth, 
and said to me, ‘ By the life of 
thy lord, I adjure thee tell me 
what is thy name?’ 


And I 
answered and said to him, ‘Iam 
Ahikar the Secretary and Great 
Seal of Sennacherib king of 
Assyria and Nineveh.’ 


And the 
king said to me, ‘ Did J not cer- 
tainly hear that thy lord had 
killed thee?’ And I said to 
him, ‘I am yet alive, my lord 
the king: and God saved me 
from something which my hands 
did not.’ 


And the king said to 
me, ‘Go, Ahikar, to thy house, 
and come to me to-morrow, and 
tell me a word which I never 


heard nor any one of my nobles, | 


and which was never heard in the 
city of my kingdom.’ 





AHIKAR 6. 17-20 (27-30 


27 


28 


Zo 


ARABIC 


And when Pharaoh heard 
this speech, he was greatly 
perplexed and was wroth 
with a great wrath, and said 
to him: ‘O man! tell me the 
truth, and let me know who 
thou really art.’ 

And he told him the truth. 
‘I am Haigar the scribe, 
greatest of the Privy Coun- 
cillors of king Sennacherib, 
and J am his vizier and the 
Governor of his kingdom, 
and his Chancellor.’ 

And he said to him, ‘ Thou 
hast told the truth in this 
saying. But we have heard 
of Haiqar, that king Senna- 
cherib has slain him, yet 
thou dost seem to be alive 
and well.’ And Haiqar said 
to him, ‘ Yes, so it was, but 
praise be to God, who 
knoweth what is hidden, for 
my lord the king commanded 
me to be killed, and he be- 
lieved the word of profligate 
men, but the Lord delivered 
me, and blessed is he who 
trusteth in Him.’ 

And Pharaoh said to Hai- 
qar, ‘Go, and to-morrow be 
thou here, and tell me a word 
that I have never heard from 
my nobles nor from the peo- 
ple of my kingdom and my 
country.’ 





Arab., 17-24 Arm.) 


ARMENIAN 


The king said: Tell me, what 
is thy name? I said: Khikar 
ismyname. Hesaid: Wretch, 
hast thou come to life? And I 
said: Since I have seen thy face, 
O king, I am alive. The king 
said: May this day be blessed, 
for I have seen Khikar with my 
own eyes alive, with my own 
eyes. 

And I fell on my face and 
did homage to him and kissed 
him. The king said: Expound 
this saying. 

There stands a pillar, and 
upon that pillar twelve cedars, 
and upon them thirty wheels, 
and upon each wheel two 
couriers}, the one black and 
the other white. And I said: 
O king, this the cowherds of 
the Asores know. The pillar 
of which thou spakest is the 
year and the cedars are the 
twelve months. The thirty 
wheels are the days of the 
months. The two couriers, the 
one black and the other white, 
are dawn and nightfall *. 


The king said, What is this 
story, that from Egypt as far as 
Nineveh there are 500 leagues 
—how did our mares hear the 
neighing of your stallions and 
miscarry? I, Khikar, went out 
from him, and I took a cat and 
scolded and tortured it. Then 
they told the king, saying: 
Khikar flouts the ag and tor- 
tures the cats. The king called 
meand said: Khikar, wherefore 
dost thou flout our dg and 
torture the cats? And I said: 
Yon cat has done harm enough 
to me. Aforetime the king 
gave to me a cock; sweet of 
voice was it, and at each hour 
it awoke me, to go to the king’s 
palace. This very night (the 
cat) went off and bit off the 
head of the cock and came back 
here. And the king said to me 
as follows: It appears that as 
thou growest old, in the same 


1 The Arm. word has this meaning. 

2 After the explanation of the pillar 
MS. Canon passes direct to the rope 
of sand incident, as does the Syriac. 


17 
18 


7 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR? 7) 125 


SYRIAC 


Then I sat down and me- 
ditated in my heart and wrotea 
letter as follows: 

‘From Pharaoh, king of 
Egypt, to Sennacherib, king of 
Assyria and Nineveh, greeting. 
2 ‘Kings have need of kings 
and brethren of brethren: and 
at thistime my gifts are become 
scant, because silver is scarce in 
my treasury: command, there- 
fore, to send me from thy 
treasury goo talents of silver, 
and in a little while I will return 
them to their place.’ 


3. This letter, then, I folded and 
held it in my hands: and the 
king commanded and I came 
into his presence, and I said to 
him, ‘Perhaps in this letter 
there is a word that was never 
heard by thee.’ And when I 
read it before the king and before 
his nobles, they cried out, as 
they were ordered by the king 
to do, and said, ‘ This has been 
heard by all of us, and it is so.’ 

4 Whereupon I said to them, 
“Behold, [in that case] there is 
a debt of goo talents from Egypt 
to Assyria.’ And when the king 
heard this, he marvelled. 


Then 
he said to me, ‘I am planning 
to build a castle between earth 
and heaven. Its height from 
the earth shall be one thousand 
fathoms.’ 








ARABIC 


And Haiqar went to his 
dwelling, and wrote a letter, 
saying in it on this wise: 

‘From Sennacherib king 
of Assyria and Nineveh to 
Pharaoh king of Egypt. 

2." Peace be to, theasO many. 
brother! and what we make 
known to thee by this is that 
a brother has need of his 
brother, and kings of each 
other, and [my] hope from 
thee is that thou wouldst 
lend me nine hundred talents 
of gold, for I need it for the 
victualling of some of the 
soldiers, that I may spend [it] 
upon them. And after a 
little while I will send it 
thee.’ Then he folded the 
letter, and presented it on 
the morrow to Pharaoh. 

3 And when he saw it, he was 
perplexed and said to him, 
‘Verily I have never heard 
anything like this language 

4 from any one. Then Hai- 
qar said to him, ‘ Truly this 
is a debt which thou owest 
to my lord the king’? And 
Pharaoh accepted this, say- 
ing, ‘O Haigaéar, it is the like 
of thee who are honest in the 
service of kings. Blessed be 
God who hath made thee 
perfect in wisdom, and hath 
adorned thee with philo- 

5 sophy and knowledge. And 
now, O Haiqdr, there re- 
mains what we desire from 
thee, that thou  shouldst 
build us a castle between 
heaven and earth.’ 


762 


71 





ARMENIAN 
measure your words and wisdom 
are changed round. From 


Egypt to Nineveh there are 
5001 leagues. How then in a 
single night could a cat bite off 
the head of the cock and come 
back hither? But I said: How 
could your mares hear the 
neighing and miscarry? 


The king said: Leave this. 25 


Come and weave me a rope of 
sand. When I had gone out 
from him, the king said to all 
those with him: Whatever 
Khikar says, ye shall say, ‘We 
know and have heard this say- 
ing.’ 


And I took and wrote a letter 7 1 


thus: From Senegerim king, all 
hail to Pharaon king of Egypt. 


Brethren have need of brethren 2 
to behold them and kings of 
kings. In this season expenses 
and debts enough have there 
been and silver is wanting in 
our treasuries. So then give 
orders and have brought to me 
by dispatch a hundred talents 
of silver. And I fastened up 3 
the letter and went in to the 
king and said: In this dispatch 
I have written of a matter, of 
which neither your city? nor 
your satraps have heard. And 
they all said: We have heard 
and we know this matter of 
yours. But I said: If ye have 
heard, say then before ye have 
opened the letter. And they 
could not say, but opened and 
read it. I said: Ye have heard 
what is written. The king said?: 4 
If a rope of sand thou weavest 
not for me, thou shalt not carry 


? MS. Canon has 360. 

® 92 adds ‘nor your king’. 

* Canon =‘and Pharaon said: 
Weave me a rope of sand, in length 
nine ells. And I said: My lord king, 
order them to bring forth from your 
treasury a model that I may see and 
according to the model make it, that 
it be not too thick or too thin. And 
Pharaon said: In my treasury is 
none. But unless thou weave it, thou 
carniest not off the silver, which by 
thy wisdom thou hast sought and I 
promised.’ 


Lae STORY OF AHIKAR 7. 


SYRIAC 


Then I brought out 
the young eagles and bound the 
ropes to their feet, and set the 
boys on their backs; and they 
were saying, ‘Provide mud, 
mortar; [foreman, mix] tiles 
and bricks for the builders, 
because they are idle.’ And 
when the king saw it, he was 
confounded. 


Then I, Ahikar, 
took a switch and beat the king’s 
nobles, till they all took to flight. 
Then the king was indignant 
with me, and said to me, ‘ Thou 
art gone clean mad, Ahikar: 
who is able to carry up any- 
thing to these boys?’ 


And I 
said to him, ‘Concerning the 
affairs of Sennacherib my lord, 
say ye nothing; for if he had 
been at hand, he would have 
built a couple of castles in one 
day.’ And the king said to me, 
‘Have done with the castle, 
Ahikar, and go to thy lodging ; 
and in the morning come to me.’ 


6 thou desirest’. 


ARABIC 

Then said Haiqar, ‘To 
hear is to obey. Iwill build 
thee a castle according to thy 
wish and choice ; but, O my 
lord! prepare us lime and 
stone and clay and workmen, 
and I have skilled builders 
who will build for thee as 
And _ the 
king prepared all that for 
him, and they went to a wide 
place; and Haiqar and his 
boys came to it, and he took 
the eagles and the young 
men with him; and the king 
and all his nobles went and 
the whole city assembled, 
that they might see what 
Haiqar would do. 

Then Haiq4r let the eagles 
out of the boxes, and tied the 
young men on their backs’, 
and tied the ropes to the 
eagles’ feet, and let them go 
in the air. And they soared 
upwards, till they remained 
between heaven and earth. 
And the boys began to shout, 
saying, ‘Bring bricks, bring 
clay, that we may build the 
king’s castle, for we are 
standing idle!’ 


» And the crowd were aston- 


ished and perplexed, andthey 
wondered. And the king 
and his nobles wondered. 
And Haiqar and his servants 
began to beat the workmen, 
and they shouted for the 
king’s troops, saying to them, 
‘Bring to the skilled work- 
men what they want and do 
not hinder them from their 
work. And the king said 
to him, ‘ Thouart mad; who 
can bring anything up to 


8 that distance?’ And Haiqar 


said to him, ‘O my lord! 
how shall we build a castle 
in the air? and if my lord 
the king were here, he would 
have built several castles in 
asingle day. And Pharaoh 
said to him, ‘Go, O Haiqar, 
to thy dwelling, and rest, for 
we have given up? building 


1 Lit. ‘on the eagles’ backs’. 


2 Lit. ‘we have passed away from’. 


763 


6-8 


ARMENIAN 


away the tribute from Egypt. 
And I went into a deeply dug 
chamber, and perforated the 
wall of the chamber on the side 
whence the dawn shone; and 
when the dawn gleamed forth, 
it flashed into the chamber seven 
ells; and I took up dust of sand 
and cast it into the hole bored 
and blew into it. It appeared 
like woven twists, and I said: 
Give orders, O king, that they 
collect yon ropes and I will 
weave yet others. 

When the king saw this he 5 
laughed and said: Blessed art 
thou before the dg. And he 
gave me very great presents, 
and allowed the tribute from 
Egypt and well and gladly dis- 
missed me, and I departed. 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 7. 9-14 


SYRIAC 


9 And when it was morning, I 
came into his presence, and he 
said to me, ‘Explain to me, 
Ahikar, the following matter. 
The horse of thy lord neighs in 
Assyria, and our mares hear his 
voice here, and their foals mis- 
carry.’ 


Io Then I went forth from 
the king’s presence, and com- 
manded my servants to catch 
mea cat, and I whipped it in 
the streets of the city ; and when 
the Egyptians saw it, they went 
and told the king that ‘ Ahikar 
has acted contemptuously of our 
people and makes mock of us. 
For he has caught a cat and 
whips it in the streets of our 
city.’ 

II And the king sent for me 
and called me; and I came into 
his presence. 


12 And he said to 
me, ‘In what way art thou in- 
sulting us?’ and I answered 
and said to him, ‘This cat has 
seriously damaged me in no 
slight matter; for a cock had 
been entrusted to me by my 
lord, whose voice was extremely 
beautiful, and by the time that 
he crowed I understood that 
my lord wished for me, and I 
went to the gate of my lord. 
And in this past night this cat 
went to Assyria and tore off the 
head of this cock of mine and 

13 returned.’ And the king an- 
swered and said to me, ‘As far 
as I can see, Ahikar, since thou 
art grown old thou art become 
stark mad. For it is 360 para- 
sangs from here to Assyria; and 
how canst thou say that in a 
single night this cat went and 
cut off the head of the cock and 
came back?’ 

14 Then I said to 
him, ‘ And if it is 360 parasangs 
from Egypt to Assyria, how do 
thy mares in this place hear the 
voice of the horse of my lord, 
and their foals miscarry ?? 





ARABIC 


the castle, and to-morrow 
come to me’. 

9 Then Haigar went to his 
dwelling and on the morrow 
he appeared before Pharaoh. 
And Pharaoh said, ‘O Hai- 
qar, what news is there of the 
horse of thy lord? for when 
he neighs in the country of 
Assyria and Nineveh, and 
our mares hear his voice, they 

1o cast their young.’ And when 
Haiqar heard this speech he 
went and took a cat, and 
bound her and began to flog 
her with a violent flogging 
till the Egyptians heard it, 
and they went and told the 
king about it. 


II And Pharaoh 
sent to fetch Haigar, and said 
to him, ‘O Haiqar, wherefore 
dost thou flog thus and beat 

12 that dumb beast?’ And 
Haigar said to him, ‘O my 
lord the king! verily she has 
done an ugly deed to me, 
and has deserved this drub- 
bing and flogging, for my 
lord king Sennacherib had 
given me a fine cock, and he 
had a strong true voice and 
knew the hours of the day 
and the night. And the cat 
got up this very night and 
cut off its head and went 
away, and because of this 
deed I have treated her to 

13 thisdrubbing.’ And Pharaoh 
said to him, ‘O Haiqar, I see 
from all this that thou art 
growing old and art in thy 
dotage, for between Egypt 
and Nineveh there are sixty- 
eight parasangs, and how did 
she go this very night and 
cut off the head of thy cock 
and come back ?’ 

14 And Haiqdr said to him, 
“O my lord! if there were 
such a distance between 
Egypt and Nineveh, how 
could thy mares hear when 
my lord the king’s horse 
neighs and cast their young ? 


764 


15 


~ 16 


17 


18 


we 


20 


THE 


SYRIAC 


And 
when the king heard this, he was 
sore vexed, and he said to me, 
‘Ahikar, expound to me this 
riddle: A pillar has on its head 
twelve cedars; in every cedar 
there are thirty wheels, and in 
every wheel two cables, one 
white and one black.’ And I 
answered and said to him, ‘My 
lord the king, the ox-herds in 
our country understand this 
riddle that thou tellest. The 
pillar of which thou hast spoken 
to me is the year; the twelve 
cedars are the twelve months of 
the year ; the thirty wheels are 
the thirty days of the month ; 
the two cables, one white and 
one black, are the day and the 
night.’ 

Again he said to me, ‘ Twine 
me five cables from the sand of 
the river.’ And I said to him, 
‘My lord the king, bid them 
bring me from thy treasury one 
rope of sand, and I will make 
one to match it.’ Then he said 
to me, ‘ Unless thou do this, I 
will not give thee the Egyptian 
tribute. Thereupon I sat down 
and calculated in my heart how 
I should doit. And I went out 
from the king’s palace’ and 
bored five holes in the eastern 
wall of the palace. And when 
the sun entered the holes I 
scattered sand in them, and the 
sun’s path? began to appear as 
if [the sand] were twined in the 
holes. Then I said to the king ; 
‘My lord, bid them take up 
these, and I will weave you 
others in their stead. And 
when the king and his nobles 
saw it, they were amazed. 

And again the king com- 
manded to bring me an upper 
millstone that was broken: and 
he said to me, ‘ Ahikar, sew up 
for us this broken millstone.’ 
Then I went and brought a 
nether? millstone, and cast it 
down before the king and said 

1 Lit. ‘temple ’, ¢ supra. 

2 Lit. ‘furrow’. 

$ Lit, ‘the mortar of a millstone’. 





STORY OF AHIKAR 7, 15-20 


ARABIC 


and how could the voice of 
the horse reach to Egypt?’ 
And when Pharaoh heard 
that, he knew that Haiqar had 
answered his questions. 


And 
Pharaoh said, ‘O Haiqar, I 
want thee to make me ropes 
of the sea-sand.’ And Hai- 
qar said to him, ‘O my lord 
the king! order them to 
bring me a rope out of the 
treasury that I may make 
one like it. Then Haiqar 
went to the back of the 
house, and bored holes in the 
rough shore of the sea, and 
took a handful of sand 
in his hand, sea-sand, and 
when the sun rose, and pene- 
trated into the holes, he 
spread the sand in the sun 
till it became as if woven 
like ropes. And Haigar said, 
‘Command thy servants to 
take these ropes, and when- 
ever thou desirest it, I will 
weave thee (some) likethem.’ 


16 


17 And Pharaoh said, ‘O Hai- 
qar, we have a millstone 
here and it has been broken 
and I want thee to sew it up.’ 
Then Haigar looked at it, 
and found another stone. 

18 And he said to Pharaoh, ‘ O 
my lord! I am a foreigner, | 
and I have no tool for sew- . 
ing. But I want thee; to | 
command thy faithful shoe- 


705 


THE STORY OF AMINAR Wie20-e2 


SYRIAC ARABIC 
to him, ‘ My lord the king, since makers to cut awls from this 
I am a stranger here, and have stone, that I may sew that 
not the tools of my craft with millstone.’ 


me, bid the cobblers cut me 
strips (?) from this lower mill- 
stone which is the fellow of the 
upper millstone; and forthwith 

21 I will sew it together.’ And 19 Then Pharaoh 
when the king heard it, he and all his nobles laughed. 
laughed and said, ‘The day in And he said, ‘ Blessed be the 
which Ahikar was born shall be Most High God, who gave 


blessed before the God of Egypt; thee this wit and knowledge.’ 
and since I have seen thee alive, | 29 And when Pharaoh saw that 
I will make it a great and appro- Haiqar had overcome him, 
priate day.’ and returned him hisanswers, 


he at once became excited, 
and commanded them to 
collect for him three years’ 
taxes, and to bring them to 


22 Then he gave me | ay Haiqar. And he stripped off 
the revenue of Egypt for three his robes and put them upon 
years, and straightway I returned Haiqar, and his soldiers, and 
and came to my lord the king his servants, and gave him 
Sennacherib: and he came forth the expenses of his journey. 
to meet me and received me. And he said to him, ‘ Go in 


peace, O strength of his lord 
and pride of his Doctors! 
have any of the Sultans thy 
like? give my greetings to! 
thy lord king Sennacherib, 
and say to him how we have 
sent him gifts, for kings are 
content with little.’ 

22 Then Haiqdar arose, and 
kissed king Pharaoh’s hands 
and kissed the ground in 
front of him, and wished him 
strength and continuance, 
and abundance in his trea- 
sury, and said to him, ‘Om 
lord! I desire from thee that 
not one of our countrymen 

23 May remainin Egypt.’ And 
Pharaoh arose and_ sent 
heralds to proclaim in the 
streets of Egypt that not one 
of the people of Assyria or 
Nineveh should remain in 
the land of Egypt, but that 
they should go with Haiqar. 
Then Haigar went and took 
leave of king Pharaoh, and 
journeyed, seeking the land of 
Assyria and Nineveh; and 
he had some treasures and a 
great deal of wealth. 





* Lit. ‘my peace upon’. 


766 


THE STORY 


SYRIAC 


23 And he madeita great day and 


set me at the head of his house- 
hold: and he said to me, ‘ Ask 
what thou wilt, Ahikar’; and I 
worshipped the king and said, 
‘Whatever thou willest to give 
me, bestow it upon Nabuse- 
makh . . .!; because he gave 
me my life; and for myself, my 
lord, bid them give me my son 
Nadan, that I may teach him a 
further lesson, For he has for- 
gotten my former teaching.’ 


Ut supra. 





ARABIC 

24 Andwhen the newsreached 
king Sennacherib that Hai- 
qar was coming, he went out 
to meet him and rejoiced 
over him exceedingly with 
great joy and embraced him 
and kissed him, and said to 
him, ‘Welcome home, O 
kinsman! my brother Hai- 
qar, the strength of my king- 
dom, and pride of my realm. 
Ask what thou wouldst have 
from me, even if thou desirest 
the half of my kingdom and 
of my possessions. Then 
said Haiqdr unto him, ‘O 
my lord the king, live for 
ever! Show favour, O my 
lord the king! to Abu Samik 
in my stead, for my life was 
in the hands of God and in 
his.’ 

25 Then said Sennacherib the 
king, ‘Honour be to thee, O 
my beloved Haiqar! I will 
make the station of Abu 
Samik the swordsman higher 
than all my Privy Coun- 
cillors and my favourites.’ 
Then the king began to ask 
him how he had got on with 
Pharaoh from his first arrival 
until he had come away from 
his presence, and how he had 
answered all his questions, 
and how he had received 
the taxes from him, and the 
changes of raiment and the 

26 presents. And Sennacherib 
the king rejoiced with a great 
joy, and said to Haiqar, 
‘Take what thou wouldst 
fain have of this tribute, for 
it is all within the grasp of 
thy hand. And _ Haiqar 
said: ‘Let the king live for 
ever! I desire naught but 
the safety of my lord the 
king and the continuance of 
his greatness. O my lord! 
what can I do with wealth 
and its like!? but if thou 
wilt show me favour, give me 
Nadan, my sister’s son, that 
I may recompense him for 
what he has done to me, and 
grant me his blood and hold 
me guiltless of it.’ 

1 y¢ here = dergleichen. 


767 





OF AHIKAR 7. 23 (24-26 Arab., 6-7 Arm.) 


ARMENIAN 
When the king Seneqerim 6 
heard of my coming, he went 
out to meet me with joy. When 
we had saluted each other, he 
took and led me into his palace 
and made me recline at the 
head of the couch; and made 
merry for several days, and 
bestowed on me very great 
presents, and said to me: O 
my father Khikar, ask of me 
other very great presents and I 
will give them to thee. And 7 
I bowed to the earth to him 
and said: O king, live for ever. 
Whatsoever thou wouldst bestow 
on me, bestow on Abusmaq 
my comrade, who gave life to 
thy servant. 


But to me thou 
shalt give Nathan my sister's 
son whom I taught!. For he 
hath not well learned my former 
lore. 


1 Canon = ‘sister's son, that{] may 
teach him another teaching’. 


24 


is} 
Ou 


26 


ee) 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 7. 24-8) 2 


SYRIAC 

And the king commanded and 
gave me my son Nadan; and 
the king said to me, ‘Go thy 
way, Ahikar, and work thy will 
on thy son Nadan; for no man 
shall rescue his body from thy 
hands.’ Thereupon I took Na- 
dan my son, and brought him to 
my house; and I bound him 
with iron chains whose weight 
was twenty talents, and I fas- 
tened the chains in rings, and I 
fastened collars on his neck; and 
I struck him one thousand blows 
on the shoulders and a thousand 
and one on his loins!; and I put 
him in the porch of the door of 
my palace, and gave him bread 
by weight and water by measure. 
And I delivered him to my boy 
Nabuel to guard, and told my 
boy, ‘Write down in a tablet 
whatever I say to my son Nadan, 
when I go in or come out.’ And 
I answered and said to my son 
Nadan as follows: 








a7 


ARABIC 

And Sennacherib the king 
said, ‘ Take him, I have given 
him to thee.’ And Haiqar 
took Nadan, his sister’s son, 
and bound his hands with 
chains of iron, and took him 
to his dwelling, and put a 
heavy fetter on his feet, and 
tied it with a tight knot, and 
after binding him thus he 
cast him into a dark room, 
beside the retiring-place, and 
appointed Nebu-hal as sen- 
tinel over him and com- 
manded him to give him a 
loaf of bread and a little 
water every day ; and when- 
ever Haiqar went in or out he 
scolded Nadan, his sister’s 
son, saying to him wisely : 





ARMENIAN 


And the king gave Nathan 
my sister's son into my hands, 
and I* bound him with a single 
chain of iron, which was of the 
weight of seven talents, at the 
door of my portico; and I en- 
trusted him to Béliar myservant. 
And I ordered him to scourge 
him on his back and belly. And 
I said to him in my coming in 
and going forth: Whatsoever I 
speak in proverbs with him, do 
thou write on paper and keep it 


8 


with thee ; and I gave to him a 9 


little bread and a little water. 
I began to speak and said as 
follows : 


The Parables of Ahikar, VIII. I~4I 


‘My son, he who does not hear 
with his ears, they make him 
hear with the nape of his neck.’ 


My son Nadan answered 
and said to me, ‘ Wherefore art 
thou so angry against thy 
son?’ 

I answered and said to him, 
‘My son,I set thee on the throne 
of honour; and thou hast cast 
me down from my throne. And 


* Cf. the punishment of the dis- 
obedient servant in the Gospel, dap;,- 
@eTat Todds, 





iy 


‘O Nadan, my boy! I have 
done to thee all that is good 
and kind, and thou hast re- 
warded me for it with what 
is ugly and bad and with 
killing. 

‘O my son! it is said in 
the proverbs: He who listen- 
eth not with his ear, they 
will make him listen with the 
scruff of his neck.’ 

And Nadan said, ‘For 
what cause art thou wroth 
with me?’ 

And Haiqar said to him, 
‘ Because I brought thee up, - 
and taught thee, and gave 
thee honour and respect and 
made thee great, and reared | 
thee with the best of breed-_ 
ing, and seated thee in my | 
place that thou mightest be 
my heir in the world, and_ 





And I 


768 


words 


Son, him that with his ears 
heareth not they make to hear 
through his back. 

Nathan began to speak and 
said: Wherefore art thou angry 
with me, my father? I havel 
sinned against thee, my father 
Khikar. If thou wilt have 
mercy on me, thy servant, I 
will even become to thee dust 
and ashes and a servant all the 
days of my life. 

And I said to him: 

Son, on the throne of glory 
I seated thee, and from my 
thronethou didst hurl meto ruin. 


Sa 


Ny 


Son, I in byssus and purples 3 


clad thee, and thou with earth 


wouldst have destroyed my 
body. 


Son, I raised thee on high 4 


* Canon, with Syriac, omits the 
wihavem uae of my life ’, 


) my pillar of iron, of which the weight 
smote a thousand blows (lit. trees) on 
of my portico. 
; and entrusted him to Beliar my servant, 


. And I gave him bread 
and I said to him: In my goings 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 8. 2-6 (7-10 Arm.) 


SYRIAC 


as for me, my righteousness! 
has saved me. 


Thou hast been to me, my 
son, like a scorpion, which 
strikes at a rock. And the rock 
said to it, ‘““ Thou hast struck at 
an unconcerned heart.” And it 


struck at a needle, and they say | 


to it, “ Thou hast struck at a 
sting worse than thy own.” 


My son, thou hast been to me 
like a gazelle that was standing 
over a sumach-tree and eating it. 
And the sumach-tree said to it, 
“Why eatest thou me, seeing 
that they tan thy skin with 
me?” And the gazelle said, “I 
eat thee in my life, and when I 
am dead they will pluck thee 
up by thy roots.”? 

My son, thou hast been to me 
like the man that threw a stone 
at the heaven, and it did not 
reach the heaven; but he in- 
curred sin against God. 

My son, thou hast been like 
the man who saw his com- 
panion shivering from cold, and 
took a pitcher of water and 
threw it over him. 


1 In the primitive sense of ‘alms- 
giving’? 

2 Apparently the point of the story 
is missed, which is that the sumach- 
tree has its revenge on the gazelle: 
‘thy skin shall be dyed with my roots 
presently.’ 


1105.2 


ARABIC 


thou didst treat me with 
killing and didst repay me 
with my ruin. But the Lord 
knew that I was wronged, 
and He saved me from the 
snare which thou hadst set 
for me, for the Lord healeth 
the broken hearts and hin- 
dereth the envious and the 
haughty. 


O my boy! thou hast 
been to me like the scorpion 
which, when it strikes on 
brass, pierces it. 


O my boy! thou art like 
the gazelle who was eating 
the roots of the madder, and 
it said to her, “ Eat of me to- 
day and take thy fill, and to- 
morrow they wiil tan thy 
hide in my roots.” 


O my boy! thou hast 
been to me like a man who 
saw his comrade naked in 
the chilly time of winter ; 
and he took cold water and 
poured it upon him. 

O my boy! thou hast 
been to me like a man 
who took a stone, and threw 
it up to heaven to stone his 
Lord with it. And the stone 
did not hit, and did not reach 
high enough, but it became 
the cause of guilt and sin. 


769 


ARMENIAN 


like a tower, so that if the enemy 
should come to me, I might go 
forth and fortify myself in thee ; 
and thou thyself hast been found 
to be the enemy in my house. 

Son, I gave thee to glory 5 
and honour; and thou didst 
betray me into the hands of 
enmity and death. 

Son, I nurtured! thee like 6 
the cub of the fox; and thine 
eye was on thine hole and my 
finger smooth was on thy mouth 
and thy fingers were sharpened 
upon my eyes. 

Son, my righteousness and 7 
innocency saved and rescued 
me; and thy injustice prospered 
thee not. 

Son, thou wast to me as a8 
scorpion which struck the needle. 
The needle said?: Behold a sting 
which is worse than thine own. 
Again he struck the sole of the 
foot of the camel, and he set 
his foot hard upon that scorpion 
andcrushed it and said: Captive, 
knewest thou not that thy breath 
and soul were under my feet ? 

Son, thou hast been to meg 

like a goat which was eating 
madder. Says the madder: 
Why eatest thou me? Knowest 
thou not that with my root they 
dye thy skin*? Said the goat: 
I in my lifetime eat thee, after 
my death they pluck up thy 
root and prepare (zz. build) my 
skin. 

Son, thou hast been to me ro 
like him that shot his arrow 
up to the heavens ; and he was 
not able to reach thereunto, but 
reaped the reward of his lawless- 
ness, and the arrow returned 
upon his head. 


1] render szoutz¢ of MS. Canon 
instead of ousoutzi = ‘taught’ of the 
other MSS. MS. Canon has the rest 
of the saying thus: ‘like the young 
of the eagle, and thy fingers were 
sharpened against my eyes. For 
thine eye was evil to look upon me.’ 

2 I supply the words ‘ The needle 
said’ from MS. Canon. The other 
copies omit it through Aomototeleuton. 

3 So MS. Canon; the other MSS. 
less well: ‘with me they work thy 
skin,’ 


3D 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR:8. 7-17 


SYRIAC 


7 My’ son, not when thou hadst 
killed me, wouldst thou have 
been able to stand in my place; 
for be well aware, my son, that 
even if the tail of the swine 
should grow to seven ells, he 
would never take the place of 
the horse: and even if his hair 
should become soft and woolly, 
he would never ride on the back 
of a free man.! 

8 My son, I said that thou 
shouldst be in my place; and 
thou shouldst acquire my house 
and my wealth, and inherit 
them. But God was not pleased 
therewith and has not heard thy 
voice. 


9 My son, thou hast been to 
me as the lion that came upon 
an ass in the morning of the day 
and said to him, “ Welcome, my 
lord Kyrios.” But the ass said 
to him, “ May the same welcome 
that thou givest me be the por- 
tion of him that tied me up last 
night, and did not make my 


halter fast, so that I had not | 


seen thy face.” 

1o My son, a snare was set? 
upon a dunghill, and there came 
a sparrow and looked at it and 
said, “ What doest thou here?” 
And the snare said, “Iam pray- 
ing to God.” The sparrow said, 
“And what is that in thy 
mouth?” The snare said, 
“ Bread for guests.” Then the 
sparrow drew near and took it, 
and the snare caught him by 
the neck. And the sparrow 
said, as he was being shaken, 
“If this is thy bread for guests, 
may the God to whom thou 
prayest never listen to thy 
VOICewe aa" 

tr My son, thou hast been to me 

as an ox that was bound with a 

lion; and the lion turned and 

crushed him, 


* We should expect ‘ the free man 
would never ride on his back’. 
* A Syriac play of words be- 


tween = disposuit lagueos and 


relun which follows. 








ARABIC 


7 Omy boy! if thou hadst 
honoured me and respected 
me and hadst listened to my 
words thou wouldst have 
been my heir, and wouldst 
have reigned over my domi- 
nions. 

8 O my son! know thou 
that if the tail of the dog or 
the pig were ten cubits long 
it would not approach to the 
worth of the horse’s even if 
it were like silk. 

O my boy! I thought 
that thou wouldst have been 
my heir at my death; and 
thou through thy envy and 
thy insolence didst desire to 
kill me. But the Lord de- 
livered me from thy cunning. 
to O my son! thou hast 

been to me like a trap which 

was set up on the dunghill, 
and there came a sparrow 
and found the trap set up. 

And the sparrow said to the 

trap, “What doest thou | 

here?” Said the trap, “lam 4) 

praying here to God.” 

And the lark! asked it 
also, “ What is the piece of 
wood that thou holdest?” | 

Said the trap, “That is a ; 

young oak-tree on which © 

I lean at the time of prayer.” 

Said the lark: “And what is 

that thing in thy mouth?” 

Said the trap: “That is 

bread and victuals which 

I carry for all the hungry 

and the poor who come near 

tome.” Said the lark: “Now 

then may I come forward . 

and eat, for I am hungry?” 

And the trap said to him, 

‘Come forward.’ And the 

lark approached that it might 

eat. But the trap sprang up 
and seized the lark by its 
neck, And the lark answered 
and said to the trap, “If that 
is thy bread for the hungry © 


\o 


? For this rendering of cold See 
Payne Smith’s Zhes. Syr. col. 3555) | 
Sub PAswAAD. 


110 


12 


13 


I 4 


15 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 8. 12-17 


SYRIAC 


My son, thou hast been to me 
like the weevil that is in the 
corn, which destroys kings’ 
granaries, and is itself of no 
account. 

My son, thou hast been to me 
like the pot, to which they 
made golden handles1, but its 
bottom was not cleansed from 
blackness. 

My son, thou hast been to me 
like a husbandman that sowed 
a field with twenty measures of 
barley ; and when he reaped it, 
it made him twenty measures. 
And he said to it: “What I 
scattered, I have gathered, but 
thou art shamed with thine evil 
name, in that thou hast made a 
bushel into a bushel?: and I, 
[how] am I to live?” 


My son, thou hast been to me 
like the ... bird that could 
not save himself from death, 


_ and by his voice slaughtered his 


16 


17 


companions.® 

My son, thou hast been to me 
like the buck that led his com- 
panions into the  slaughter- 
house; and yet he did not save 
his own life. 

My son, thou hast been to me 
like the dog that came to the 
potters’ oven to warm himself, 
and after he was warm rose up 
to bark at them. 


1 Lit. Sears’. 
2 Cf. Matt. xxv. 24-7. 
3 Reading wala. 


ARABIC 


God accepteth not thine alms 
and thy kind deeds. And if 
that is thy fasting and thy 
prayers, God accepteth from 
thee neither thy fast nor thy 
prayer, and God will not 
perfect what is good concern- 
ing thee.” 

O my boy! thou hast 
been to me (as) a lion who 
made friends with an ass, 
and the ass kept walking 
before the lion for a time; 
and one day the lion sprang 
upon the ass and ate it up. 

O my boy! thou hast 
been to me like a weevil in 
the wheat, for it does no good 
to anything, but spoils the 
wheat and gnaws it. 


It 


pee 


12’ © my boy! thou hast 
been like a man who sowed 
ten measures of wheat, and 
when it was harvest time, he 
arose and reaped it, and 
garnered it, and threshed it, 
and toiled over it to the very 
utmost, and it turned out to 
be ten measures, and its 
master said to it: “O thou 
lazy thing! thou hast not 
grown and thou hast not 
shrunk.” ! 

O my boy! thou hast 
been to me like the partridge 
that had been thrown into 
the net, and she could not 
save herself, but she called 
out to the partridges, that 
she might cast them with 
her(self) into the net. 

O my son! thou hast 
been to me like the dog that 
was cold and it went into the 
potter's house to get warm. 
And when it had got warm, 
it began to bark at them, 
and they chased it out and 
beat it, that it might not bite 
them. 


13 


14 


1 This meaning Of 53 will be found 
in Lane, p. 1776, col. 3. 


77% 











ARMENIAN 


Son, thou hast been tour 
me like the sower, who sowed 
ten bushels, and gathered five 
bushels, and the rest failed. 


3D2 


18 


19 


20 


21 


23 


24 


THE 


SYRIAC 


My son, thou hast been to me 
like the swine that had been to 
the baths, and when it saw a 
muddy ditch, went down and 
washed in it, and cried to its 
companions, “Come and wash.” 

My son, my finger is upon thy 
mouth, and thy finger is upon 
my eyes. Why have I brought 
thee up, thou jackal, that thy 
eyes look thus upon apples ? 


My son, the dog that eats of 
his hunting will become the por- 
tion of wolves: and the hand 
that is not industrious shall be 
cut off from its shoulder: and 
the eye in which there is no 
vision the raven shall pluck it 
out. 

What good hast thou done 
me, my son, that I remembered 
thee and that my soul had com- 
fort in thee?! 

My son, if the gods steal, by 
whom shall they make them to 
swear? And a lion that steals a 
piece of land, how will he sit 
down and eat it? 

My son, I caused thee to be- 
hold the face of the king, and 
brought thee to great honour: 
and thou hast chosen to do me 
evil. 

My son, thou hast been to me 
like the tree that said to its 
woodcutters, “If there had not 
been somewhat from me in your 
hands, ye had not fallen upon 
me, 


* We should have expected, ‘ that 
I might remember thee and that my 
soul might have comfort in thee’. 











STORY OF AHIKAR 8. 18-24 


ARABIC 


O my son! thou hast 
been to me like the pig who 
went into the hot bath with 
people of quality, and when 
it came out of the hot bath, 
it saw a filthy hole! and it 
went down and wallowed in 
it; 
16 


15 


O my son! thou hast 
been to me like the goat 
which joined its comrades 
(on their way) to the sacri- 
fice, and it was unable to 
save itself. 

O my boy! the dog which 
is not fed from its hunting 
becomes food for flies. 

O my son! the hand 
which does not labour and 
plough and (which) is greedy 
and cunning shall be cut 
away from its shoulder. 

O my son! the eye in 
which light is not seen, the 
ravens shall pick at it and 
pluck it out. 


17 


18 


nah!) 


O my boy! thou hast 
been to me like a tree whose 
branches they were cutting, 
and it said to them, “If 
(something) of me were not 
in your hands, verily you 
would be unable to cut me.” 


20 


1 Gare means a hollow place, s¢én 
is presumably from the Hebrew 1D 
to be soft or sticky and the Syriac 

290 limus, coenum. I can find no 
justification for s¢ég, the reading of 
the MSS. used by Salhani and Lidz- 
barski. 


77% 





ARMENIAN 


Son, thou hast been to 
me like the axe that was chop- 
ping a tree. Said the tree: 
Wert? thou not from me, thou 
couldst not overcomeme. Thus? 
didst thou imagine saying: I 
will fill his place. But if the 
pig’s tail were about five ells 
long, it would not fill the place 
of the horse. And if its fleece 
were as purple, it could not be 
likened to the body of a king °, 


* MS. Canon, better: ‘Were not 
what is in thy hand from me, thou 
wert not able to overcome me.’ 

* MS. Canon, better: ‘My son, 
thou didst imagine thus, saying: I fill 
the place of Khikar, but were the 
pig’s tail nine ells long,’ &c. 

* MS. Canon like the Syriac adds 
here this saying: ‘Son, I thus thought, 
that thou wouldst stay in my house 
and inherit my goods. But according 
to thy lawlessness, God hath not 
prospered thee.’ 


Tree 


25 


26 


27 


28 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 8, 25-28 


SYRIAC 


My son, thou hast been to me 
like the young swallows which 
fell out of their nest ; and a cat 
caught them and said to them, 
“Tf it had not been for me, 
great evil would have befallen 
you.” They answered and said 
to her, “Is that why thou hast 
put us in thy mouth?” 


Son, a dog which itself eats the quarry, will become the prey of wolves. 


no light, the ravens dig it out. 


ARABIC 


ARMENIAN 





ARMENIAN 


The maggot of the bread ate 
the body of a king, but was 
itself of no use to any one nor 
profitable, but vile. 

Son, thou hast been to me 
like the young of the swallow 
which fell out of its nest, and 
a weasel found it and said: If it 
had not been for me}4, then a 
great evil would have befallen 
you. The nestling said to the 
weasel: Thy good which thou 
hast done to me shall return 
upon thine head. 


1 Lit. ‘if it had been apart from 
MG 


An eye that gives me 


Hand which helps me not, from the shoulder let them lop it off. 


Son, thou hast been to me like the lure which lay buried in the dung. A sparrow found it and 


said: What doest thou? 2 


And that which is in thy mouth, what is it? 


And it said: I am engaged in prayer unto God. Said the sparrow: 
It said: A little loaf for the hungry. The sparrow 


darted in to takethe bread and was caught by the neck and said: If this was a little loaf for the 
hungry, God even so heareth thy prayer. 


Son, they said to the wolf: Keep away from the fold. 


blinded; for the dust isa remedy for my eyes and benefits them. 

Son, thou hast been to me as the wolf that encountered an ass, and said: Peace be unto thee. 
The young ass said: Peace to yonder master of mine, who hath loosed the cord of my feet, and 
let me behold thy face evil and bloodthirsty.* 


Son, thou hast been to me like one who saw his fellow a-shivering. 


it over him. 


It answered: If I live away, I am 


Taking water he threw 


Son, thou hast been to me like the dog which went into the oven of the potter. When he 
was warm, he began to bark at the potter. 


2 So Paris 69: the rest = ‘ What art thou?’ 


SYRIAC 


My son, thou hast been to me 
like the cat, to which they say, 
“Leave offthy thievish ways,and 
thou shalt go out from and come 
in to the king’s palace, accord- 
ing to thy heart’s wish.” And 
she answered and said, “If I 
should have eyes of silver and 
ears of gold, I will not leave off 
my thieving.” 

My son, thou hast been tome 
like a serpent that was mounted 
on a thorn-bush and thrown into 
a river; anda wolfsaw them and 
said to them: “Bad rides on 
bad, and worse than either 
carries them off.” The serpent 
said to him, “If thou hadst been 
here, thou shouldst have paid 
the reckoning for the she-goats 
and their young ones.” 

My son, I have seen a she- 


21 


22 


ARABIC 


O my boy! thou art like 
the cat to whom they said : 
“Leave off thieving till we 
make for thee a chain of gold 
and feed thee with sugar and 
almonds.” And _ she said, 
“T am not forgetful of the 
craft of my father and my 
mother.” 


O my son! thou hast 
been like the serpent riding 
on a thorn-bush when he was 
in the midst of a river, and 
a wolf saw them and said, 
“Mischief upon mischief, and 
let him who is more mischiev- 
ous than they direct both of 
them.” And the serpent 
said to the wolf, “‘ The lambs 
and the goats and the sheep 
which thou hast eaten all thy 


743 


3 Canon omits ‘ evil and bloodthirsty *. 


ARMENIAN 

Son, they said to the cat, 
Give up thy habitual affair *, 
and the privilege* is extended 
to thee to enter the palace and 
quit it. The cat said: If my 
eyes were gold and my paw of 
silver, I would yet not give up 
the habitual thing °. 


Son, thou hast been to me as 
a snake that wound itself round 
a bramble and fell into a river. 
A wolf saw it and said: Lo, the 
evil is mounted on the evil, and 
evil is that which drives them 
along. 


4 Toit. word. 

5 Canon here has ‘ habit’, darvs for 
ban = ‘word’, and this should prob- 
ably be read all through. 


12% 


21 


THE: STORY OF: AMI KAIief e632 


SYRIAC 


goat brought into the slaughter- 
house, and because its time was 
not yet come, it returned to its 
place and saw its children and 
its children’s children. 

My son, I have seen colts 
that have become slayers of 
their mothers. 

My son, I fed thee with every 
pleasant meat: and thou, my 
son, hast fed me with bread of 
ashes}, and I was not satisfied 
therewith. 

My son, I salved thee with 
sweet salves, and thou, my son, 
hast fouled my body with dust. 


My son, I trained up thy 
stature like a cedar, but thou 
hast humbled me in my life, and 
hast made me drunken with thy 
wickedness. 

My son, I raised thee like a 
tower and said, “If the enemy 
should come upon me, I will go 
up and dwell in thee”: and thou, 
when thou sawest my enemy, 
didst bow before him. 


My son, thou hast been to me 
like the mole that came up out of 
the earth that he might get pos- 
session? of the sun, because he 
had no eyes; and an eagle saw 
him and struck him and carried 
him off? 


Lit. ndustes 

® Lit. ‘receive’. But perhaps the 
original was ‘that he might see the 
sun, though he had no eyes’. 








ARABIC 


life, wilt thou return them to 
their fathers and to their par- 
ents or no?” Said the wolf, 
“No.” And the serpent said 
to him, “I think that after my- 
self thou art the worst of us.” 

O my boy! I sfed thee 
with good food and thou 
didst not feed me with dry 
bread. 

O my boy! I gave thee 
sugared water to drink and 
good syrup, and thou didst 
not give me water from the 
well to drink. 

O my boy! I taught thee, 
and brought thee up, and 
thou didst dig a hiding-place 
for me and didst conceal me. 

O my boy! I brought 
thee up with the best up- 
bringing and trained thee 
like a tall cedar; and thou 
hast twisted and bent me. 

O my boy! it was my 
hope concerning thee that 
thou wouldst build me 
a “fortified ‘castle:> that 1 
might be concealed from my 
enemies in it, and thou didst 
become to me like one bury- 
ing in the depth of the earth ; 
but the Lord took pity on 
me and delivered me from 
thy cunning. 

O my boy! I wished thee 
well, and thou didst reward 
me (with) evil and hateful- 
ness, and now I would fain 
tear out thine eyes, and make 
thee food for dogs, and cut 
out thy tongue, and take off 
thy head with the edge of 
the sword, and recompense 
thee for thine abominable 
deeds.’ 


23 


28 


* For this meaning of V3l> je cf. 


Lane, Book I, part 2, p. 598, and 
Badger, p. 272. 





ARMENIAN 


Son, thou hast been to me as 
a mole which came out of its 
hole and one with another went 
forth because of their eyes not 
seeing. And an eagle swooped 
and seized him; and the mole 
said: If there had been no 
senses in my case, I should 
have remained in my place and 
lived a peaceful life. 

Son, they gave teaching to 
the wolf’s cub, and said: Say 
thou, ayb, ben, gim!; and he 
said ayts, bouts, garhn (i.e. goat, 
kid, lamb). 

Son, they took the swine to 
the bath, and he plunged into 
it, then rolled himself in the 
bog, saying: You wash in your 
own, and I will in mine. 


1 i.e. the first three letters of the 
Armenian alphabet. 


22 


iS) 


3 


THE 


SYRIAC 


My son Nadan answered and 
said to me, ‘ My father Ahikar, 
such things be far from thee: 
do to me according to thy 
mercy: for God also forgives 
the fault of men: and thou 
also, forgive me this my folly: 
and I will tend thy horses and 
feed thy pigs which are in thy 
house, and I shall be called evil : 
but thou, devise not evil against 
me.’ 


I answered and said to him, 
‘My son, thou hast been to me 
like that palm-tree that stood 
by a river, and cast all its fruit 
into the river, and when its lord 
came to cut it down, it said to 
him, “Let me alone this year, 
and I will bring thee forth 
carobs.” And its lord said unto 
it, “ Thou hast not been indus- 
trious in what is thine own, and 
how wilt thou be industrious in 
what is not thine own?” 


My son, they say to the wolf, 
“ Why dost thou follow after the 
sheep?” He said to them, 
“Their dust is exceeding good 
for my eyes.” Again they 
brought him into the school- 
house?: the master said to him, 
“ Aleph, Beth”; the wolf said, 
“ Kid, Lamb.” 

My son, I taught thee that 
there is a God: and thou risest 
up against good servants, and 
beatest those that have not 
sinned; and like as God has 
kept me alive on account of my 
righteousness? so hath He 
destroyed thee for thy works. 

My son, they set the head of 
the ass over a dish at the table, 
and he rolled off and fell in the 
dust. And they say, “ He spites 


1 Lit. ‘house of the scribe’. 
2 Query, ‘almsgiving’? wt supra. 





STORY OF AHIKAR 8. 


ARABIC 


And when Nadan heard 
this speech from his uncle 
Haiqar, he said:. ‘O my 
uncle ! deal with me accord- 
ing to thy knowledge, and 
forgive me my sins, for who 
is there who hath sinned like 
me, or who is there who for- 
gives like thee? Accept me, 
O my uncle! Now I will 
serve in thy house,and groom 
thy horses and sweep up the 
dung of thy cattle, and feed 
thy “sheép; for Io am “the 
wicked and thou art the 


49) 


righteous: I the guilty and 


thou the forgiving.’ 

And Haigar said to him, 
‘O my boy! thou art like 
the tree which was fruitless 
beside the water, and its 
master was fain to cut it 


30 


down, and it said to him, — 


“Remove me to another 
place, and if I do not bear 
fruit, cut me down.” And its 
master said to it, “Thou being 
beside the water hast not 
borne fruit, how shalt thou 
bear fruit when thou art in 
another place?” 

O my boy! the old age 
of the eagle is better than the 
youth of the crow. 

O my boy! they said to 
the wolf, “Keep away from 
the sheep lest their dust 
should harm thee.” And the 
wolf said, ““The dregs of the 


sheep’s milk!are good for my | 


eyes.” 
O my boy! they made 
the wolf go to school that he 


33 


might learn to read, and they 


said to him, “Say A, B.” 
He said,“ Lamb and goat? in 
my belly.” 

O my boy! they set the 
ass down at the table and he 
fell, and began to roll himself 
in the dust, and one said, 
“Tet him roll himself, for it 


34 


1 This is evidently a pun, ghabar 
meaning dust, and g/wér the last milk 
in the udder. 

2 The animals mentioned by the 
wolf had names which doubtless began 
with A, B. In the Arabic and English 
this is lost. 

775 





34-38 


ARMENIAN 


Nathan began to speak and 24? 


said: My father Khikar, men 
sin unto God, and He forgives 
them, when they say: I have 
sinned. Father, I have sinned 
unto thee. Forgive me, and 
I will be to thee a slave hence- 
forth for ever.! 


And I spake to Nathan thus: 


Son, thou hast been to me 25 


like a palm-tree which was grow- 
ing with roots on the bank of 
the river. When the fruit 
ripened, it fell into the river. 
The lord of the tree came to cut 
it down, and the tree said: 
Leave me in this place’®, that in 
the next year I may bear fruit. 
The lord of the tree said: Up 
to this day hast thou been to 
me useless, in the future thou 
wilt not become useful. 


Son, God hath rescued me 
because of my innocence, but 
hath destroyed thee because of 
thy lawlessness. God passes 
judgement between me and thee. 
For the tail of the dog gives 
bread and his mouth a cudgel.’ 


1 Canon adds: ‘like one of the 
sinners ’. 

25 Ganon Leave 
year’. 

8 Canon adds this precept about 
the dog after no. 16. It comes as 
the fourth in the first series of the 
Syriac. 


me for this 


THE 


SYRIAC 


himself; he does not receive 
honour.” 

My son, thou hast verified the 
proverb, which is current : “Call 
him whom thou hast begotten, 
thy son, and him whom thou 
hast purchased, thy slave.” 

My son, the proverb is true 
that is current : “ Take thy sis- 
ter’s son under thy arm and 
dash him against a stone.” 

But God is He that hath kept 
me alive, and He will judge be- 
tween us.’ 


Thereat Nadan swelled up 
like a bag and died. And to 
him that doeth good, what is 
good shall be recompensed : and 
to him that doeth evil, what is 
evil shall be rewarded! And 
he that diggeth a pit for his 
neighbour, filleth it with his 
own stature. And to God be 
glory, and His mercy be upon 
us. Amen. 


The proverbs of Ahikar the 
Sage and secretary of Senna- 
cherib king of Assyria and 
Nineveh are ended. 


JR HARRIS. 


* Lit. ‘He shall be rewarded evil £ 


STORY OF AHIKARIS) 38-41 


35 


36 


37 


ARABIC 
is his nature, he will not 
change.” 

O my boy! the saying 
has been confirmed which 
runs: “If thou begettest a 
boy, call him thy son, and 
if thou rearest a boy, call him 
thy slave.” 

O my boy! he who doeth 
good shall meet with good ; 
and he who doeth evil shall 
meet with evil, for the Lord 
requiteth a man according to 
the measure of his work. 

O my boy! what shall 
I say more to thee than these 
sayings? for the Lord know- 
eth what is hidden, and is 
acquainted withthe mysteries 
and the secrets. And He 
will requite thee and will 
judge betwixt me and thee, 
and will recompense thee 
according to thy desert.’ 

And when Nadan heard 
that speech from his uncle 
Haiqar, he swelled up im- 
mediately and became like 
a blown-out bladder. And 
his limbs swelled and his legs 
and his feet and his side, and 
he was torn and his belly 
burst asunder and his entrails 
were scattered, and he per- 
ished, and died. And _ his 
latter end was destruction, 
and he went tohell. For he 
who digs a pit for his brother 
shall fall into it ; and he who 
sets up traps shall be caught 
in them. This is what hap- 
pened and (what) we found 
about the tale of Haiqar, and 
praise be to God for ever. 
Amen, and peace. This 
chronicle is finished with the 
help of God, may He be 
exalted! Amen, Amen, 
Amen. 

A. S. LEwIs. 


*“ The text of MS. Canon is as follows : 


Said Khikar: He that doeth well to the 
fellow, with his own person filleth it. 


inherits it. 


He who loves evil is hatefu 


good will meet with 


776 


ARMENIAN 


In the same hour 
swelled up and all his body 
burst asunder, and I said: 


Son,* he that doeth good, 27 


winneth good ; and he that digs 
a pit for others, himself falls into 
the pit. The good endeth in 
good and the evil in evil. 


Here endeth Khikar.1 


F. C. CONYBEARE. 


1 The last three words in Codex 
Ven, alone. 


good. And he who diggeth a pit for his 
1 to many, and he who pursues the good 


Nathan 26° 


Garr ovORY- OF AHTIKAR 


AETHIOPIC FRAGMENTS OF THE SAVINGS OF AHIKAR. 


The following is the translation of the fifteen sayings of Ahikar, published by Cornill in his 
Mashafa Falasfé Tabibén, or Book of the Wise Philosophers. These sayings are taken from two 
MSS., one at Frankfort and the other at Tiibingen. They apparently come from an Arabic collec- 
tion of ethical maxims, and not from a complete story of Ahikar. We should have inferred that the 
precepts were in separate circulation in Arabic, from the title of a MS. in the Vatican described by 
Assemani which is said to contain Hicard philosophi Mosulani praecepta. 


Instruction of Haikar the Wise. 
1 He spake as follows: 


‘ Hear, my son, and keep in remembrance my discourse, so that thou rememberest God the High 
and the Mighty. 

My son, if thou hearest a discourse, hide it in thy heart and disclose it not to thy neighbour, that it 
become not to thee asa coal and burn thy tongue, and bring derision upon thee and make thee 
hateful to God. 

2 My son, make fair thy discourse and thy behaviour; for the wagging of a dog’s tail gives him 
bread, but his jaw brings him stones. 

3 My son, do not tarry with him, in whom there is strife: for strife brings controversy: and strife 
gives for an inheritance revengefulness and murder. 

4 My son, if a house could be built by talk without action, an ass would build two houses a day. 

5 ond son, it is better to haul stones with a wise and understanding man, than to drink wine with 
a fool.. 

6 My son, so long as there are shoes on thy feet, tread down the thorns, and level the way for thy 
children and thy children’s children. 

7 My son, if the rich man eats a snake, they say of him, “ He seeks a medicine therein” ; if, however, 
the poor man eats it, they say of him, “It was from hunger.” 

8 My son, if there come to thee a slenderer and poorer man than thyself, rise up to receive him. 

9 My son, the wicked falls and rises not again; but the good man falls and rises immediately and 
remains in his condition. 

1o My son, cease not to beat thy son; for the chastisement of a child is good for it, even as dung 
makes the land good; and as the land which is not rugged and on which there is grass delights the 
cattle, so doth a well-brought up son delight his father. 

11 My son, keep thy son in curb, as long as he is small, that he may not grow up and thou have no 
more control over him, and be fain to blush over his corrupt behaviour. 

12 A fair repute is better than a fair appearance; for the fair repute abides for ever, but the fair 
appearance and form pass away. 

13 My son, it is better to stumble with the foot than with the tongue; and bring no discourse out of 
thy mouth, before thou hast entered into counsel with thine own self. 

14 My son, if the course of water should turn backwards, and if birds should fly without wings, and if 
the raven should become white as snow, then may a fool become wise. 

15 My son, if thou wilt be wise, refrain thy tongue from lying and thy hands from stealing.’ 

J. R. HARRIS. 


THE ARAMAIC FRAGMENTS FROM ELEPHANTINE. 


The following represents roughly the narrative portion of the Ahikar-legend, and the most impor- 
tant of the Parables and Proverbs of Ahikar preserved in the papyrus: 


Hh lect gi ee Pe Ahikar was his name, a wise and erudite scribe, who instructed hisson...... He 
said: The son will be...... for me belores, 2754. oe ANE Oe the Great Seal of 
Sennacherib, king of Assyria...... and there was no son to me...... and Sennacherib, 

3 king of Assyria, had fulfilled (his days) and Sennacherib died ...... his son, named Esarhaddon, 

15 and he was king of Assyria in the place of his father (Sennacherib) ...... Assyria. Thereupon 
ie(opk)) my. som...) ~..-) - and I instructed him and virtue ..... . in the Palace along with 
Spier es Fs I presented him before Esarhaddon, the king of Assyria. And wisdom...... what 
he had asked him. And thereon Esarhaddon, the king of Assyria, loved him and said, (Long) life 
ares ala ss the wise scribe, the counsellor of all Assyria, who has appointed as his son, and no son 


Ms Seopa es 2 and I bowed down and worshipped, I, Ahikar, before Esarhaddon (the king) of Assyria. 
5 A aeaadei Ahikar, and when I saw the face of Esarhaddon, the king of Assyria, favourably, I rose 


ieee (as I was before) Sennacherib thy father, who was king (before thee) : ; 


Litie 


THE STORY) OF GHikaki 


I shall not be able to serve (the king) in the gate of this palace ...... whose name is Nadin, my 
grown-up son, and he shall succeed me as Secretary ...... (and Great) Seal shall he be; and 
also my wisdom and. ..... the king of Assyria. And he said to me, (like thyself) . . Oe es 
and in thy stead he shall do thy work. ...... I went to my house...... and I set him in 
the gate of the palace... ... and I said, he will seek after what isgood...... (my son Nadin) 
whom I have brought up, think on...... the king Sennacherib, thy father... . . . he is wise 
and according to his counsel and advice... ... will much disquiet the king. Listen. ...... as 
a son, who is not my son; as a son : : , . : tt Lee 
; : : : : : ; : j : ; (Answered) Esarhaddon the king and 
SAIC seep. woeort whom my father hath made great, who (ate) the bread of my father. ..... thou 
wilt seek, where thou canst find...... that old man Ahikar. Heisa wise secretary ...... 
whether he can corrupt the country against us, after that...... Assyria; he attached to him 
two men, in order to seer... a. « that officer (?) NabuSumiskun, riding upon a swift horse whl 
with him after yet three days ...... and the others who were with him, as I was walking in the 
vineyards... NabuSumiSkun, the officer, rent his garment; and ‘lamented lee. Rem: the wise Secretary 
and master of good counsel who ...... by whose counsel and words all Assyria was directed 
ee (Nadin, thy son) whom thou hast appointed in the gate of the Palace, hath undone thee. 
SRF erecta ts Then was I much afeard, even I Ahikar; and I answered and said to NabugumiSkun 
tahowiet fae Iam he who aforetime saved thee from undeserved death ...... the father of the 
present king, Esarhaddon, (was angry) with thee. ..... I brought thee to my house, thither 
was I bringing thee ; ‘ ; ‘ : : : : ; : s ; 


(I treated thee) as a man treats his brother, and I hid thee from the presence of (king Sennacherib). 
I said, I have killed him, until at another time and after yet many days I presented thee before 
king Sennacherib, and caused thy sins to pass away before him: and no evil did he to thee. And 
with me also king Sennacherib was well pleased, because I had preserved thee alive and not 


to slain thee. And now do thou also to me in the same fashion as I did to thee. Slay me not, but 


If 
I2 


13 


bring me into thy house until other days. King Esarhaddon is merciful as one...... towards 
another. He will remember me and will long for my advice. Thou wilt then present me before 
him, and he will suffer me to live. Thereupon answered NabuSumikkun and said to me, Fear not. 
Thou shalt live, Ahikar, the father of all Assyria, according to whose counsel Sennacherib and all 
the Assyrian army were wont to make war. NabuSumiskun, the officer, spake to those two men, 
his companions, who were with him, (Listen) and I will give you a piece of advice, and it is good 
advice too. The two men answered and said to him, Tell it us then. And NabuSumiSkun answered 
and said to them, Listen to me. Yonder is Ahikar, a great man. He is the Great Seal of 
Esarhaddon. According to his counsel and word is the whole army of Assyria governed. Do not 
let us kill him. There is a eunuch whom I have, and whom I will give you. He must be killed 
in the mountain; he shall be a substitute for Ahikation.s aaa other people (may come and) see 
the body of yonder Ahikar, for the body of the young man, the eunuch, whom I have 


until our brother Esarhaddon (shall have regret) over our brother and the heart of Esarhaddon 


I will give you much treasure... ... and the soul (of the officer) was content with his two companions. 
(And they said,) Do as thou counsellest ..... . Thereupon they slew the aforementioned eunuch 
in the stead of Ahikar «: 2... At that time report was made in the king’s palace, (and they said) 


to the king, He hath been slain. Thereupon NabuSumigskun (brought me to his house, and he 
caused to be supplied to me there (meat and drink) and said, Let these things be furnished to my 
lord (Ahikar). Likewise he brought much treasure...... Thereupon NabusumiSkun, the 
officer, went to Esarhaddon the king (of Assyria), and informed him, saying, I went my way, (as 
directed) and I found Ahikar (walking in his vineyards), and I have put him to death. And do 
thou, O king, inquire of the two men whom thou didst appoint. Sospakehe...... until that 
Esarhaddon (believed his words). 


(This is all of the narrative which has been preserved: the extant portions of the proverbial and 
allegorical parts of the book are very fragmentary in character, and uncertain as to their restoration 
to order, and sense. The most important are as follows :— 

What is stronger than a brayingtassy 45) eee 

The son who is instructed and disciplined, and who has on his feet 

Do not withhold thy son from beating, if{houys nse ee 

My son, if I beat thee, thou diest not. And if I leave on thy heart . . 


778 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 


Sonte the boys like fu.c <i. 3 even so to all thy servants 

The lion willbe... ... the stag in the secret of his den(@)...... 

And he pours out his blood and eats his flesh... ... 

ane ass hastleft «= « ane does noticarry it: He takesup ...... from his companions, 
See ras which was not his. 
_ Watch carefully over thy mouth... ... and make thy heart’ slow (), for the word spoken is 
like a bird, and he who utters it is like a man without ...... the craft. of the mouth is mightier 
than the ctafftw:.:.+.3.. 


Do not conceal (?). the word of a king 


They deal with trees by fire, with flesh by a knife, and with man...... 

Let not thy heart rejoice in the multitude of children and over their fewness (be not thou dis- 
couraged). 

(Cf. Armenian sayings, No. 34.) 
_ A king is as a merciful man, also his voice is higher than that of him who stands before him . . . 

The king is fair to look on as the sun, and for them that walk the earth, his adornment is 
costly .. 


(My son,) I have lifted sand, and I have carried salt, but there was nothing heavier than Sd i : 
I have lifted straw and handled (?) the plough ...... and there was nothing lighter than the 
man who dwells in. ; é , ’ 3 : : : ; : : ; : 


The panther met the goat, and it was naked. And the panther answered and said to the goat, 
Come and I will cover thee with my skin. 
The goat answered and said to the panther, Why ...... my skin? Take it not from me 


The wolf came to the lambs (?)....- -- and I will be silent. The lambs answered and said to 
him, Take what thou wantest from us ...... 

Nothing lies in a man’s. power, to lift up his foot or to set it OSI oad acs 

(Do not.bend) thy bow and shoot an arrow at the upright, lest God should ...... and cause it 


to return upon thyself. 


(Thou hast bent) thy bow and shot thy arrow at one who is more righteous than thou. That is 
a sin against our God. ; 


A loan is heavy, and borrow thou not from aman......- and if thou contractest a loan, give 
thy soul no peace until . : 4 


in thine ears, for the charm of a man is his trustiness, and his hatred is lying with his 


was © ene, te 


lips (?). 
The son of my body has spied out my house ...-.--- hethas teld: strangetsisn. v0. 2% 


He has become a false witness against me: 
And who will now declare my righteousness ? 


With him that is higher than thyself do not ...... 
With him that is stronger ..-.... than thyself, do not 
Ly os Votan and be not insolent to thy father 
The thorn-bush sent to the pomegranate (and said): 
The thorn-bush to the pomegranate. How,numerous are thy thorns for him who handles thee! 
The pomegranate answered and said to the thorn-bush, 
Thou art all thorns for him who handles thee. 


v719 


pedi 


C. XX1V 


Cc. XXV 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 


GREEK VERSION OF THE LEGEND OF AHIKAR. 


The following is the portion of the story of Aesop which shows coincidence with Ahikar. 


Fabulae Romanenses Graece Conscriptae (ed. Eberhard). 


Mera dé Todro rhs vicov damdpas, mepiner THY 
olkovuperny, Tots Gravtaxod Tay irocdpwy d.iareyd- 
Mevos* aAdixduevos 5& Kal mpds BaBvddva: kal rh 
EavTod copiay émiderEdpevos, méyas Tapa TO Batre? 
Avxip@ éyéveto. Kar exelvous yap tovs xpdvous of 
BactArels mpds GAAjAovs elpyyyny exovtes Kat Tép ews 
xdpw mpoBrAjpata TOv codpiotiKev Tpds addidovs 
ypaovtes ereuTov. Gmep of pev emthudmevor pédpovs 
ent pytois mpos TOv TeumdvTw@v éAduBavov* ei d5é py, 
Tovs toovs Tapetxov. 6 Toivey Alowmes Ta TepTOpeva. 
TOV TPOBAnLaTwY AvkKipe cvvev éeméAve, Kal evdoKt- 
pely evroler Tov Baoidéa. Kal attds d& did Avxipou 
Erepa Tols Bacihetow dvrémeuTev, Gv advToOV pevov- 
Tov, Pdpovs 6 Bactreds tt TAEloTOUs eioémparren. 


Alowmos 5& pH matdoToincdpevos, Eva tid Tov 
ebyevv, "Evvov tiv KAfow, eloemounoard te kal ds 
yicwov ratda 76 Baciret mpocevéyxas ovvéoryoe. 
peta © od moddv xpdvov tod "Evvoy 77 Tod Oeuevov 
Tadhaxyn ovppOapévtos, Aicwmos todto yvods, dme- 
Aadvew Ewedde Tis olklas. 6 b¢, rH Kar’ éxelvou dpyF 
Anpoels, emicrodny te mrAacdwevos map Alodmov 
670ev mpds rods avticopiCoyevovs Avkiipw, os adrois 
Eros ott mpoorlOecOar padrdov 7) TO Avkipe, TO 
Bache évexeipioe, TH TOD Alodrov ravrnv ofpayt- 
oduevos daxtudrio. 6 d& Bacideds TH TE odpayid. 
melo Gels kal dnapaitir dpyh xpnoduevos, rapaxphua 
TO ‘Epuinm® kedever, pndev e€erdoavra ofa 3d) Tpo- 
ddtnv diaxeipicacbar Aicwrov. 6 dg "Eppimmos 
piros te jv TO Aloda@ kal rére 8} Tov didrov éné- 
deigev. ey ri yap tév tdpov pndevds €iddros 
Kpvas Tov dvOpwrov, év amopprros érpepev.  Evvos 
d€, To’ Bacidéws Kedkedoavtos, Tacay THv dvolknow 
Aloomov mapéAafe. 


Mera d€ twa xpdvov NextevaBo Bacireds Alyv- 
atiwv TvOduEvos Alownoy TeOvynevat, TéurTrer Avxipe 
Tapaxpijya emorodny, olkoddyovs aiT@ amootet\a 
KeAevovoay, ob m¥pyov olkodoujoover pir ovpavod 
Byte ys amrdéuevov, AAG Kab rov atoKkpiwovpevov det 
Tpds TaVvO boa dv epwrdy* Kal rodTo Toloavra, pdpovs 
elompadrre, ef d& uy}, KataTibecbar. tabra TS Avanpo 
dvayvocderra ets GOuputav eveBare, undevds TOV hirwy 
Sduvapevou Td TpdBdnywa Td wep Tod mbpyou ovvelvat. 


After this he set sail from the island, and went c. xxiii 


about the world, in discourse everywhere with 
the philosophic; and having reached Babylon, 
he then also exhibited his wisdom and acquired 
renown with Lykeros the king. In those days 
the kings were at peace with one another, and 
used to amuse themselves by sending one another 
sophistical questions to answer; and those who 
could resolve them used to get for their answers 
tribute from those who proposed them; if, how- 
ever, they failed, they paid in turn the like 
amount. So Aesop, who was associated with 
Lykeros, used to solve the problems which were 
sent to him, and caused the king to become 
famous. And he himself sent through Lykeros 
counter-challenges to the kings, the non-solution 
of which brought an abundance of revenues to 
the king. 


Now as Aesop himself had no children, he c. xxiv 


annexed a certain young man of noble birth 
named Ennus, and brought him to the king, 
with commendation as his proper son. And 
when, not long after, Ennus played false with the 
concubine of his adoptive father, Aesop, becoming 
aware of it, would have banished him the house. 
But he, seized with rage against him, and having 
forged a letter, to wit, from Aesop to the kings 
who were in contest with Lykeros, to the effect 
that he was prepared to take their side rather 
than that of Lykeros, went and put the letter 
into the king’s hands, having first sealed it with 
Aesop’s signet. 

So he, being persuaded thereby, and under the 
influence of implacable anger, forthwith directs 
Hermippus to make away with Aesop without 
a trial, on the ground that he was a traitor. 
Hermippus, however, was a friend of Aesop, 
and showed himself so at the time. Without 
any one knowing it, he concealed Aesop in one 
of the tombs, and secretly maintained him. 
Meanwhile Ennus, by the king’s orders, took 
over all Aesop’s affairs, 


Some time after, Nectenabo, the king of the c. xxv 


Egyptians, having ascertained that Aesop was 
dead, forthwith sends to Lykeros a letter, com- 
manding him to send builders to construct him 
a tower that should not touch either heaven or 
earth, and a man withal who should make him 
continual answer to all his questions ; if thus he 
would do, he should revenues acquire; but if the 
contrary, he should pay them over. When these 


780 


Bike STORY 


6 pevto. Bacireds kal kiova tis Eavtod Bacireias 
édeyey aroAwdeKevat Tov Alowmov. “Eppurmos 8€ thy 
Tod Baciréws bv Aicwrov AvTnv pabav, Tpoc|ADE TO 
Baciret kat Civ exeivoy etnyyeAlcato, tpocdels ws 
ToddE yap adTov ovK dveEirer, cldds ws peTapEAoeEL 
Tote T@ Baowrel THs awopdcews. Tod d¢ Bacidéws 
duahepdvtws em TovTois NoPevtos, Alowmos puT@v Kal 
avxpav bos mpoonvéexOn, Kal rod Bacirés, os etdev 
avtév, daxptaavros Kal AovoacOai re Kal THs GAAns 
emuperclas aéuwdjvar KeAedoartos, Alowmos peta 
ToOTO Kal Umep Gv kaTnyopnOn Tas aitias dmecKevdoaro. 
ed ois kal Tod BactAéws Tov” Evvoy dvatpety pédAovTos, 
Aic@ros aire ovyyvdyny jrjocato. émopevas 88 
tovto.s 6 Bactdeds THY Tod AiyuTTlov emiotoAhy TO 
Aicdte énédxev avayvevat. 6 d& aitixa tiv Avow 
suvels TO mpoBAnpatos, eyeAacé Te Kal avTvypadew 
exehevoev, Os eTeLdav XELLOY TapEAOn, TEUpOjvar 
Tovs Te TOV TUpyov cikodopnoovtas Kal Tov GmoKpLVOv- 
pevov mpds TA epwTomeva. 6 Bacidreds ody Tos pev 
Aiyutrious mpéoBers anéoteidev, Aicdmm dé thy e€& 
apxijs d.olknoww éveyeipicev Gmacav, exdotov ais 
Tapadovs Kat TOv”Evvov. 6 8& Atcwmos tapadaBov 
tov "Evvov, ovdév andes adrov dpacer, GAN ws vie 
mddw Tpoccyxev, GAdovs TE Kal TovTOUs brEeTIOEL Tos 
Adyous. 


e.xxvi.t © Tékvov, mpd tdvtwv céBov 70 Oeiov ; tov Baothéa 

2 dé tiua’ Kal Tots pev exOpois cov dewwdv ceavtov 

mapackebace, Iva pH Katappovaol cov rots bé pidous 

mpaov Kal evperadoror, os ebyovaTépovs cor paAdAov 

3 yiverOar. rr de Tods pev exOpods vooeiv ebxov Kal 

méverOat, @s fa) olovs Te elvar AvTEiy ce’ Tos Oe 

didovs kata mdvta «d mparrew Bovdrov. alel TH 

4 yovaikl cov xpynoras dutrer, mms Erépov avdpds TELpay 

pr Cytjon AaBelv. Kodpov yap TO TAY yuvarKkoy éoTL 

5 pdAov Kal KoAaKevdpevoy €AdtTw Ppovel Kaka. 6fetav 

yey. mpos Adyov KThoa Thy akony, Ths d€ yAoTTys 

6 éyxpatys goo. Tois « mpdrrovow pH pOdver, dAAa 

ovyxaipe § =<p0ovdv yap ceavtdy padAov BAawets. 

7 TOV olKerav cov emipedod tva pi) mdvov ws SeaTdTHY 

8 ce PoRGvtat, GAA Kal as edepyérny aiddvra. By 

9 aicxdvov pavOdvew del ta kpelrT. — TH} yuvatxl pndé- 

more TuoTevons amoppyra, del yap dmAiCerat TOS Gov 

10 kupietoet. Kad? iuépav kal eis THY avprov amroTaplevov’ 

BéAriov yap TeAevT@vTa exOpois Karadetypat, H GOvTa 

1 Tov hidrwr émideiobar. edmpooryopos Eao Tols ovvav- 

réow, edds ds Kal TO Kvvaplo dprov H oblpa mpoo- 

12, 13 Toplte. dyabds yevdpevos ph peTavdet. wWidvpov 

dvdpa éxBadre offs olkias, 7a yap tnd cod Aeyopeva 

14 kal mparrdpeva Erépors pépwv avabjoe. mparre pev 

Ta pn AvTAToVTA cE, emi SE Tols ovpBaivovor it) 

15 Avmod. pire srovnpa Bovreton more rire TpoTovs 
KAKOV PLbnoN. 





OF" AHIKAR 


things were read to Lykeros, they put him in a 
sad muse, seeing that none of his friends could 
understand the riddle about the tower. Where- 
upon the king was saying that he had lost in 
Aesop the very pillar of the kingdom. Her- 
mippus, however, when he learned the king’s 
grief over Aesop, came to the king, and gave 
him the good news that he was yet alive, adding 
that it was for this very reason that he had not 
done him to death, because he knew that the 
king would some time repent him of the sentence. 
And when the king was mightily pleased thereat, 
Aesop was brought in to him, all filthy and be- 
grimed, and the king, when he saw him, wept, 
and bid him to the bath and to be attended with 
all care, and after this Aesop cleared himself of 
all the accusations that had been made against 
him. Whereupon the king would in turn have 
slain Ennus, but Aesop asked that he would 
pardon him. Thereafter the king put into 
Aesop’s hand the letter of the Egyptian to read. 
And he, promptly divining the solution of the 
riddle, laughed and bid them dispatch a reply 
to the effect that, on the approach of winter, he 
would send him both the builders of the tower, 
and the person who should answer his questions. 
So the king sent ambassadors to Egypt, and to 
Aesop he entrusted all his ancient affairs, handing 
over to him Ennus, to boot. So Aesop took to 
him Ennus, nor wrought he him any unpleasant- 
ness, but dealing with him again as with a son, 
he imparted to him the following and kindred 
instructions. 

‘My child,’ said he, ‘first of all revere the divine, c. xxvi. 1 
and honour the king; to thine enemies make 2 
thyself dread that they despise thee not: but to 
thy friends be gentle and generous, that they in 
turn may be better affected to thyself. 

Further, let it be thy prayer that poverty and 3 
sickness may be the lot of thy enemies, that they 
may not have it in their power to annoy thee ; 
but for thy friends desire good fortune in every- 
thing. Ever talk kindly to thy wife, that she 4 
may not seek to make experiment of another 
man. For the female sex is a slight thing, and 
when flattered makes little of mishap. Keep 5 
thine ear attentive to discourse, but be retentive 
of thy speech. Envy not the prosperous, but be 6 
glad with them: for by envying thou wilt rather 
damage thyself. Have such care of thy servants 7 
that they not merely fear thee as lord, but revere 
thee, too, as benefactor. Take no scorn to be 8 
always learning better. Never entrust secrets 9 
to the wife, for she ever sets her camp to have 
mastery over thee. Every day, and for the to 
morrow, do thou store up: for it is better to die 
and leave one’s estate to enemies than to live and 11 
be dependent on friends. Be affable to those 
whom thou meetest, knowing that even for the 12 
dog his tail provides him bread. When thou 


981 


Cc. XXVi 


C. XXVI1i 


xxix 


THE STORY OFTAMIKAR 


a / 
rovrois tod Alo@mov tov “Evvov vovderhoarros, 
lal o a f er 

€xeivos tots Te Adyous Kal TH olkela ovverdjoer ola 
/ \ \ Joe > > Aas ¢ 14 
Tit Beret TANyeEls THY oxy, MET OV TOAAAS TMEpas 
t 
Tov Blov petr)\Aa€gev. 


Atoomos 6€ rods ifevras mdvtas mpooKadeodpevos, 
deTOv veotro’s TéTTapas GvAANPOHVaL KedeVEr. TVA- 
AnPlevtas ody otrws COpewev, ws A€yerat, kal éeral- 
devoev, STEp od Tadvu TL pe TELOdpeEvon EXEL, Os Taldas 
dua OvdAdkwv adrots mpoonprnuévwv BactdCovtas els 
twos atperOat, kal otws bmynkdovs Tots TaLolv etvat, os 
drovmep dv exeivor BotrowTo tntacbar dv Te eis thpos 
dv te els yv xauace. Ths d& xemmepwwhs Spas mapa- 
dpayovons Kal pos diayeAdoavtos, &mavta Ta Tpds 
THY Oddov TvoKEevacdawevos AtowTos, Kal Tovs Te Taldas 
AaBov Kal rods derovs, anfpev eis Atyvrror, TOAAH 
favracig kai 5d6&y xpos xardmrAnéw trav exe? Kexpn- 
pévos, NexrevaBo & dxotvoas wapayeyovévat Tov 
Alcwroy, ‘ évjdperuar, pyol trois Pirois, ‘enabn- 
kos Atowmov reOvnkéva.’ 





a 34 3. he z. © \ / \ 5 
7 5 €movon Ke\evoas 6 Baotreds mavTas Tous ev 
/ : \ ‘ he ‘ ries \ \ 
TeAeL AEvKas TEptBareobar oToAds, adbros d& Kippav 
2 te \ It \ f / \ 
evedvoato Kat diddnua Kal diddALOov Kitapiv. Kal 
a \ 
kateobels ef’ tynrod dippov, Kat tov Alowroy eloa- 
a , ce Sih Ee s) Q 4 
XOnvar keAevoas, ‘ rive me eixdCers,” eloeAOdvTe pyoty, 
‘Alowze, kal rovs obv euol;’ Kal ds, Soe pay NAl@ 
a > 
€apivo, Tovs dé TEpi oe TovTOLS Gpatots aTdyvolt. Kal 
c : MS / > Te. \ , bs) , 
0 Bacireds Oavuaoas adroy Kal dépory edeLidoaro. 
| O& per’ €xelvyy uepa Tadww 6 pev Bacirel vj 
77 O€ per Exeivny Hucpg Tad 6 Mev Paothevs orodny 
Aevaotarny évoxevacdyevos Tots de pirors howikas 
ceevoas AaBeiv, elvehOdvta tov Alowmoy Thy TmpoTépay 
avis meow envOero. Kal 6 Alcomos, ‘oe pév, 
> < ee 2 < / . Xx la Ud > cal > 
eime, ‘ elkd(w HAl@, Tors 8& wept oe TovTows axriat. 
Nae , 6 8 \ m a , 
kal 6 NexrevaBo, ‘ oiuar undey etvar Avkijpov mpds ye 
\ 2 NX * s ee Nocae-€: x J x 
Thy euyy Bacidciav” cat 6 Atowmos MelOtaoas edn, 
‘ \ ’ n A SS / ax a , 
M1) EVXEPOS OUTW TEpL EKEivoU, ® Barred, AoylCov. 
/ n 
Tpos Nev yap TO buerepov LOvos H buav em DerKvUuLeVN 
y / Cun reer Det , 
Bacidreta dixny nAtov oedayet: ef dé Avknpe Tapa- 
7 ION dX , Si \ la a 4 U 3 
BAnGein, ovdev dv d€ou pi) Td PSs TodTO (Spov amrode- 
loa > n 
XOqvat. Kal 6 NexrevaBo riy tov Adyov edoroxlay 
4 ¢ lal > 
extrAayels, ‘iveyxas juiv, en, ‘rods Mé\Aovras Tov 
, a é 
Tupyov oikodomeiv” Kal bs* ‘érowuol elo, Movoy 
vmodetéers Tov TOmov.’ 





Eta TodTo eLedAOdy Leo THS TOAEWS 6 BactrEvs emt 
70 medlov, dmederke Siapetpracas Toy XGpov. dyayav 
toivuy Alcwros én) ras UmodexOeloas tod rémov 
yovilas Térrapas Tous TéTTapas TOY deTOv jue Tots TaLo) 
did TOY OvAdKwy amnptnuevors, Kab oixoddéuwv tots match 


782 


hast been kindly do not regret it. Turn the 
whisperer out of thy house, for he will carry off 
and deposit with others whatever thou sayest or 
dost. Do such things as will grieve thee not 
afterwards, but over things that happen grieve 
thou not. Devise thou not evil, nor ever imitate 
the ways of bad men.’ 

When thus Aesop had admonished Ennus, the 
latter was compunct.in soul as with an arrow at 
his words, and by his own conscience, and not 
many days after he departed this life. 

Aesop then called to him all the hunters, and 
directed the capture of four eaglets. When these 
were caught he reared them (so it is said) and 
trained them (a thing which does not altogether 
convince me) to carry boys, attached to them 
by bags, up into the air, and to be so under the 
boys’ direction as to fly wherever they willed, 
whether to the heaven above or the earth beneath. 
Winter being now past and smiling spring arrived, 
Aesop made all things ready for his journey, and 
taking with him the boys and the eagles, he 
hied him to Egypt, employing much splendour 
and great array for the astonishment of the 
people in that country. Now when Nectenabo 
heard of the arrival of Aesop, he said to his 
friends, ‘I have been entrapped by the information 
of Aesop’s death.’ 

On the next day, then, the king bid all his 
officials to robe them in white raiment, whereas 
he clad him in a suit of orange, with a diadem 
and a jewelled turban. He took -his seat on a 
lofty throne and bid Aesop to be summoned. 
To whom entering said he, ‘To whom dost thou 
compare me, Aesop, and those who are with me?’ 
Whereat he, ‘ Thee to the sun in spring, and them 
that are around thee to its beauteous ears of 


+3 


I4 


15 


Cc. XXvil 


C. XXViil 


corn.’ The king marvelled at him, and honoured 


him, too, with gifts. On the next day the king 
arrayed him in purest white, and bid his friends 
be clad in purple, and upon Aesop’s entrance he 
asked him again his former question. Whereat 
Aesop, ‘ Thee,’ said he,‘ I compare to the sun, and 
them that are about thee to his rays. Whereat 
Nectenabo, ‘I think,’ said he, ‘that Lykeros has 
nothing to compare with this kingdom of mine.’ 
Aesop smiled, and said, ‘Reckon not so readily, 
O king, concerning him. To your people your 
vaunted kingdom hath indeed the splendour of 
the sun: but if it should be compared with 
Lykeros, it would take nothing to convert that 
light into mirk.’ Nectenabo, amazed at his witty 
words, inquired, ‘ Hast thou brought us those who 
are to build the tower?’ Said he, ‘ They are ready, 
if only you show us the place.’ 

After that the king went out into the plain, 
and pointed.out and measured the spot. There- 
upon Aesop, bringing to the four corners of the 
place indicated the four eaglets with the boys 
fastened to them by bags, and giving to the 


C. XXiX 


Cc. XXX 


Coxx XT 


S, XXXii 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 


AN r XN fal na 
MeTa xElpas Sovs epyadeta, exeAevoev GvamTHvat. ot de 
iA , a? 
mpos twos yevoyevor, ‘ddre Huiv, epdvovy, ‘ dALOovs, 
, , lal \ ~ 
dote koviay, ddre EVAa, Kal TaAAa TGV Tpos olKodopTyY 
5) > Lal 
emitndeiwy. 65 NexrevaBw Tovs Taitdas Oeacduevos 
> n a 
els twos b1d TSv derdv dvapepopevovs Epn’ ‘T7d0Ev 
2 \ ee > \ ¢ ¥ * ¢ 3 \ 
€4.0l TT nvol avOpwrot; Kal o Atownos adda 
fod JA 3 
Avkijpos éxev’ ob b& Oéders AvOpwmos dv icobew 
2 a \ af 
epiCew Bacire?;’ Kal 6 NexrevaBa: ‘ Alowre, frr7y- 
> 
Mau. 


b] be / \ / ) , > \ , 
epyoomat d€ oe, OU O€ MOL ATOKpIWaL" Kal Pyotr’ 
BA S2 al Mea , @ ¢ 4 > \ 2 , 
elot pot OnAevar Ode immo, aimep eTELdav Axovowar 
Tov ev BaBvdAGui tnT@Y xpeueTiCdvTar, EvOds cvAAaL- 
! a 
Bdvovow. €t coimpods TodTO TapeoTt copia, éemiderEat.” 
oS yy ete ee a b) a I a2 
kal 0 Atowtos* ‘avptov amoxpivotual co, Bacted. 
5) x DS Ka , ¥ cal \ CRN 
eAP@v SE Ov KaTHyETO, aiovpoy Tots Taloly eKxéhEvTE 
° \ 
ovddaBely, Kal ovddAnpbévta dSnuocia epiayerOar 
, ce XN Sh Oe. x ss , 
pactiCowevov. of d€ Aiy’mrio Td Gov oeBdpuevor, 
A \ 
ovT@ KaKOS TATXOV adTO Deacdmevor, ovVedpapov, Kal 
Tov atAdovpoy THs xelpos TOY pacTLyovvTMY exoTd- 
cates, dvayyedAAovew ws TaXos TS Bactrel Td TABS" 
< X / BN y 6 ‘5 LA > , 
0 6€ Kadéeoas Tov Alowmov, SovK noes, yor, 
¢ ” < XX 4 9 Cent. 9 \ ¥ # 
AtowmTe, ws eds ceBdpevos Tap Nuty €oTly atroupos ; 
a a NS e las 
iva ti yotv tobdto weToinkas ;” Kal ds* ‘ Avxjooy tov 
/ Q7 ™ lal a 7 \ 
Baoirtéa ndiknoer, ® Bacired, Ths TapeAOovons vuKTos 
ottos 6 alAovpos’ aGdextpvdva yap adrod mepdvevKe 
Maxuzov Kal yevvatov, mpocére pry Kal Tas Spas av’T@ 
n > \ 
THs vuKTos onpatvovta. Kal 6 Baotrets’  ‘ ovk 
n p) al \ 
aicxvvn Wevddmevos, Atowme 3 TOs yap ev pad vuKTl 
x i pie DD, > > n > c 
alkovpos an’ Alyinrov 7\Oev eis BaBvdGva 5” Kaxei- 
x n > n 
vos perdidcas pyot’ Sxal més, ® Baorred, ev BaBv- 
n a roa , Lae) / / ¢ 
A@uvi Thy immer xXpEepeTiCdvTMY ai EvOdde OndrEvat tmToL 
/ ed ¢ ‘ XN a > / IN 
ovdAapBdvovow ;’ 6 d5€ Bactreds Tatta dxovoas, THY 
avtov ppdvynow euaxapice. 


a n ? c 
peTa O€ Taita petateuWdpevos TOV ap “HAiov 
lal f 
moAews avdpas CyTnpat@y scodiotikGy éemLoTHpovas, 
\ Q a 3) TA \ >’ lal ) / ef 
Kal mept TOV Aia@mov drarex els avtots, exadevev Apna 
7T@ AlodT ew evoxiay. davaxdiOévtwy ody aiTor, 
A € Ves r na f XQ SN x 5 
tév “HAlov amodutév tis dyno. mpds Tov Alowrov 
a n a / 
‘ameotdAnv mapa Tod Oeod pou Tedoiv Twa TvOETAaL 
= . A . 
cou, os av adryy emiddvons. Kal 6 Alowmos’ ‘ Wevdn 
o cal \ XN 
Oeds yap Tap’ avOpdmov ovdey detrar pabeiv. ov d€ 
an lal nan nn P] 
ov “Ovoy GavTOD KaTnyopets, GAA Kal TOD Deod cov. 
5 \ a 
érepos mdAwv cimev" ‘ott vads péyas Kal ey avT@ 
an / 
atoAos, ddédexa ToAELS! exwv, GY ExdoTN TpLaKoVTA 
lal an > 
doKols €oTéyaotat, TovTous 5€ mepiiacr VO yuvatkes. 
Neue ¥ MY * a \ t \ ¢ ? 
Kal 6 Atownos €py’ ‘totTo To TpOBAnMma Kal ol Tap 
r cal o < 
Hiv emdvoovTa: Tatdes* vads pev yap €aTLy ovTOS O 
KOouos, oTbAOS SE 6 eviauTds, ai S€ TOAELS, Ot phveEs, 
/ c i \ te 
kat doxol ai rovT@y nu€pat, nuepa Sé Kal vdé ai dvo 
a / PI] 
yovatkes, al Tapadda€ GAAnAats dvadeX ovrat. 


Th de Epe€iis Nuepg cvyxadéaas Tovs pirovs amavtas 

6 NexrevaBd now’ ‘dia Tov Atowrov robrov dpAjoo- 
, a a , > @ , are 

yey Popovs TH BaciArct Avkypo. ets d€ Tis avT@V 
a , , eon 

cime? ‘xeAevowpey adt@ mpoBAnuata dpacar npiv, 











hands of the boys the builders’ tools, bid them 
fly away. But they, mounted on high, kept 
crying out, ‘Give us stones, give mud, give 
timber, whatever else is proper for building.’ 
Nectenabo, regarding the lads high borne in the 
air of the eagles, said, ‘Whence shall I get me 
winged men?’ But Aesop said, ‘Yea! but 
Lykeros hath such: and wilt thou, a man, strive 
with a king, the mate of gods?’ Whereat Nec- 
tenabo: ‘I am beaten, Aesop,’ quoth he. 

‘I will, however, ask thee somewhat, and 
answer thou me.’ Says he, ‘I have mares here, 
which, when they hear the horses in Babylon 
neighing, straightway conceive offspring. If thou 
hast aught of wisdom for that matter, show it.’ 
Said Aesop, ‘To-morrow, O king, I will answer 
thee.’ When he came to his lodging, he bid his 
boys to catch a cat, and when caught to drag it 
about in public and whip it. But the Egyptians 
who reverence that beast, seeing it suffer thus, 
ran together, and pulling the cat out of the hands 
of those that were whipping it, report imme- 
diately to the king its sufferings. . He, then, 
called Aesop, and said, ‘ Knowest thou not, Aesop, 
that the cat is worshipped amongst us as a god? 
Wherefore hast thou done thus?’ Said he, ‘ This 
cat, O king, in the past night, did wrong to 
King Lykeros, for he killed his cock, a game 
‘bird and well bred, which, further, used to tell 
him the hour of the night.’ To whom the king: 
‘Dost thou not blush, Aesop, thus to lie? How 
came a cat in one night from Egypt to Babylon ?’ 
He, smiling, made reply: ‘And how, O king, do 
thy mares here conceive when the horses neigh 
in Babylon?’ When the king heard this, he 
commended his understanding. 

Afterthishe sent for men from Heliopolis, expert 
in sophist questions, and having discoursed with 
them about Aesop, he invited them and him to 
a banquet. When they were set at meat, one of 
the citizens of Heliopolis says to Aesop: ‘I have 
been sent by my god with an inquiry for thee 
to resolve.’ 

‘Liar!’ said Aesop. ‘God needeth not lore 
from man. Thou accusest not thyself only, but 
thy god!’ 

Another again said: ‘There is a great temple, 
and in it is a pillar, it has twelve gates, whereof 
each is roofed with thirty beams, and round 
these go two women.’ And Aesop replied: 
‘Even boys in our country can solve that riddle; 
For the temple is this world, and the pillar is the 
year, the gates are the months, and their beams 
are the days: moreover night and day are the 
two women who succeed one another alternately.’ 

On the following day, Nectenabo called to 
him all his friends and said: ‘Through this 
Aesop we shall incur revenue debts to King 
Lykeros.’ But one of them said, ‘ Let us bid him 


1 Sic! lege wvAas. 


783 


C. XXX 


CAXKKRL 


C. XXXii 


THE STORY OF AHIKAR 


\ @ v9 oY i dat) b) te > 2 st bs 
. TEept Ov ovT eldouer ov7T HKovcapev.  dpeotdy ody 
tobdto T® NextevaBo dd€av, kadéoas tov Alowrov epn’ 
‘ lA , S| Av / \ Gl se) in) 
ppacov nuiv, Aiowne, tpdBAnyua Tept ob ovr’ eldomev 
ovr’ WKovoayer. Kal ds* ‘adpiov ep tovrov byiv 
nan >’ o 
amokpwovpat. amehOv ody kal cvvrakdpevos ypap.- 
Ca) < n 
paretov, €v © meptelxeto NexrevaBe Omodoyev yxiAva 
i a ie ? 7 , b \ ee 
Tadavra To Avkip@ ddeirewv, tpwias eraveAOoy Tw 
Bache? 76 ypapparetoy éréd@xev. of 70d Baodéws 
piror, mply dvorxOjvat 7d ypaupareiov, mavres éeyov" 
lel SK an 
‘kal eldouey Todro Kal nKovoapev, Kal GAnOds em- 
, > \ € y . ¢ , Oa a a 
oTrapeba. Kat 6 Alowmos Xaply vty oda THs 
> oe ed > c \ T X\ \ < f 
amoddcews evexey. 6 d& NekrevaBd rv dpodoylav 
a > los ) ‘ Ly fe ¢ 2 nn / \ 
THs OpEldns avayvors eimev' ‘ euod Avknp@ pndev 
opethovtos mavtes tyuels paprupetre 3’ KaKeivor META 
4 = eh Cpe ey eae mae | s > \ 
BaXovres eitov* ‘ovr’ eidopev ov7’ Hxot’capuev.’ Kal 
\ an 
6 Atowmos* ‘kat ef rad’ obtws éxet, AeAvTaL TO 
\ T a 
(ntovpevov. Kal 6 NextevaBe mpos tadra’ ‘ waxd- 
plos €or Avkiipos tovadtny coplay év TH Bacirela 
éavtod KexTypevos. ods ody cvudwrndévtas pédpovs 
tapadovs T@ Aicdre, év elpyvn ané€orevev. Aiowmos 
an lol , 
6 els BaBvAdva Tapayevopevos, dueEHOE Te Avkiip 
pd > i cal \ \ 
Ta ev Atyimt@ Tpaxdévta taidta Kal tovs pdpovs 
amédwxe, Avknpos 8 éxédevoev avdpidvra Xpucody 
To Alodrw avareOjvat. 








784 


enounce riddles, of things we never heard nor 
saw. This seemed agreeable to Nectenabo, so 
he called Aesop and said: ‘Enounce us, Aesop, 
a riddle of somewhat we nor heard nor saw.’ 
Said he, ‘I will answer thee of this to-morrow.’ 
So he went away and composed a letter in which 
it was contained that Nectenabo admits that he 
owes a thousand talents to Lykeros, and on the 
morrow he returned to the king and gave him 
the document. But the friends of the king, 
before the paper was opened, cried out together, 
‘We both know this and have heard it, and we 
truly understand it.’ Said Aesop, ‘Thank you 
for your answer.’ But Nectenabo took and 
read the admission of the debt. Said he: ‘You 
all bear witness that I owe nothing to Lykeros.’ 
And they took him up and said, ‘We neither 
saw nor heard of it’ Whereat Aesop: ‘And if 
the thing is really so, your inquiry is answered.’ 
To which Nectenabo said, ‘Happy is Lykeros 
who has such wisdom in his kingdom.’ So he 
handed over to Aesop the tribute as agreed, and 
sent him away in peace. 

And Aesop, when he reached Babylon, dis- 
coursed to Lykeros of all that had taken place, 
and delivered to him the tribute. And Lykeros 
bid that a statue of gold should be set up to 
Aesop. 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


INTRODUCTION 


§ 1. SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE ZADOKITE PARTY AND INCIDENTALLY OF THE BOOK. 


WRITTEN towards the close of the first century B.C. in good Hebrew,’ our book represents the 
beliefs and expectations of a body of reformers who sprang up in the second century B.C. within 
the priesthood, as the Pharisees had within the laity, and called themselves, at all events in the first 
century, ‘the Sons of Zadok’.2 The reformation, in which they were the chief movers, was the 
result of a slow but steady religious revival, which took place between the years 196 and 176 B.C. 
or thereabouts (i. 6), and which culminated at the close of this period in the formation of a Party 
within the priesthood. This Party—‘the penitents of Israel’—appears to have attempted the 
reform of irregularities connected with the Temple (§ 10. i), but having failed in the attempt they 
left Jerusalem and the cities of Israel, either voluntarily or under compulsion, and withdrew to 
Damascus under the leadership of ‘the Star’, otherwise designated as ‘the Lawgiver’ ($ To. i), 
where they established the ‘New Covenant’—‘the Covenant of Repentance’. Thus the first 
breach of the Party was with their brethren the Sadducean priesthood. After the institution 
of the New Covenant, the Party appears to have returned from Damascus and made the cities 
of Israel the sphere of their missionary efforts. For an unspecified period of years till the coming of 
the Teacher of Righteousness, they were to obey faithfully the interpretation of the Law laid down 
by the Lawgiver above referred to. It was probably during this period that they first came into 
open antagonism with the Pharisees—an antagonism which grew in bitterness with the growing 
years. The most virulent attacks in our book are directed against the Pharisees (§ 10. ii). The 
ground for these attacks can be best understood from the knowledge of the origin of the Party. 
The movement that gave them birth was of an intensely ethical and religious character, and naturally 
tended to lead them to recognize the Prophets as of great worth, even if not of equal worth with the 
Law, and therein to differentiate themselves from both Pharisee and Sadducee. This was one 
cause of the breach with the Pharisees. Another arose from the fact that whereas the Pharisees 
were upholding and developing a vast body of oral tradition, the reformed Sadducees (i.e. our Party) 
absolutely opposed its acceptance except in a few particulars. They clung fast to the written Law 
and would have none of the oral. While the Pharisees called their school or college ‘ the House 
of Midrash’, our Party designated theirs as ‘the House of the Law’. Furthermore, since they 
claimed to represent the true Israel, especially on the priestly side, to them belonged the covenants 
and the priestly functions, and the rights of teaching and judging Israel—which latter functions had 
been usurped by the Pharisees ; to them also belonged the Temple at Jerusalem as their Sanctuary, 
to them belonged Jerusalem, ‘the holy city’ (§ to. iii). 

The precepts of the Law as expounded by the Lawgiver were to be obeyed till the coming 
of the Teacher of Righteousness. This Teacher was to come ‘in the end of the days’. It was 
probably during this time that the Party assumed the name ‘ the Sons of Zadok’ (§ Io. iv). 

After the death of the ‘Teacher of Righteousness’, whose teaching and activities are not 
recounted—a fact which points to the defectiveness of our MSS.—a considerable period elapses, 
much more than forty years. We have now arrived at the date of our author. He is living ‘in the 
end of the days’, and the advent of the Messiah ‘ from Aaron and Israel’ is momentarily looked for. 
If I am right in my interpretation of this phrase, the Messiah was to be a son of Mariamne and 
Herod (i.e. from Aaron and Israel), and the book was therefore written between 18 and 8B.c. Herod 
put his two sons to death in 8 B.C.,, since they were the popular idols of the nation, and so this hope, 
like so many that preceded it, failed to reach fulfilment (§ 12). 


1 There are some Aramaisms and Rabbinic expressions in the text, but the Hebrew is good on the whole. 
2 The Party, though originating apparently with the priests and Levites, came to embrace a strong lay element, 
just as the Pharisaic party, though in the main a lay movement, came ultimately to embrace a section of the priests. 


785 3E 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


The later history of the Sons of Zadok is buried in all but impenetrable gloom. It is, however, 
not at all improbable that many of their members joined the Christian Church ($ Io, vi). For 
their appreciation of the Prophets—unparalleled in legalistic Judaism ; their insistent preaching on 
the need of repentance ; their constant proclamation of God’s readiness to forgive the repentant; their 
expectation of a Messiah (and just at this period) and of a future life—all these beliefs and hopes 
prepared them to accept Christianity, and accordingly it is not unreasonable to conclude that they 
formed part of the ‘great company of the priests that became obedient to the faith’ (Acts ic), 


026. “THE TITLE: 


Our book, which in its present form is only fragmentary, was most probably called ‘ The Book 
of Zadok’ or some such designation. We draw this inference from the statements of Kirkisani, 
a Karaite scholar, who wrote in the tenth century A.D. and appears to have had our book or one 
closely resembling it before him. In his Kitab al-Anwar (‘ Book of Lights’) he states (1) that Zadok 
was the first to attack the Rabbinites. This is true of our author, who attacks fiercely the Pharisees 
of his time. Kirkisani further states (2) that Zadok absolutely forbade divorce: so our author 
in vil. 1; (3) that Zadok did not support by proofs the laws he laid down save in case of his 
forbidding a man to marry his niece—the daughter of his brother or sister—on the ground that 
these connexions were already prohibited in Lev. xviii. 13, being analogous to the forbidden 
connexion of a man with his aunt on the father or mother’s side: so in our author, vii. g—10. 

It is worth observing also that in i. r@ there is a play on the name Zadok, also that the 
Zadokites ascribed to a Zadok the merit of having rediscovered the Law, vii.6. Who this Zadok 
was can hardly be determined. Inv. 7 ‘the Priests and the Levites and the sons of Zadok’ are 
mentioned. From the explanation of these words in vi. 1-2 it is clear that the Priests and Levites 
represent the original priestly founders of the Party, and that the expression ‘Sons of Zadok’ 
designates their spiritual successors ‘at the end of the days’. , 


$3... EHE-MSS, 


The text is preserved in two MSS. in the University Library, Cambridge, which are designated 
respectively as T.-S. 10 K.6 and T.-S.16. 311. After the precedent of Schechter, who presented 
them to the Library and issued the editio princeps, they will hereafter be called A and B. 

A, which embraces the entire work so far as it exists except ix. 28-54, consists of eight leaves 
85x 7g in. The first eight pages have twenty-one lines on each page, pages g-12 have twenty-three 
lines on each page. As regards 13-16 the number of lines is uncertain owing to the mutilation 
of the bottom of the pages, but was probably twenty-three—there were at least twenty-two lines on 
pages 13 and 14. This mutilation extends in a slight degree to the edges of the leaves. 

This MS. belongs according to Schechter to the tenth century, but the writing is of a decidedly 
careless description. * and } are frequently confused, and } is occasionally so large as to resemble 
}} 1 and 7 are likewise confused. 

B consists of a single leaf, 133 x 8 in., of the eleventh or twelfth century and is a more careful 
reproduction than A. ‘There are thirty-four lines on each page. These two pages contain viii, 20— 
ix. 3, 10-54, thus preserving ix, 28-54, which has been lost in A, as well as ix. rt. That the MSS. 
were freely dealt with will be manifest from a comparison of ix. 3, where A gives a quotation from 
Isa. vii. 17, whereas instead of it B gives a quotation from Zech. xiii. 7. 


§ 4. THE HEBREW TEXT AND ITS PHRASEOLOGY. 


The text is on the whole fairly preserved, though there are many corruptions. Most of these 
can be emended with tolerable certainty. The rest can only be tentatively restored. 

The language is in itself a witness to an ancient epoch, It is good Hebrew enriched by a few 
Aramaisms like the Book of Daniel and Sirach, though in a less degree. It contains also 
a few Mishnaic and Talmudic expressions, but in certain: cases the phrases in question bear 
a different meaning in _post-Biblical Jewish literature. The language, as has been generally 
recognized, is not that of the Mishnah, the Midrashim, or the Talmud. 

Like Sirach, our author makes constant use of O. T. diction, but, unlike him, he quotes its text 
patently in the name of the writer. At times our text is of the nature of a mosaic of O.T. 
phrases. 

_ The language is, as we have said, pure Biblical Hebrew, but interspersed with a few phrases 
which are not Biblical and are not attested save in Mishnaic or Talmudic Hebrew. Those of 
a Talmudic character may be due to the Substitutions of later scribes. Some of these can be 

786 


SINTRODUCTION 


supported from Jewish pre-Christian literature. Thus wown bia ‘the sun’s orb Xie Y, is-clearly 
the Hebrew implied by 1 Enoch Ixxviii. 4: ‘xq yan ‘the community of Israel’, xiv. 8, is 
supported by the inscription on the Maccabean coins; see note zz loc.: imwaind ‘allowing’, xiv. 1; 
cf. Sirach iii. 22, mw-in ‘thou art allowed’: j200n ‘that which has been prepared ’, xiii. 8 implied in 
Jub. if. 29, 1 0. pane 

Others which have not such ancient support are wind ii. 8 (note), ANI3n ‘ the creation’ vii. 3— 
a Talmudic word; npn ‘sexual intercourse’ vii. 11; pwn? ‘on the following morning’ 
aoe i (note); Mav2 ‘entrance’ xiii. 16 (see note); jm ‘wealth’ xviii. g (note); psp xix. 14 (see 
note). 

All the preceding words are authenticated in their use in our text by parallels in earlier or 
later Jewish literature; but there are some expressions, as might be expected, which are more 
or less unique in the meaning that must be attached to them in this book. Thus 71D ix. 1, &c., 
which means ‘ order’, ‘arrangement’, &c., is unexampled in Hebrew in this sense, but it is found in 
Aramaic (see note on ix. 1). Again, nimnwn na ‘the house of worship’, xiv. 2, is as a name of the 
Temple or a Synagogue a dm. Ney. Again, the word pan ‘the censor’, x. 10 (note), xvi. £ (note), 
is used in Jewish literature, but not in the sense attributed to it in our text. Again, the term 
inp =‘ office’ (ii. 8 note), has in our text a nuance of its own, but Jewish literature furnishes fairly 
good analogies. 

Finally, the term /‘P (see i. 5 note) must, I think with Lévi, Bacher, and Lagrange, be rendered 
‘period’ or ‘division of time’. No true parallel for this use of the word appears to occur elsewhere, 
though it is easy to see how it could mean ‘a final period’. 


§ 5. THE ZADOKITES WERE A PARTY AND NOT A SECT. 


Since there is no question as to the genuineness of the orders of the Zadokite Priests and 
Levites, and since further their Sanctuary, which is so often referred to (see note on i. 3), is, as Lévi 
has recognized, the Temple in Jerusalem, it follows that the Zadokites were not a heterodox Sect 
but a Party within Judaism. They were no more a Sect than the Pharisees. It is true that even 
the Pharisees are described as a Sect (aipeous) in Acts xv. 5, xxvi. 5, Joseph. Vita 38; the Sadducees 
in Acts v. 17, Joseph. Amt. xx. 9. 1, and.the Christians in Acts xxiv. 5, 14, xxvili. 22; but its 
application to the two former isa misuse of the term. If, however, we use this term of the Pharisees 
and Sadducees, there can be no objection to its application in the same sense to the Zadokites. 
But since the term is in itself misleading we shall only speak of the Party of the Zadokites. 


§ 6. DATE OF THE ORIGINAL. 


The limits of time between which our book appears to have been written seem clear. Since 
the Book of Jubilees is referred to (xx. 1) it must have been written after 106 B.c. This forms the 
terminus a quo. The terminus ad quem is no less obvious; for the Temple is still standing (see 
note on i. 3, where it is shown that the Sanctuary so often referred to is the Temple). Thus our 


book was written between 106 B.C. and 70 A.D. 
But it may be possible to define these limits more closely, and fix on one or other of two 


periods within these limits. } 
(i) If the nation was free from foreign control, as might be inferred from our entire text, with 


the exception of the doubtful passage in x. 1, then it was written before Pompey seized Jerusalem 
in 63 B.C., or before Judaea was made a Roman province by Gabinius in 57 B.c. This would bring 
the composition of the book within the years 106-57 B.C. 


1 Schechter treats 13M ‘incurred guilt’, iv.9,asaRabbinicterm. But it is found in the Pielin Dan. i. 10, and critics 
read °*N3n for ‘NID in 1 Sam. xxii. 22, in accordance with the LXX, Vulg. and Pesh. Again, 731 oT ‘the blood of 
her issue’, vii. 8, is a Biblical expression (cf. Lev. xv. 19 TWA AI 7 O4), and not merely a Rabbinic one. 

2 In addition to the grounds given in i. 3 as proofs that the Temple was still standing when our book was 
written, is to be mentioned the fact that nowhere is the destruction of the Second Temple so much as hinted at. Had 
it already occurred our author could not have omitted such an argument in support of his attack on the Pharisees. For 
it is characteristic of his method to trace the great national calamities of the Jews to their unfaithfulness to God. This, 
he declares, was the ground of the Captivity in 586 B.C., and the destruction of the First Temple, 1. 3 sqq. The same 
unfaithfulness (ix. 17-19) led to the desolation of Judaea and Jerusalem under Antiochus Epiphanes (ix.20). And yet, 
notwithstanding such judgements in the past, ‘the builders of the wall’ (i.e. the Pharisees), our author complains, 
persist in their evil ways (ix. 21). Now, if the Second Temple had been already destroyed, this latest and overwhelming 
judgement could not have been passed over. Our author would have pressed it home as an irresistible proof of their 
guilt. That he did not do so is no accident. It was an event still in the future. 


787 3ER 


(Fas =e 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE ‘WORK 


Some statements partially support this date. (2) The expectation of the Messiah from Aaron 
and Israel, ii. 10, viii, 2, ix. 10 (B), 29(B), xv. 4, xviii. 8. This expectation arose, as we know, in 
connexion with the Maccabean family, and probably persisted only in connexion with that family. 
But for the peculiar statement ‘from Aaron and Israel’, we could with some reason infer that the 
Maccabees were still ruling. (4) The halacha are severer than those in the Talmud and are closely 
related in some respects to those in the Book of Jubilees. (c) ix. 39, which speaks of ‘the men 
of war’ who marched with ‘the man of lies’ during forty years, would apply tolerably to Jannaeus, 
who was rightly an object of unmixed hatred to all the faithful of his time. He was a great warrior 
and his troops were ever on the march. It may, however, be objected that this king reigned not 
forty but twenty-six years. But to surmount this difficulty it is only necessary to suppose that the 
book was written during his lifetime, and that the writer expected an evil period of forty years like 
that in the wilderness. We have a good parallel in the ‘ Assumption of Moses’, where the author 
predicts that the sons of Herod would reign for a shorter period than their father. This prediction 
was falsified. : 

If the above reasoning were valid, our book was probably written between 106 and 58 B.C. 
But there are stronger grounds for a later date. ; 

(ii) Our book was most probably written between 18 B.C. and A.D. 70, or possibly between 
18 B.C. and 8B.c. The grounds for these dates are as follows: (2) x. 1 does seem to imply 
political subjection on the part of the Jews. Hence our author wrote after 63 or 57 B.C, (2) The 
phrase ‘man of lies’ receives its most easy explanation as applied to Herod the Great, who reigned 
forty-one years. The phrase ‘man of lies’ is eminently fitting for a prince who was wholly devoid 
of principle and religion. The ‘men of war’ who went with him were his fierce soldiery—all 
mercenaries, Galatians, Thracians, Germans—who on the slightest uprising struck down relentlessly 
on every side.’ Now, if these identifications are valid, our book was written either during Herod’s 
life, 37 B.C.— A.D. 4, or after Herod’s death, accordingly as we take the forty years in our text as 
a prediction or as recording a fact already past. The next piece of evidence—the peculiar form 
of the Messianic expectation—favours the former alternative. (c) The Messiah was to arise from 
Aaron and from Israel. See § 12. This implies that he was not to be purely of Levitic or priestly 
descent, but to be sprung from Levi (i.e. the Maccabees) and some other tribe of Israel. Now when 
all the direct male descendants of the Maccabees were put to death directly: or indirectly by 
Herod—Antigonus II in B.c. 37, Antigonus III, the brother of Mariamne, in 35 B.Cc., Hyrcanus II 
in 30 B.C.—there remained only Mariamne, the wife of Herod, who represented the royal Maccabean 
house both on her father’s and her mother’s side and all its claims, and the two sons of Mariamne 
and Herod, Alexander and Aristobulus. In 29 B.C. Mariamne was executed on a false charge by 
Herod, and so her two sons Alexander and Aristobulus might reasonably be described as descended 
Srom Aaron and Israel, seeing that Mariamne was of Aaronic descent alike on her father’s and her 
mother’s side, and Herod was said to be a Jew (Jos. Azt. xx. 8.7; cf. xiv. 1. 3), and the Herodian 
family regarded themselves as Jews, though they were at times reminded that they were 
only half Jews (And. xiv. 15. 2). These two young men were held in high esteem by the nation 
owing to their descent on their mother’s side and their own brilliant qualities (Anz. xvi. 1. 2), and 
it is quite possible that the Zadokite Party may have cherished the hope that one of them might 
become the Messiah, just as similar hopes had arisen in connexion with the earlier Maccabees in 
the second century B.c. If this be so, our book was probably written between 18 B.C, (when these 
youths returned to Jerusalem after finishing their education in Rome) and 8 B.C., when they were 
put to death by their father. With their death the hope of a Messiah arising from the Maccabean 


family must have finally perished.2- Hence it is not improbable that our book was written during 
the lifetime of these young princes. 


§ 7. INTEGRITY OF THE TEXT. 


_ fi) Our text is cxcomplete. This is obvious even on the most cursory examination. Its end is 
missing, and probably large portions of the rest of the text as at the close of ix. In the case of the 


* Herod treated the Sadducees with the utmost rigour. He executed forty-five of the abl 
party, and confiscated their estates (Jos. Azz. xv. 1. 2; xiv.9.4; Bell. lud.i. 18. 4). 
for Herod is therefore very intelligible. ' 

, * Both Alexander and Aristobulus left sons, the former having married Glaphyra, the daughter of Archela 
king of Cappadocia, and the latter Bernice, the daughter of Salome. But the descendants of seo AN cee 
Judaism, and the descendants of Aristobulus, being three-fourths Herodian in blood, could not represent the priestly 


and royal house of the Maccabees, while their infamous character in itself was enough to alienate the few, if any, surviving 
hopes that attached to this great family, : r 
788 


1 est and wealthiest of their 
The hatred of the priesthood 


INTRODUCTION 


A text we see that after ix. 28 there is a loss of twenty-six verses, which have happily been preserved 
in the Btext- ; 

__ (ii) Our text is in great disorder. The question of vows is introduced in ix. 1, and then ignored 
till xx. 2-12. The enumeration of the laws of the Sabbath is given in xiii. 1-11, broken off 
in xiii. 12 and resumed in xiii. 13, broken off in xiii. 27 and resumed in xiv. 6. The duties of the 
Censor are dealt with in xvi. 1-12, and again in xvii.6—-7._ The laws as to Uncleanness are scattered 
here and there throughout chapters xii—xv, i.e. in xii. 1-2, xiii. 12, xiv. 1-3, 7-16, xv. I-3. 
he (iii) Our text may be based on an earlier document or documents. This appears to be so 
in i. 5, where there is a prose insertion in the midst of verse. A still more obvious prose addition 


iS en bese in ii. 8. Yet these prose additions are in character with the later chapters of 
e book. 


§ 8. ATTITUDE OF THE PARTY TO THE O.T. AND OTHER ANCIENT JEWISH BOOKS. 


We have here a very interesting question. We have to inquire into the attitude of the Party 
towards the various sections of the O. T., i.e. the Law, the Prophets, and the Hagiographa. In this 
inquiry we shall, for the present, take account only of those passages which are introduced by such 
significant expressions as "ON WND, TON WE, &c. Afterwards we shall deal with those passages 
which are actually quotations, but which are not introduced as such. By a study of these two 


classes of passages, we shall be able to determine the respective values our author set on the three 
divisions of the O. T. 


(i) Quotations from the O.T. introduced as such (a) but without mention of the speaker or writer. 

(2) WON AWD (= cabds cimev John i. 23, vii. 38: cf. Kabds edddnoe Luke i. 55; 70). This expression is 
used once of the Law, i.e. Num. xxx. 16 in ix. 1, and three times of the Prophets, i.e. Amos v. 26-7 in ix. 5, 
Amos ix. rr in ix. 6, and Hosea iii. 4 in ix. 40. This usage, as we have seen above, is found in the N. T. also. 

(2) "ON WN (cf. mpopara. . . door €AdAnoay Acts iii. 24, and 6 Adyos ‘Hoaiov ... dv etre John Xil. 38). 
This expression is used twice of the Law, i.e. Lev. xix. 18 in x. 2, and Deut. xxiii, 24 in xx. 4: and twice 
of the Prophets, i.e. Hos. v. r1 in vii. 1 and Mic. vii, 2 in xx. 11. This usage also belongs to the N. T. 

(c) aIND (= yéypanra Matt. iv. 4, 6, 7, 10, xxi, 13, &c.). This expression is used once of the Law, i.e. 
Deut. xvii. 17 in vii. 4, once of the Prophets, i.e. Nahum i. 2 in x. 3, once of the Hagiographa, i.e. Prov. xv. 8 
in xiv. x. It occurs also in xiii. 27, but the quotation is lost. This is the most usual of the N. T. usages. 

(dZ) IND AWND (= Kxabas yéypanrat Mark i. 2; Luke ii. 23; Rom. i. 17, iii, 10, &c.; os yéypaTrrat 
Mark vii. 6; Luke iii, 4; xaOds eorw yeypaupévov John vi. 31). This expression is used of the Law, i.e. 
Num. xxiv. 17 in ix. 8. 

(e) 23 (= 2N23—practically the same as the preceding = cara 1d yeypaupéevov 2 Cor. iv. 13 (cf. Kaddmep 
yéypanrar Rom. iii. 4, ix. 13, &c.—Westcott and Hort)). This expression is used of the Law, 1. e. Deut. vii. 9 in 
viii. 21 (B). 

(8) With mention of the speaker or writer. 

(a) Ss aN WN (cf, Gv eAdAnoev 6 Beds Sua oTdparos T. dylov ... mpopytév Acts iii, 21). This expression 
is used twice of the Law, i.e. Deut. xxxii. 33 in ix. 19 and Lev. xix. 17 in x. 5 (MON AWS Sy), and once of the 
Prophets, i.e. Mal. i, ro in viii. 11. 

(2) nw “MX wR. This expression is used of the Law, i.e. Deut. ix. 5 and vii. 8 in ix. 23 (AB). In 
vii. To we have TON wD (= Moavoijs etev Mark vii. 10; Acts iii. 22) used of Lev. xviii. 13. 

(c) Dye” TON WN in viii. 8 from Isa. liv. 16. 

(d) Ssepimy 0 ON TWN in ix. 11 (B) from Ezek. ix. 4. 

(e) MoD Pa Dn2 Wwe in ix. 2 (B) from Zech. Xili. 7. 

(7) myer e373 aind in ix. 2 (A) from Isa. vii. 17. 


If we summarize the above facts, we find that, while the Hagiographa is expressly quoted once, 
the Law is quoted ten times and the Prophets eleven times. Thus in the eyes of the Zadokite 
Party the Prophets were at all events not less important than the Law, though theoretically the Law 
was held in the highest honour: cf. xix. 2, 11, XxX. 2, 7- In this respect this Party are at variance 
with the practice of Judaism as a whole after the year A.D. 70, but not with the Apocalyptic or more 
spiritual side of Pharisaism before the Christian era. The chief studies of Apocalyptic Pharisaism 
were devoted to Prophecy, and hence to them the Law and the Prophets were practically of equal 
worth, however differently they might view this question cheoretically. At all events, in the 
Apocalyptic School of Pharisaism this practical equating of the Law and the Prophets was current, 
and in this respect the Zadokites approximated to this School, being no doubt influenced by it. 
We are not surprised, therefore, that in the N. T. the actual phrase ‘the Law and the Prophets’ is 
used frequently: cf. Matt.v. 17, vii. 12, xxii. 405 Luke xvi. 16 (xxiv. 44); John i. 45; Acts xiii. 15, 


789 


FRAGMENTS. OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


XXiv. 14, xxviii. 23; Rom. iii. 21, and in the inverse order in Matt. xi.13. The N. T. usage represents 
the culmination of this tendency which was at work in the preceding two centuries and more, 

But in addition to the O.T. books our Party assigned to other writings a canonical or 
a deutero-canonical value’. For in vi. 10 we have the expression ‘concerning which Levi the Son 
of Jacob spake’ (apy j2 4b om Sy sp wrx), the source being probably the Test. Lev. ix. 9, xiv. 5-6, 
xvi. 1. In xi. 4 there is a quotation drawn apparently from Jub. xxiii. 11, and the title of this book 
is given in full in xx. 1. Possibly to both these books a quasi-canonical authority was accorded. 
Another book—hitherto wholly unknown—is ‘the Book of the Hagu’ in xi. 2, xv. 5) XVI. 5. From 
the contexts in which it is mentioned it seems to have contained traditional decisions. The ten 
judges of each congregation (xi. 1-2) were to be thoroughly versed in it (cf. xv. 5). These judges 
were both clerical and lay. Associated with this book is another entitled the ‘Ordinances (or 
‘ Foundations’) of the Covenant’ (xi. 2). This work probably contained the statutes of the New 
Covenant which was drawn up at Damascus. Again, in vii. 19 we have mention of the apocryph 
entitled ‘Jannes and Jambres’. Finally, in ix. 28 A there may be an allusion to two Pseud- 
epigraphs—‘ This is the word which Jeremiah spake to Baruch the son of Neriah, and Elisha to his 
servant Gehazi’. 

In these two respects : 1° in the recognition of the Prophets as pretty much on the same level as 
the Law; 2° in the use and even the quasi-canonical recognition of a body of Pseudepigraphs, the 
Zadokite Party is like most of the intensely religious parties in Palestine before the Christian era; 
for all these parties edited Pseudepigraphs. 


$9. The Zadokite Party had its Origin in the Priesthood (2.€. the Sadducees) but was 
closely related to the Pharisees. 


The Zadokite Party represents an attempt at reform beginning within the ranks of the 
priesthood and extending outwards so as to embrace a strong lay element (xi. 2, xvii. 1-3), just as 
the Pharisaic movement was an attempt at reform initiated on the side of the laity but ultimately 
embracing a large section of the priesthood. 

We have already come to the conclusion ($ 5) that the Zadokites formed a Party and not 
a Sect in Judaism. We have now to determine, so far as we may, the position and affinities of this 
Party in relation to the Samaritans, Essenes, Pharisees, and Sadducees. In the course of this 
comparison many of the distinctive teachings of this party will come to light. 

1° The Zadokites were not Samaritans. The Zadokites were not Samaritans; for not only 
did they acknowledge the canonicity of the Prophets and Hagiographa, which the Samaritans denied, 
but they set on these two divisions of the O.T. a higher value than the legalistic side of Pharisaism. 

2° The Zadokites were not Essenes. The Zadokites were not Essenes, since they inculcated 
the duty of animal sacrifice, xiii, 27 EP AV el 

3° Lhe Zadokites were related in point of origin and name to the Sadducees, but were not 
Sadducees in the ordinary sense but a reformed Sadduceeism, The two names are the same in 
Hebrew, opty. The Zadokites called themselves ‘sons of Zadok’ pity °33, vi. 2, and this was also 


the name of the priests: cf. Sir. li. 129 (Hebrew) na pry 293 amad yn «Praise Him who chose 
the sons of Zadok to be priests’. With this: designation in Sirach cf. Ezek. xl. 46, sxlivea: 
xviii. 11 ; 1 Chron, xxix. 22. Thus the Party did not choose a new name but retained the name 
to which they had a right as priests and Levites, By so doing they no doubt claimed to be the 
true ‘sons of Zadok’ as opposed to the Sadducean priesthood. For, though they belonged in point 
of origin to the Sadducean priesthood, they came to differ essentially from them through internal 
reform and the adoption of new tenets. Theirs was a reformed Sadduceeism. 

(2) They believed in a blessed future life, v. 6. So also the priestly author of the Book of 
Jubilees believed. 

(2) They believed in the advent of the Messiah, ii. 10 (B), &c. 

(c) They cultivated an ascetic form of life, viii. 12-20, as opposed to the self-indulgent life 
of pee eae dueees and shunned the wealth of the Temple, viii. 12, but the meaning of this passage 
1s doubttul. 


(2) They set a value on the Prophets and Hagiographa which the Sadducces would wholly 
have repudiated.2 


‘In Test. Lev. x. 5 there is an express quotation from 1 Enoch Ixxxix. 54. This recognition of Pseudepigraphs 
was very general before A.D. 70. Whatever the Law was in theory, these books formed the living literature of the most 
ardent spirits of the tame. The Book of Daniel is simply the most prominent member of this class. 

* That in our Lord’s time the main body of the Sadducees accepted only the Pentateuch as zormative is clear from 
the fact that the only argument He used in favour of a future life in His debate with them was drawn from the 
Pentateuch. The same argument was used by the Samaritans for the same purpose. See Encyc. Bib. iv. 4240, 


79° 


e 


INTRODUCTION 


(e) They attacked the Hellenizing priesthood, ix. 19-20. 
dragons’: i.e. they adopt the ways of the Greeks. 

_ (f) They recognized a certain amount of tradition, whereas the Sadducees rejected all but the 
written Law, Cf. Jos. Ant. xiii. 10.6. Inthe middle of the first century B.C. there was a great strife 
between the Pharisees and Sadducees, in which the former won the day under the leadership 
of Simon ben Shetach and Judas ben Tabbai. So overjoyed were the Pharisees over this victory 
i.e. of oral tradition over the letter of the written Law, that they instituted a festival to com- 
memorate it (Meg. Taan. iv). 

(g) They accused Israel of ‘despising the prophets’, ix. 7. This charge could not have been 
brought by a purely Sadducean priest but only by a reformed Sadducean priest. 

4° The Zadokites were related in many respects to the Pharisees but were not Pharisees. They 
were related in many respects; for 

(a) They believed in a blessed future life, v. 6. 


‘Their wine is the poison of 


Oe tas, ¥ angels and spirits, vi. 9, ix. 12 (ii. 4). é 
Eye vss r the advent of the Messiah, ii. 10, &c. 

ia). <5 $3 a certain body of tradition. 

(e) < the divine predestination, ii. 6, 10¢, and yet in free-will, iii. 1-2, 7, iv. 2, Io. 


Jf) They required separation from the people of the land, ix. 18. 

But in many respects they were opposed to the Pharisees. 

(2) The attack on ‘the builders of the wall’, vii. 1, ix. 21, 26, can be best explained in reference 
to the Pharisees and the abnormal growth of oral tradition (see note on ix. 21). The Pharisees 
‘removed the landmark’, viii. 1, and they made the written Law of none effect by their tradition. 

(0) The Zadokites forbade divorce, vii. 1-3, which was permitted freely by the Pharisees. 
Hence the charge of fornication brought against the Pharisees in vil. I. 

(c) The charges of robbing the Temple offerings may have been directed against them. Simon 
ben Shetach, the chief Pharisee of the reign of Jannaeus, was charged with this offence: see 
viii. 12 note. But the text may be interpreted differently (see (g) below). 

(d) While it was the practice of the Rabbis to derive halacha from the Pentateuch almost 
universally, the Zadokites, owing to the higher estimation in which they held the Prophets, founded 
halacha on their writings. Thus halacha are derived, x. 4, from Nahum i. 2; in x. 6 from 
1 Sam. 26, 31; in xiii. 16 from Jer. xvii. 21, 22, 24, 27 (cf. Neh. xiii. 19)—a regulation adopted 
also in the Mishna; in xiv 1 from Prov. xv. 8. 

(e) The Zadokites, like the Sadducees (Erub vi. 2), were opposed to the Pharisaic principle 
of the ‘Erub, i. e. the combination of several private precincts in order to justify the carrying of food 
and vessels from one house to another on the Sabbath day: see our text xiii. 16. 

(f) Our text in xiv. 15 (see note ad fin.) seems to extend the power of contamination from 
direct to indirect contact. This legislation was due to the Sadducees, Yad. iv. 7. 

(zg) Possibly the difficult words ‘to hold aloof... from the wealth of the Sanctuary’ (viii. 12) 
may be interpreted as referring to the Sadducean contention that the daily burnt-offering 
(Num. xxviii. 4) should be offered at the personal cost of the High Priest: whereas the Pharisees 
maintained that it should be provided as national sacrifice by the Temple treasury. 

(2) The Zadokites charged the Pharisees with profaning the Temple through sexual pollution, 
vii. 8: with allowing a man to marry his niece, vii. g—an act in which some of the Rabbis actually 
gloried: with disturbing the Sabbaths and festivals through their revolutionary reforms of the 
Calendar, v. 2 (see note). Though the details are not given they can be discovered by means. 
of Jubilees and the Talmud. The Pharisees further were charged with usurping (i. 11) the judicial 
functions of the priesthood, vi. 4. Hence their judgements could not be right. 

From the first of these two lists it appears that the Zadokite party were closely related to the 
Pharisees in their eschatological doctrines (a, 0, c), in their acceptance of a limited measure of tradition, 
(2) in their views on predestination and free-will, and in their insistence on separation from the people 
of the land (e, f). On the other hand, from the second list it is clear that on several important 
questions as tradition, divorce, and the source of halacha they were opposed to the legalistic Pharisees, 
and in certain others mentioned under ge, f, (g?), 2, they held fast to the positions maintained by the 
Sadducean priesthood. From these two facts, combined with the facts stated under 3°, the natural 
conclusion is that the Zadokites had their origin in the priesthood and formed a party within wt but 
a reforming party, the reformation being due largely to the Apocalyptic side of Pharisaism as is shown 
by the extreme importance attached to O.T. prophecy and the aavanced views on Eschatology.* The 


1 The Zadokites, owing to the right estimation they placed on O.T. prophecy, would naturally have been predisposed 
to accept Christianity, even in a greater cegree possibly than the Apocalyptic side of Pharisaism. They may have 
formed part, at all events, of the ‘ great company of the priests’ that became ‘ obedient to the faith’ (Acts vi. 7). 


19% 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


fact that they used the literature that supported the claims of the Maccabees (i.e. Test. Bye ven 
and Jubilees) would in part account for their looking forward to a Messiah sprung from the 
Maccabees, but see § 12. 


§ 10, THE PRINCIPAL EVENTS IN THE HISTORY OF THE ZADOKITE PARTY. 


About 390 years after the fall of Jerusalem, i.e. 196 B.C. God had mercy on His people and 
‘visited them, 


And He made to spring forth from Israel and Aaron 

A root of His planting to inherit His land’ (i. 5). 
The order in this statement is remarkable, i.e. not ‘from Aaron and Israel’, but ‘ from Israel and 
Aaron’. If this order is original it seems to indicate that the religious revival referred to in 
i. 5-6 originated on the side of the laity. In other words, it was the same great lay movement that 
gave birth to the Pharisaic Party and likewise to the Zadokite, but, whereas in the case of the former 
the lay element always remained paramount, in the case of the latter the priestly element held 
unquestioned sway.! 

I will now place under separate heads the chief stages in the actual as well as the expected 
developments of the Zadokite Party. ie : 

(i) Rise of the Party and its breach with the Sadducean Priesthood. When God visited His 
people about 196 B.C. there ensued a period of spiritual unrest which lasted for twenty years, during 
which Israel ‘groped after the way’, and came to know that ‘they were guilty men’, i. 6. What 
followed immediately on this religious revival we can gather by reading between the lines, For 
from their vigorous action later we are justified first of all in inferring that this religious revival led 
to action, and in the next place, from their subsequent protest, which runs through several chapters, 
against the profanation of the Temple by the (Hellenizing) priests and others, we may reasonably 
conclude that the first public act of the Zadokite Party was the denunciation of the irregularities 
connected with the Temple worship in more scathing and irreconcilable terms than had been used by 
Malachi the prophet and 1 Enoch. But when in this attempt at reform they failed to gain the 
support of the people (cf. 1 Enoch xc. 6-7), they migrated either voluntarily or under compulsion 
to Damascus, vi. 1, possibly soon after 176 B. C., under the leadership of ‘the Star’, ix. 8, whose advent 
had been foretold in Num. xxiv. 19. 

(ii) Zhe establishment of the New Covenant of Repentance and the subsequent breach of the 
Party with the Pharisees. ‘The Star’ just referred to is likewise called ‘the Lawgiver’ (ppnn), 
vill. 5, 8, y. He was not a lawgiver in the sense of Moses, but rather an interpreter of the Law. 
Of the Star, as of the Lawgiver, the outstanding characteristic is that ‘he studied the Law a WALLS Oe 
ix. 8. Under this Lawgiver the religious side of the movement culminated at Damascus in the 
establishment of ‘the new Covenant’ (awInn nan), viii. 15, ix. 28, 37—the covenant foretold 
by Jeremiah xxxi. 30 sqq., though this claim is not advanced by our author. This covenant was 
fittingly called ‘the covenant of repentance’ (AIwn 3), ix. 15 (B)), seeing that the Party as 
a whole originated in a conviction of their sinfulness before God, i. 6, and that they designated 
themselves as ‘the penitents of Israel’ (oxru ‘Iw), vi. I, viii. 6, ix. 24; for they ‘repented of their 
transgression’, ii. 3, ix. 41; and dwelt frequently on the fact and the marvellousness of the 
divine forgiveness, ii. 3, v. 5, vi. 6, ix. 54, xviii. 8. To them the words of Ezekiel xliy. I5 were 
addressed, v. 7, and thus they alone formed the true priesthood of Israel, vi. 1-2. 

Under the leadership of the Lawgiver the Party established itself resolutely on the lines of the 
written Law. In this task he was assisted by the other members of the Party, viii. 5. 


‘A well the princes digged, 
The nobles of the people delved it 
By the order of the Lawgiver. 


‘The well’ here, as our author explains, is ‘the Law’, and ‘ they who digged it are the penitents 
of Israel’, viii. 6. But ‘the Law’ is not to be understood in the narrow sense of the Pentateuch. 
It embraces the Prophets and the Hagiographa. From the standpoint of the latter can be 
explained their adoption of certain tenets of the higher theology, which, from the standpoint of 
unreformed Sadduceeism, would have been impossible (see §§ 8 and 9. 3°). 

It was most probably the intensely ethical and religious character of the revival in which the 


_ } But it is to be observed that in viii. 3, where the same movement is referred to, its leaders are described as being 
raised by God ‘ from Aaron... and from Israel’, These words would represent the religious reformation as due to 
the joint efforts of the priests and the laity. 


792 


INTRODUCTION 


Zadokite Party originated that led to their recognition of the Prophets as of equal value with the 
Law. It is this equal recognition of the Law and the Prophets that differentiates the Zadokite 
Party alike from the legalistic Pharisee and the unreformed Sadducee. 

Taking their stand, therefore, on the written word, they charged the Pharisees with raising such 
a body of tradition (i.e. ‘the wall’ referred to in vii. 1, ix. 21, 26) round the written Law that 
it was made void (see § 9. 3°, 4°) : with speaking rebellion against the Law and leading Israel astray, 
vill. I, and despising the words of the Prophets, ix. 7. As the true representatives of the Law, they 
designated their Party as ‘the House of the Law’, ix. 35, 37, though it is possible that this phrase 
may mean the School or College belonging to their Party in which the Law was taught. 

(iii) The Party claims to be the true Israel: hence the T. enple was their Sanctuary, Ferusalem 
their holy city, and the cities of Israel the sphere of their missionary effort. The New Covenant was 
established by the leaders of the Party in Damascus, but from thence they returned to the land 
of Israel. There is not a hint that Damascus continued to be even one permanent place of sojourn 
of the Party among others, much less their head-quarters. Cf. viii. 6 with viii. 15, ix. 28, 37. For 
the true Israel as they claimed to be, heirs of all the divine promises, to whom belonged the 
Covenants, the priestly functions, the rights of teaching and judging Israel—which latter privileges 
had been usurped by the Pharisees—the Temple at Jerusalem (i. 3 note), in whose sacrifices they 
took part,® xiii. 27, and none other could be their Sanctuary, and Jerusalem and none other their 
Holy City, ix. 46, the city of their Sanctuary, ix. 46, xiv. 4, and all the cities of Israel were theirs 
to be instructed by them in the Law of God, xv. I-3. 

In all these cities the Zadokites organized themselves in congregations and assemblies, of 
which there are no less than five distinct Hebrew words used (see note on 1. 17). Only the 
faithful members of the Party were allowed to share in their worship or take part in their counsels. 
To these a candidate for membership could be admitted only by the Censor, xvi. 6. Should 
a member of the Party profane the Sabbath or the Feasts he was to be excluded, and not to be 
restored for a period of seven years after his repentance, xiv. 6. 

(iv) Period of obedience to the precepts of ‘ the Lawgiver’ (or ‘the Star’) till the coming of the 
‘ Teacher of Righteousness’. The Party henceforth called the ‘Sons of Zadok’. ‘Throughout the 
full period of the wickedness,’ viii. g (cf. i. 5 note), the Zadokites were to walk according to 
the precepts laid down by the Lawgiver in accordance with the Law, viii.g. All such as disobeyed 
these precepts were to be expelled from the congregation, ix. 31, and not reinstated until they 
returned to the degree of holy perfection, ix. 32. But in case they persisted in their apostasy, 
they and theirs should no longer have a share in the House of the Law, ix. 34-5. Besides these 
precepts they were to receive no fresh revelation or instruction till the ‘Teacher of Righteousness 
arose ‘in the end of the days’, viii. 1c, i. 7 note. This last phrase is eschatological and indefinite, 
and does not help towards fixing the date of this Teacher. At all events, a probably considerable 
period elapsed between the founding of the New Covenant and his advent. From the fact 
that we are told nothing about the teaching of this Teacher of Righteousness, we may conclude the 
defectiveness of our MSS. The task of this Teacher, who was also designated the Unique Teacher, 
ix. 29, 39, 53, was apparently to prepare the way for the Messiah. Not improbably it was during 
the time of this Teacher that the Zadokites came to be known as, or assumed the name of, ‘Sons of 
Zadok’, for his time synchronizes with that of their assumption of this title—being both ‘in the 
end of the days’ (on n“nN3), vi. 2, compared with viii. Io. 

(v) Period from the death of the Teacher of Righteousness to the expected advent of the 
Messiah. After the death of the Teacher of Righteousness a fresh interval elapsed before we 
come to any definite date. In ix. 39-41 a period of ‘about forty years’ is spoken of. These may 
count from the death of the Teacher, or they may begin at some year subsequent to his death. In 
any case we have arrived at a new epoch which is at least forty years after the death of the Teacher, 
and may be more. Since the Teacher came ‘7x the end of the days’, viii. 10, and at least forty years 
have already run their course since his removal, it follows that we have now come to our author s 
own time. During these forty years those ‘who repented of transgression in Jacob had ‘observed 
the Covenant of God’, ix. 41, exhorting each other to ‘hold fast to the way of God’, ix. 42. But = 
for those who had been faithless, they were to be handed over to the sword when the Messiah 


1 With this expression we might contrast the expression ‘ The House of Midrash ’ (YT 79N n°2), which meant the 
(Pharisaic) School or College in which the Law and its problems were studied. In the earlier days it designated 
the seat of the High Court of Justice, or of the Sanhedrin in the Temple and in Jabne. See Levy, Lez. mee : In 
opposition to this phrase the Zadokites may have chosen deliberately the above expression the House of the Law’. 

2 On the other hand the Zadokite priests were not allowed to share in the Temple ritual unless under certain 
conditions, viii. 12-20. | 

3 The Messiah was apparently called also ‘the Sceptre’, ix. 9. 


793 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


‘from Aaron and Israel’ comes, ix. 10, 29, xv. 4, xviii. 8. This event is still in the future. Now if 
I have been right in my interpretation of the peculiar phrase ‘from Aaron and Israel’ (see § 12), 
then the author wrote between the years 18 and 8 B.c. It is remarkable that, whereas a Pharisaic 
work—the Assumption of Moses—written shortly after this date abandoned wholly the hope of 
a Messiah, the present work, written by a priest, should just on the eve of the Christian era look 
forward earnestly to a militant Messiah, who should avenge his people, ix. 10, take upon himself 
the ruling of God’s people and the settlement of all disputed questions, xv. 4. 

(vi) The later history of the Zadokites can only be surmised. It is not at ail improbable that 
some, if not many, of them joined the Christian Church. Their appreciation—unparalleled in 
Judaism—of the Prophets, their insistence on the need of repentance, their constant proclamation 
of the readiness of God to pardon the repentant, their expectation of the Messiah and of a blessed 
future life—all these beliefs and hopes would prepare them to accept Christianity, and accordingly 
it is not unreasonable to conclude that they formed part of the ‘great company of the grzests that 
became obedient to the faith’ (Acts vi. 7). 

(vii) Into the possible influence of the Zadokites on the Karaites, a Jewish Sect of the eighth 
century of the Christian era, we cannot enter here. The whole question is too doubtful to be 
discussed in the present connexion. Kirkisani, a Karaite scholar and exegete who flourished 
in the tenth century of our era, was, as we have already pointed out (§ 2), acquainted with our 
Present text or with something very similar to it. That the Zadokites had any direct connexion 
with the Dosithean Sect is improbable in every way. According to the Ps. Tertullian (Adv. omnes 
Haereses, i) Dositheus was the first to deny the Prophets. If this statement is trustworthy, it is 
enough to prove that the Zadokites, who regarded the Prophets as of equal worth with the Law, 
had nothing whatever to do with the Dositheans. Rabbinical sources make Dositheus the founder 
of a Samaritan Sect (see F¥ewish Encyc. iv. 643). If this has any element of truth in it; the 
Dositheans could claim no affinity with the Zadokites. In fact Zadokites and Dositheans, from 
whatever source we derive our knowledge of the latter, are widely sundered on characteristic and 
essential doctrines. Agreement on minor points may be established, but these points of agreement 
were not peculiar to the two bodies with which we are concerned.} 


§ 11. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE PARTY—THE FOUR ORDERS. 


The Zadokite Party consisted of four Orders—Priests, Levites, Israelites, and Proselytes, 
xvii. 3. The governing body in each congregation (i. 17 note) was to consist of ten men chosen 
from the first three Orders, xi. 2, whose age was to be not less than twenty-five years and not more 
than sixty. These were to be called ‘judges of the congregation’, and were to be selected from the 
tribe of Levi and Aaron and from Israel, four from the former and six from Israel. This body was 
to be presided over by two men, who belonged to this number or were independent of it. The first 
of these was to be a priest from thirty to sixty years old, learned in the Book of the Hagu and in 
the judgements of the Law, xvii. 5, xv. 5. His duty was to number the members of the settlement 
according to their rank in the Four Orders, xvii. 1-5, to decide in regard to cases of leprosy, xv. 7-8, 
and generally to bear rule, xv. 5-6. 

The second joint authority was the Censor (= p39). On Jewish officials bearing this title, but 
with different functions, the reader should consult the notes, on, x, 10, xvi x. In one text this 
official, whose age was to be between thirty and fifty, xvii. 6, had very extensive duties. It was his 
task to give instruction to the many in the works of God, xvi. 1 ; to admit new members into the 
Party, xvi. 6 (xix. 10 sq.), assigning to each his proper place according to his personal powers and 
qualifications, xvi. 4; to examine and receive back the lapsed on their repentance, xix. 7-10 406 
administer the monthly alms of the congregation to those in need, xviii. 2 sqq.; to regulate suits and 
controversies, xvii. 8, xix. 12 ; to exercise control over all business with the Gentiles, xvi. 7-8; and 
to fulfil the functions of supreme judge in the case of capital and other offences, x. 10-1 2. 

This organization was spread over the cities of Israel, xv. 1. Congregations or communities on 
the above model were formed in these cities, which met together in ‘houses of worship’, xiv. 2, for 
divine service. These buildings were secured against ceremonial uncleanness on the part of the 
worshippers, xiv. 2. 

But the centre of the Party was Jerusalem—‘ the city of the Sanctuary’, where the usual burnt 
sacrifices were offered, xiii. 27. The entire city, as the holy city, ix. 46, was to be kept pure from 
Levitical impurity, xiv. 4. 


On the Dositheans, see ‘Dositheus’ in Smith’s Dict of Christian Bio ia j meee ey) H i t 
1 J : L fm eraphy, 1. go2 7 Th e€rzog and Plit *s 
Real-Encycl. 5 in the Jewish Encycl. IV, 64 3-4 ; and the literature cited in these al tic les 5 also FAGH 
oF ‘ ? : ; i - ] i 1Ci ) Schechter, Fy; as ments 


794 


INTRODUCTION 


§12. THE MESSIAH—EXPECTED TO ARISE FROM AARON AND ISRAEL. 


The Zadokite Party expected a Messiah not from Levi simply as in the Zest. «ii Patriarchs 
but ‘from Aaron and from Israel’, ii. 10, viii. 2, ix. 10 (B), 29 (B), xv. 4, xviii. 8. It must be 
confessed that the form of the expectation is peculiar and needs explanation. Since our author 
was acquainted with the Zest. xi Patr., the fact that he does not simply repeat the 
expectation there entertained, but differentiates that of his Party from it, leads us to conclude that 
the difference of phraseology points to a real difference in the nature of the expectation. Since 
the Messiah was to be descended, not from Aaron simply, but ‘from Aaron and from Israel’, the 
additional words ‘and from Israel’ are surely significant. The priesthood was, of course, an 
hereditary privilege, and could only be passed on through the male line. As long as the succession 
from father to son was preserved the descent through the mother was zmmaterial; for the priests 
were not confined in their choice of wives to the Tribe of Levi. Not only could they marry any 
Israelite, but they could marry the daughter of a proselyte.1 These facts make the phrase ‘ from 
Aaron and Israel’ all the more strange. In the case of unbroken descent zz the male line, the 
words ‘and from Israel’ would be wholly superfluous. Hence they cannot point to the maternal 
ancestry of the expected Messiah. If not to the maternal ancestry, then they can only refer to his 
paternal ancestry. If this reasoning is valid, it follows that the expected Messiah was to spring 
from Israel, i.e. from a non-priestly source, on his father’s side, and from Aaron, i.e. from 
a priestly source, on his mother’s. Such an expectation could only be explained, so far as I am 
aware, in reference to the two sons of Mariamne and Herod, i.e. Alexander and Aristobulus. 
Herod was an Israelite—see § 6. ii—while Mariamne combined in her own person all the royal 
claims of the Maccabean house. Since Alexander and Aristobulus were descended from Aaron on 
the spindle side, they could not legitimately inherit the priesthood. But the technically non- 
priestly character of Mariamne’s sons could not stand in the way of the Messianic hopes attached 
to them by the Zadokite Party, since the all but universal expectation of Israel was directed to 
a Messiah sprung not from Levi but from Judah. But since the Zadokite Party rejected the 
expectation of a Messiah from Judah they described their expected Messiah as sprung from 
Aaron (i.e. from the Maccabees through Mariamne) and from Israel (i.e. from Herod). 

But we can go a step further in defining the comprehension of the words ‘and from Israel’. 
Since throughout our text there is a decided aximus against Judah and the dynasty of David, we 
may fairly conclude that the Messiah was not expected to spring from Levi and Judah—which 
would have been a natural fusion of the two conflicting hopes—but from Aaron and an Israelite, 
who was not descended from Judah. 

This hostility to the Davidic stock and to Judah is not an unmediated and unlooked-for 
phenomenon. The way had already been prepared for it in the struggles of the Jewish hierarchy 
to preserve its ancient prerogatives against the encroachments of the Pharisees and their followers. 
The hostility to the Davidic stock is already apparent in Sirach—the work of a priest or at all 
events an upholder of the high sacerdotal claims of that period. Lévi (L’Eccléstastique, I. xxxvi) 
has drawn attention to Sirach’s glorification of the priesthood at the expense of the kings. While 
only a few verses are assigned to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (xliv. 19-23), and even to Moses 
(xly. 1-5), Aaron and his descendants are the subjects of long and glowing eulogiums (xlv. 6-24). 
To Aaron God gave the priesthood by ‘an everlasting covenant’ (xlv. 7, 15), which was to last 
‘as long as the heaven endureth’ (xlv. 15); to the priesthood God had entrusted the charge of His 
commandments, the power to ceal with statutes and judgements, and the right of teaching 
His people (xlv. 17); and the book practically closes with a lofty panegyric on Simon the 
High Priest, the son of Onias (1). On the other hand, Sirach depreciates the kingly dynasty. 
He admits that God had, indeed, made a covenant with David touching the kingdom, but he points 
out that that was only an ordinary and limited heritage passing from father to son, whereas that 
of Aaron was an everlasting heritage transmitted to all his posterity (xlv. 25). He is careful, 
moreover, to point out that the dynasty of David had proved itself unworthy of the divine favour ; 
for that only three of them, including David (xlix. 4), had been faithful to God, and that accordingly 
they were stripped of the kingship and the government of the nation re-entrusted to the priesthood. 
Nor could the Messiah arise from such a stock: if a Messiah was to be expected he was to be 
Elijah reappearing in the flesh (xlviii. 10-11). 


1 The greatest care was taken in regard to the character of the wives chosen by the priests. Their pedigrees, unless 
known to be unimpeachable, were examined for four generations on both sides in the case of priestly lineage, for five 
if they were of non-priestly origin. Cf. Qid. iv. 4, 5,77 ab: Joseph. Contra Af.i. 7. Though a priest might not marry 
a proselyte, he could marry the daughter of a proselyte. If both parents of a woman were proselytes, a priest was not 
allowed to marry her; but if he did so, the marriage was considered legitimate. See Jewish Encye., X. 195. 


795 


FRAGMENTS OF A 'ZADOKITE WORK 


This glorification of Levi over Judah is repeated in Jubilees, which, like Sirach, was written by 
a priest, but by a priest who had assimilated some of the higher theology such as the doctrine 
of a blessed future life (xxiii. 31).1_ In Jubilees Levi receives the first blessing (xxxi. 15-17), and 
Judah the second (xxxi. 18-20). Levi was to be at once the supreme teacher, the sole priest, and the 
civil ruler of the nation. Judah’s blessing dwells on his great military power, which the Gentiles 
should fear and at which the nations should quake. Thereby he should prove the help of Jacob 
and the royal dynasty should bring peace to Israel. There is a clause of two or three words 
in xxxi. 18d referring to a Messiah from Judah, but it is most probably an interpolation, since 
throughout the rest of this long work there is not even the barest hint of such a hope. : 

The glorification of Levi reaches its climax in the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs. Not 
only is Levi the supreme authority in Church and State: from Levi also is to spring the coming 
Messiah. In fact the Messiah had already come in the person of John Hyrcanus according to the 
author of the Testaments, just as according to the earlier writing, the CX Psalm, he had already 
come in the person of Simon the Maccabee. 

The development actually realized and the tendencies in the process of evolution in these books 
find a not unnatural culmination in our author. The steady glorification of Levi in Sirach, Jubilees, 
and the Testaments had only served to reduce Judah to the second place of authority and honour 
in the nation, but not otherwise to depreciate that great tribe. In no case had this process 
degenerated into a hostile attack on Judah. And yet this and naught else could be the inevit- 
able outcome: of the tendencies which were actively at work in the second century before the 
Christian era. 

These tendencies came to a head in the Zadokite Fragments. Therein the glorification of the 
Zadokite priests is carried out pari passu with the disparagement of the Davidic family and claims 
and an attackon Judah. David is accused of ignorance of the Law (vii. 5). The title ‘king’ (750) is 
replaced by that of ‘prince’ (Nw vii. 4). In ix. 7 the passage from Amos ix. II, which promises 
the setting up of ‘the tabernacle of David that is fallen’, is explained in such a way that all 
reference to David is got rid of; for ‘the king’ is said to denote ‘the Congregation’, and ‘the 
tabernacle of the king’ to denote ‘the books of the Law’. Having thus explained away the 
Davidic expectation, a prophecy of the Zadokite Messiah (see ix. 8) is discovered in Num. xxiii. 17. 

The princes of Judah are attacked in ix. 13 as being ‘like them that remove the landmark’ 
(ix. 13), i.e. the Pharisees. When the time of the end was approaching the Zadokites were to break 
off all relations with Judah, vi. 7. 


§ 13. SOME OF THE TEACHINGS OF THE BOOK. 


I shall content myself in the main with referring to my notes on the theological views 
of the Zadokites. 

The Messiah. See § 12. 

Doctrine of a future life. See note on v. 6. Some scholars have doubted the reference of this 
verse to a future life. But even if it were absent it would not affect the question. The Zadokites 
are the disciples of the Prophets and the Hagiographa, and in these the doctrine of a future life is 
taught. The Party that regarded the Book of Daniel, the Book of Jubilees, and thé Testaments 
of the Twelve Patriarchs as authoritative could not have questioned the belief in a blessed future life. 

Repentance. See note on vi. 1 and references: also Introd., § 10. ii. In this respect they 
prepare the way for the preaching of John the Baptist. 

Predestination and free-will. See ii. 6 note, ili. 7 @, iv. 2, 10, § 9. 4°, 

Divorce. Divorce is absolutely forbidden in our text. Sce vii. 1. 

The Law and the Prophets. It will be sufficient here to‘refer to § 8.and Index I, to show how 
profoundly the Zadokites valued the Prophets. The fact to which we have drawn attention 
elsewhere (see § 9. 4°), that they based halacha on the Prophets, is proof that they regarded the 
Prophets as of equal authority with the Law. Their attitude in this respect is nearer to that of 
the Sermon on the Mount than that of any other Party in Judaism. 


§ 14. BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


_ (a) Text. As yet there is only one text, since owing to Dr. Schechter’s arrangement with the University 
Library, Cambridge, no scholar is to be allowed to see the MSS. for five years after the publication of 


Fe : - ‘s) ine of ee appeal only the Sadducees of the highest rank still denied the doctrine of a blessed 

uture life (Azz. xviii. 1. 4). us this doctrine seemed gradually to have permeated the main body of th 

by the middle of the first century of the Christian era. : oS Rage we 
796 


INTRODUCTION 


Dr. Schechter’s edition. Even if Dr. Schechter’s edition were thoroughly satisfactory this extraordinary action on 
his part could hardly fail to call forth the reprobation of scholars generally. We shall now proceed to pass 
a few criticisms on his text. 

Fragments of a Zadokite Work edited from Hebrew MSS. in the Catro Genizah Collection now in. the 
possession of the University Library, Cambridge, and provided with an Linglish Translation, Introduction, and 
Notes, by S. Schechter, M.A., D.Litt., President of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in New York. 

Scholars are indeed grateful to Dr. Schechter for the discovery of these valuable MSS., but they cannot be 
expected to feel it in such measure for the way in which the text has been edited, It is carelessly done. 
Thus on eighteen pages of text there are two and a quarter pages of corrigenda and suggestions (pp. lvii-lix). 
A second list of corrigenda is to be found in the notes on the translation. In a third list (lix-Ix) embodying 
corrections of and additions to the translation and notes a very important correction not included in the former 
two lists is given. But the above series of corrigenda are not exhaustive. This will be obvious to any student 
who carefully compares the text of p. 20 with the facszmile of this page. Let us take a few lines beginning 
with 1.17. In 1]. 17 if we read ts there is room only for one letter and not two after it. In 1. 18 before 
wns ns and after } a gap is left for seven letters, four of which Dr. Schechter supplies. There is room only 
for four. In 1. 19 after j42t Dr. Schechter leaves a space for two letters: it should be for four or five. Before 
yawind in the same line } should be supplied or a gap left for one letter. In 1, 21 after tpn a gap is left for 
two letters: it should be for four or five. In 1. 33 the first word is nw not 5x. 

If Dr. Schechter chooses to edit his text so carelessly that is of course his own concern, but in that case he 
ought at all events to have published a facszmdle of the entire MSS.—only a matter of eighteen pages. To 
publish such a text and then to deny all scholars access to the original MSS. for five years is strange conduct on 
the part of a seeker after truth. The world of scholars from Lévi, who first expressed the need of a facsrmile, 
to the latest students of the text, look to Dr. Schechter either to remove this unscholarly embargo or himself to 
publish a facszmzle without delay. 

(2) Zranslations* Schechter, Fragments of a Zadokite Work. The translation of a text for the first time is 
obviously a piece of pioneer work, and should therefore be treated with all consideration. It betrays, as might 
be expected, frequent failures to apprehend the meaning of the writer, but on the other hand in many passages 
Dr. Schechter has shown great insight and his encyclopaedic knowledge of Rabbinic literature has helped to 
clear up many a difficulty from the outset. 3 

Lévi, ‘Un Ecrit Sadducéen antérieur 4 la ruine du Temple’ in the Revue des Etudes Juives, \xi. 161-205, 
1911. This masterly translation, accompanied with a few notes, forms a vast advance on the preceding. My 
obligations to it are mentioned not unfrequently in my notes. Unfortunately I had completed both my 
translation and notes before I saw either this translation or that which follows, else my notes might have taken 
a different form. 

Lagrange in the Revue Brblique, Avril, 1912, pp. 213-40. While Lévi’s translation is racy and idiomatic, 
Lagrange’s translation aims at being a literal reproduction of the text. It shows the influence of Lévi, but in 
certain passages makes a fresh contribution to the understanding of the text. 

(c) Critical Studies. Bacher, Zectschrift f. hebr. Bibliographie, No. 1, Jan.—Feb. 1911., Leszynski, 
‘Observations sur les “ Fragments of a Zadokite Work” édités par Schechter’ in the Revue des Etudes Juives, 
Ixii. 190-6, with Lévi’s rejoinder in pp. 197-200. ; ; 

Margoliouth (G.) in the Atheneum, Nov. 26, 1911; ‘The Sadducean Christians of Damascus ’ in the 
Expositor, Dec., 1911, pp. 499-517: March, 1912, pp. 212-35. In these studies Mr. Margoliouth has shown 
great learning and acuteness in criticizing the views of his predecessors. His own view is that the Zadokites 
were a type of Christians who regarded John the Baptist as the Messiah and Jesus as the Teacher of 
Righteousness. I have found myself unable to agree with this thesis. 


1 A Dutch translation has been published in the 7heol. Tijdschrift, but I have not seen it. +¢ : 
2 Reviews of the Zadokite Fragments have appeared in The American Journal of Theology, by Dr. Kohler; in the 
+ Harvard Theological Review, by Dr. Moore; in the Zheol. Literaturzettung, by Landauer, &c. 


a Joby $9 4 (G3/ Pp rest 
i geey ci 


797 





FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


® 


I. Jsrael sent into Captivity, 3-4. A Root of God’s Planting made to spring forth after 200 B.C. 
and a Teacher of Righteousness raised up, 5-8. Description of Israel's Wickedness in the 
First Century B.C. or at an earlier date, 9-17. 


Now, therefore, hearken (unto me) all ye who know righteousness, 
' And have understanding in the works of God. 

For He hath a controversy with all flesh, 

And will execute judgement upon all who despise Him. 


For because of the trespass of those who forsook Him, 
He hid His face from Israel and from His Sanctuary, 
And gave them over to the sword. 


I. 1. hearken ... righteousness. i.e. Pay ‘yty 55 ayow. From Isa. li. 7. The mention of pty may with 
tolerable certainty be regarded as a play on the name of the Zadokites—npiqyn. Cf. v. 7 for the pay AnD 
‘teacher of righteousness ’. 


have understanding in the works of God. Same diction in Ps. xxviii. 5 wt mwyrn Oe wahloteabe 


2. hath a controversy ... with all flesh. i.e. wa 55 ny 1 a. Based almost verbally on Jer. xxv. 35: 
‘The Lord hath a controversy ... He will plead with all flesh.’ Cf. Hos. iv. 1. 
all who despise Him. Num. xiv. 11, 23. 
3. hid His face. Ps. xxii. 24, liv. 8 and passzm. 
from His Sanctuary. These words are of extreme importance in dealing with our document ; for before 
we can make any real advance in the interpretation of the book we must know whether this sanctuary is the 
Temple in Jerusalem or a heterodox temple in one of the provinces. That it was the former is clear, I think, 
from the following evidence. The term ‘sanctuary’ is used nine times, i. 3, Vv. 7, Vi. 11, Vil. 8, viii. LI, 12, 
ix. 47, xiv. 4 (des). In xiv. 4 we have the phrase ‘the city of the Sanctuary’ used twice. Now since 
in every case only one sanctuary is mentioned, as ‘the Sanctuary’, or ‘ His Sanctuary’, we must conclude that 
it is one and the same sanctuary that is referred to in all cases. Is there any evidence to determine what 
sanctuary this was? Clearly there is in this very verse i. 3, where it is said that God ‘hid His face from His 
Sanctuary’. Now there can be no doubt as to the identity of this sanctuary: it is the Temple in Jerusalem; for 
the context refers to the time of the Captivity. Nor can there be any doubt as to the identity of ‘ His Sanctuary’ 
in v. 7; for the phrase occurs in a quotation from Ezek. xliv. 15. Next in viii. 12 it is said that the priests of 
the Party are ‘to hold aloof from the wealth of the Sanctuary’. This could not be said of a small, sectarian 
provincial and wholly unknown temple. For in the first place such a temple would not have had wealth: 
and in the next its priesthood could have incurred no blame in accepting support from their own exclusive 
sanctuary. But an ascetic and puritan Party could most reasonably from their standpoint object to many things 
in the Temple in Jerusalem, as did Mal. i. 7; 1 Enoch Ixxxix. 73 ; Ass. Moses v. 4, and yet share officially in 
its worship. Again in viii. 11 the Sanctuary can be none other than the Temple; for Mal. i. 10 is quoted as 
referring to it. This sanctuary, i.e. the Temple, is still standing vii. 8. Finally ‘ the city of the Sanctuary ’ which 
is twice mentioned in xiv. 4 and in ix. 46 can only be Jerusalem. The very phrase postulates this interpretation when 
we reflect that the Zadokites accepted not only the Law as binding upon them but also the rest of the scriptures, to 
which they attributed a higher degree of authority, than the Rabbis of subsequent times. It was the Prophets who 
made Jerusalem the sacred city, and the altar in Jerusalem the sole aliar. Possessing genuine orders also as 
Priests and Levites they would naturally officiate in the Temple at Jerusalem. They were spread throughout 
the cities of Israel, xv. 1, just as the Priests and Levites were generally. In these they had their congregations : 
but they bad only one sanctuary and that in Jerusalem. The severe conditions on which ‘they were allowed to 
discharge their. priestly functions in the Temple are given in viii, 11-20. Had the Zadokites disowned the 
Temple in Jerusalem, it is hardly possible that this matter would have been wholly passed over in silence in 
a document which criticizes the accepted Jewish authorities so freely—the Hellenizing priests, the Pharisees, and 
even the historical books of the O.T. (see vii. 7). 


From the above conclusion it follows that the present work was written when the Temple was still standing. 


In other words, we have here the /erminus ad quem. ; 
gave them over to the sword (annd pon»). From Jer. xxi, 31. See preceding verse. Cf. i. 12 (“nb p10), 


iv. 9 ("nd y71D"), and so also in ix, 4 (A) ("nd yon), ix. 11 (A and B), but “nd yD in ix. ro (B). ° 
799 


4 


5 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 1. 4-7 


But when He remembered the covenant of the forefathers, 
He left a remnant to Israel 
And gave them not over to destruction. 


[And in the period of the wrath three hundred and ninety years after He had given them into the 
hand of Nebuchadnezzar, the King of Babylon He visited them ], 


And He made to spring forth from Israel and Aaron 
A root of His planting to inherit His land, 
And to grow fat through the goodness of His earth. 


And they had understanding of their iniquity, 
And they knew that they were guilty men, 
And had like the blind been groping after the way twenty years. 


And God considered their works ; for they sought Him with a perfect heart 
And He raised them up a Teacher of righteousness 
To lead them in the way of His heart. 


4. remembered the covenant of the forefathers. i.e, DWNT NI MIM. Cf. viii. 3, ix. 25. From Lev 
xxvi. 45, Ch Exod. i 24: 

left a remnant to Israel (MANY NWN). CF. ii. 9 (node nn); Isa. i. 9; Jer. xxxi. 7; Ezek. xiv. 22. 

5. in the period of the wrath. (i.e. )9n ppa). I have with some hesitation adopted Lévi’s rendering of yp 
as ‘period’ and not as ‘end’, as in Sirach xliii. 6. In Job vi. rr the LXX renders *yp by pou 6 xpdvos (Smend). 
See our text ii. 8, vi. 1, 7, viii. 1,9, 12, ix. 10, 11, 47, XV. 4, xix. 7. It is difficult to understand the chronology in this 
work. ‘In the period of the wrath’ appears to be the period beginning or else in the course of realization in the 
year 196 B.c. ‘The phrase ‘period of the destruction of the land’ apparently refers to the same period. Probably 
by the phrase ‘in the end of the days’ (viii, 10) when the teacher of righteousness is to come, a portion of the same 
period is designed. On the other hand the phrases ‘ the period of wickedness ’ (viii. 12, xv. 4), ‘ the full period 
of wickedness’ (viii. 9, xix. 7), ‘the period of the treason of Israel’ (ix. 47) appear to refer to the close of the 
period of the Messianic woes: cf. xv. 4. 

three hundred and ninety years, &c. This number appears to be borrowed from Ezek. iv. 5, where the 
Massoretic text speaks of 390 days, i.e. years. Since in Ezekiel these years refer to the Exile, the Massoretic text 
is at variance with Ezekiel’s real expectation, which is given in iv. 6, according to which it was to last forty years. 
The right text is preserved in the majority of the LXX MSS., ice. 190 years. Israel had already been in exile 
about 150 years: Judah’s exile was to last forty: thus the exile of the entire nation was to be about 190 years. 
But it is clear that our author found 390 in his Hebrew text—a reading that appears, therefore, to be later— 
possibly considerably later than 200 B.c. If we deduct 390 from 586, the year of the capture of Jerusalem, we 
arrive at the year 196 .c. This date in our text would refer to the rise of the Chasidim. For < twenty years’ 
already the faithful in Israel had been groping after the way (i. 6). It is noteworthy that 1 Enoch xc. 6 assigns 
the origin of the Chasidim to the same period: see note in my edition zz loc. The Chasidim in 1 Enoch spring 
from the righteous remnant, just as here they are symbolized by a root of God’s planting. i 

wrath. See note oni. 14. 

Nebuchadnezzar. This is the later and corrupt spelling for Nebuchadrezzar. 

spring forth. Cf. Isa. xliv. 4, Ixi. 11 where mpy also is used. 

A root of His planting. The text here reads nypp wow, which I take to be corrupt for ivy way, Cf. 
Isa, Ix. 21 yy “¥2. With the idea, cf. 1 Enoch x. 16, xciii. 5 ‘the plant of righteousness’: also xxvi. 1. The 
root of God’s planting is the company of the Chasidim 3 see note on ‘three hundred and ninety years’ above. 

6. had understanding... and they knew. Cf. i, 1. 

had like the blind been groping. The text reads pwwi5) which Schechter, on the basis of Isa. lix. ro and 
Deut. xxviii. 29, has rightly emended into nwwin. 

twenty years. The ‘twenty years’, i. e. 196-176 B.c., may refer to the period during which the Hellenizine 
high priests wer ‘in league with Antiochus IV and the Syrian empire. Then came the great act of repentance 
often referredto in the text and probably the migration to Damascus: vi. 1, viii. 6. 

7. considered their works (amwyn bx bx 124). From Ps. xxxiii. 15. Cf. text, vii. 16. 

Jub sought Him with a perfect heart. Cf. for the thought and diction Ps. cxix. 10, t Chron. xxix. 9, 
ub. i. 15. 

raised them up. Cf. ii. 9, viii. 4, Judges ii. 18. 

a Teacher of righteousness. i.e. poy myn. See different form of the Hebrew in viii. 10. Cf. Hos. x. 12 
p18 my. Who is this teacher of righteousness? We know something as to his date; for he is raised up during 
‘the period of the wrath’ (i. 5) which began about 390 years after the capture of Jerusalem in 586 z.c. About 
this date, i.e. 196 B.c., God made ‘a root of His planting to spring forth from Israel and Aaron’. j e. the 
Chasidim. This teacher may be referred to as ‘the teacher’ or ‘teacher’ in ix. 50, and is referred to as ‘the 
teacher of righteousness’ in ix. 53, and in viii. ro, according to which passage he is to arise ‘in the end of 
the days’. So far, things are fairly certain. But fae are two other titles, ‘the unique teacher ’, Ix. 29, 39, and 
[oje) * 


Io 


II 


FRAGMENTS OF A’ ZADOKITE WORK 1, 8-11 


And He made known to later generations 
What He had done [to a later generation] to a congregation of treacherous men: 
Those who turned aside out of the way. 


This was the time concerning which it was written: 
As a stubborn heifer 
So hath Israel behaved himself stubbornly : 


When there arose the scornful man, 

Who talked to Israel lying words, 

And made them go astray in the wilderness where there was no way, 
[to bring low the pride of the world]. 


So that they should turn aside from the paths of righteousness, 
And remove the landmark which the forefathers had set in their inheritance: 


‘the Messiah’, ii. ro, viii. 2, ix. 10(B); 29 (B), xv. 4, xviii. 8. There is no ground against identifying ‘ the teacher 
of righteousness’ and ‘the unique teacher’. If this identification is right, then ‘the teacher of righteousness’ and 
‘the Messiah’ are two different personages, ix. 29. The former prepares the way for the latter, but does not 
immediately precede him; for an undetermined interval elapses between them, which is longer than forty years 
at all events, ix. 40, but in reality nearer one hundred and forty. 

lead them in the way of His heart. Cf. Isa. xlii. 16. 

8-17. A difficult and important question of interpretation arises here as to the time with which these verses 
deal. First of all, it seems clear that the phrase ‘later generations’ refers to the generations subsequent to the | 
coming of ‘a teacher of righteousness’ in v. 7. But there appears to be no way of determining the incident so 
vaguely described in v. 8, ‘What He had done... to a congregation of treacherous men.’ In any case this 
incident belongs to some earlier date. It is mentioned here apparently only in the way of admonition and 
warning against apostasy or unfaithfulness on the part of the Zadokites. We now come to v.9. To which of 
the two periods implied in the preceding verse, i.e. the ‘later generations’ or the earlier time of judgement 
on the ‘treacherous congregation’, do the words ‘this was the time concerning which’, &c. apply? If we 
take v. 9 as referring to the period of the ‘later generations’, the time implied by the ‘later generations’ can 
hardly refer to any period earlier than the first century B.c., since the ‘Teacher of righteousness’ came after 
176 8. c., and the ‘later generations’ must be two or more generations later than his time. If this interpretation 
is right, then wv. 9-17 would refer to the events of the first century B.c., and the persons attacked would 
probably be the Pharisees. Against them, at any rate, our author could bring the charge of removing 
‘the landmark which the forefathers had set’, i.e. of introducing innovations in the ritual of the Temple 
and the interpretation of the Law. It is to be remembered in this connexion that although in the earlier 
years of Jannaeus the Pharisees were persecuted, in the later years of this king they were on friendly terms 
with him, whereas the Sadducean priesthood was mercilessly dealt with by him. 

8. The fate of former apostates is a warning to those that come after. 

[to a later generation], i.e. ans 773. I have bracketed these words as a dittograph of DNS nN. 
congregation. See note on v. 17. 

a congregation of treacherous men, i.e. DTA NIys. Cf. oI. Nyy in Jer. ix. 2. 

turned aside out of the way (777 °"D). Cf. ii. 4, ix. 14; Exod. xxxii. 8; Deut. ix. 16. 

g-17. These verses appear to refer to the sins of Israel after the Captivity: cf. vill. 1, 2 where the phraseology 
in g-11 recurs. They deal with the judgements meted out to an earlier generation which were to be a warning 
to later generations, i. 8. 

As a stubborn, &c. From Hos. iv. 16. The ‘so’ in our text is not in the original. Our author can 


- easily apply these words to post-Exilic times. 


10. the scornful man. i.e. yon wx. Cf. ix. 36 ‘the scornful men’, i.e. nyo wis. The latter phrase is 
from Isa. xxviii. 14. 
talked ...lying words. Cf. viii. 2. 
talked, i.e. ON. Cf. vii. 1, ix. 22; Amos vii. 16; Mic. il. 6. 
lying words. The text reads 319 ‘9'D ‘waters of lying’, which I have emended into 313 “OND and so 
translated. Cf. ix. 22 (A.) ar sod, and ix. 39 3197 w'N. Is this ‘scornful man, who talked to Israel lying words : 
a collective expression for the wicked leaders who are subsequently referred to in vill. 1? : 
made them go astray ...no way. Cf.viii.1. A quotation from Ps. cvii. 40. Cf. ii. ro of our text, 
where the same action is ascribed to God. 
[to bring low the pride of the world | = nbd ninaa nwmd>. Cf. Isa. ii. 11,17. But these words seem to be 
interpolated. 
II. remove the landmark. Cf. viii. 1, ix. 13, 49. These words may refer to the revolutionary action of the 
Pharisees as regards law and ritual. 
remove the landmark which... in their inheritance. From Deut. xix. 14 ‘ Thou shalt not remove thy 
neighbour’s landmark, which they of old time have set Ht thine inheritance ’. : 
OL 3 





I2 


13 


14 


15 


16 


17 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 1. 12-17 


So as to make cleave unto them 

The curses of His covenant, 

To deliver them to the sword 

That avengeth with the vengeance of the covenant. 


Because they sought after smooth things, 
And they chose deceits, 
And kept watch with a view to lawless deeds. 


And they fchose the best of the neck,t+ 
And justified the wicked, 
And condemned the righteous : 


And transgressed the covenant, 
And violated the statute, 
And attacked the soul of the righteous. 


And all that walked uprightly their soul abhorred, 
And they pursued them with the sword, 
And rejoiced in the strife of the people. 


And so the wrath of God was kindled against their congregation, 
So that He laid waste all their multitude, 
And their deeds were uncleanness before Him. 


12. So as to make cleave unto them. Cf. Deut. xxviii. 21. 
The curses of His covenant. From Deut. xxix. 21. 


deliver them to the sword That avengeth with the vengeance of the covenant. Repeated in ix. 11 (B). 


We have here a quotation from Lev. xxvi. 25 n’2 Op) nppy ann. In the same verse the words ‘and 
be delivered’ occur, Onn). 
13. smooth things ... deceits (i.e. mbnny.,., mpbn). These two words—the latter a dr. Ney 
O.T.—are drawn from Isa. xxx. ro. 
kept watch, i.e. 1px’. Lagrange thinks that the verb here means ‘concealed’, Schechter propos 
nis1p which gives a good sense ‘ brought about breaches’ (or ‘ divisions’). 


ye shall 
. in the 


es WYI5" 


14. tchose the best of the neck}. In the text N\yn 21D2 14N3'—it seems clear that “Wyn is corrupt— 
most probably for }inyn. Cf. xi. 10 (B), where we have ‘the poor of the flock’. We should then have ‘ they 
chose the best of the flock’, i.e. for themselves. This may be right. But possibly the corruption lies deeper, 
and for the first two words we should read 30% 125m. We should then have: ‘they laid waste the best of 


the flock.’ 


justified ...the righteous. From Prov. xvii.15. The words recur in vi. 4 of our text. Lévi thinks 
these words refer to the usurpation of judicial powers by the Pharisees in the time of Alexandra the widow 


of Jannaeus. 


TGs transgressed the covenant, i.e. 92 way. I have here emended yq ay" into snay. Schechter 
emends the text into N33 13) and translates ‘transgressed the covenant’. But this means ‘entered into 


a covenant’ (cf. Deut. xxix. 11). This clause is practically equivalent to the next. 
attacked the soul of the righteous. From Ps. xciv. 21. 
16. walked uprightly. Cf iii 2. From Ps. xv. 2: cf. ci. 6; Gen. xvii. 3. 
their soul abhorred. From Ps. cvii. 18. 


pursued them with the sword (and ni|79"1). These words refer to the persecution of the Sadducees by 


Jannaeus or the Pharisees, 
rejoiced. I follow Schechter in taking }p'D» as 1wy. 


17. the wrath of God was kindled (bs ANIM). Cf. Exod. iv. 14, xxxii. 10, &c. This clause recurs fr 


equently 


in our text: ili. 7, iv. 7, Vil. 16, ix. (13), 22, 26, 40. Here the reference is doubtful. In iii. 7 it is directed against 
the Antediluvians: in iv. 7 against Israel in the wilderness : against Judah after the exile in vii. 16, ix. 13, 22. 
their congregation (i.e. onty). This term 77 ‘the congregation’ occurs frequently—thirteen times— 


in our author: cf. i. 8, iv. 7, ix. 22, 30, 31, xi. 1, 2, 3, xvi. 3, 4, 6, xvil. 7. In ix. 30, 31, xi. 1, 2, 3, xvi. 35 4 


xvil. 7 it is used strictly of the congregation of the Zadokites in each city or Village. “Inia v.07 ts 
used of Israel at large, and in i. 8 in a bad sense of faithless Israelites. Our text is particularly rich 


= 4 


. 22 it is 
in terms 


applying to the Zadokites in their sacred capacity as a community or congregation. Thus we have ‘ assembly” 


(71D) in ix. 29, ‘congregation’ (onp) in xiv. 3, ‘community’ (“)an) in xiv. 8. Another designation 
community, and rather a peculiar one, is ‘camp’ (33m), which appears to have simply the meaning of set 
Choe a xv.6, xvi. 1,°6 (ir).8 (Gis), oe mriieemes 4 
their deeds .. . uncleanness before Him (9285 435 omwyn). Cf. Ezek. xxxvi, 17. 
802 


of their 
tlement: 
a 


8 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 2. 1-8 


Il. Wisdom is with God and Forgiveness of the repentant, but Wrath for the unrepentant, wha are 
predestined to Destruction on the Ground of the Divine Foreknowledge, 1-7. But there is 
a Remnant whom He shall teach by the Messiah, 9-10. 


And now, hearken unto me all ye who have entered into the covenant, 
And I will disclose to you the ways of the wicked. 


God loveth [knowledge] wisdom : 
And counsel He hath set before Him: 
Prudence and knowledge minister unto Him. 


Longsuffering is with Him 
And plenteousness of forgivenesses 
To pardon those who repent of transgression. 


And power and might and great fury with flames of fire [therein are all the angels of destruction] 
For them who turned aside out of the way, 
And abhorred the statute, 


So that there should be no remnant, 
Nor any to escape of them. 


For God chose them not from the beginning of the world, 
And ere they were formed He knew their works. 


And He abhorred their generations from of old, 
And hid His face from their land till they were consumed. 


[And He knew the years of (their) office and the number and exact statement of their periods for 
all the things that belong to the ages and have been, moreover whatsoever shall come to pass in their 
periods for al] the years of eternity. | 


Il. 1. ye who have entered into the covenant. Cf. iv. 8, viii. rr, 15, ix. 12, 15, 49, X. 25 Jer. XXxiv. To, 
maa wa. This is the New Covenant that is spoken of in vill. 15, ix. 28, 37. 

I will disclose. The text reads DDN md3aN as in 1 Sam. xx. 2, xxii.8. Schechter thinks n221s a corruption 
of nay and compares ill. 1. 

2. knowledge. Bracketed as an interpolation. It occurs in the third line. 

3. Longsuffering . . . forgivenesses, i.e. mim>p ay) oy Dax Joy. The text is based on a combination of 
Exod. xxxiv. 6. DM 27) D'DX JAN and Ps. cxxx. 4 nampa yoy. For the plural mimsp cf. Dan. ix. 9; 
Neh. ix. 17. The last passage contains all the elements of v. 3 ad save ‘with Him’. 

forgiveness. Cf. v. 50, xvi. 2. 
To pardon. See v. 5 @ note. , 
who repent of transgression, i.e. YWA *aY from Isa. lix. 20. See ix. 41 and note on Wile we 

4. fury with flames of fire, i.e. WN vanba,.. non. Cf. Isa. Ixvi. rg we vanda wnayN YN TnI awn which 

is probably the source. 
therein ... destruction. Bracketed as an interpolation. 
angels of destruction (San yondn). Cftr Enoch ixiuien,, c- 
abhorred the statute (pn ‘aynt). Cf. Mic. iii. 9. 

5. So that there should be no remnant, &c. Contrast i. 4. The words ‘no remnant, nor any to escape’ are 
from Ezra ix. 14. 

6. We have here the doctrine of divine election. Cf. v. loc. 

formed, i.e. 1) emended by Bacher from D132. Cf. Jer. ‘net 

7. their generations from of old. So I emend a ny into pape ania. Schechter retains ni17 and 

would change DD into ntpr. Landauer suggests D1 ‘ rebellious’ for 0712. 

their land. The text reads » y4N, which I take to be a corruption of DYN, and have translated accord- 
ingly. Schechter takes the 9 to be a remainder of pwpwnd. But in the present MS. there is not space for 
a single additional letter, and the emendation I have made explains the MS. and satisfies the context. 

till they were consumed (Hn1n 7y). Phrase in Deut. ii. 15, xxxi. 24, 30; Joshua viii. 24, &c. But the 
words make the line too long and may be an interpolation. 

8. This verse appears to be an addition of the editor of the whole. The subject-matter belongs to the teaching 
of the sect, but it is an intrusion in its present context. Verse g follows naturally and immediately on v. 7. 
The Hebrew of this verse is very abnormal. i 

years of (their) office. With this obscure phrase compare vi. 3 ‘duration of their office’. The word ‘office’ 

(or ‘service’ or ‘function’, i.e. Ty1D) appears to mean that of the members of the inner council of the sect who in 

ix. 32 are spoken of as ‘ men of the perfection of holiness’. We should, perhaps, read Oony0 here as in vi. 3. We 

find in later Judaism the existence of a body of men ar soy ‘winx (Taanith 15 4) composed of priests, Levites, 
03 2 F 2 


Io 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 256-2) 2 


Yet in all of them He raised Him up men called by name, 
In order to leave a remnant to the earth, 
And to fill the face of the earth with their seed. 


And through His Messiah He shall make them know His holy spirit, 
And he is true, and in the true interpretation of his name are their names: 
But them He hated He made to go astray. 


IlI-IV. 1. Exhortation to choose God's Will and to shun the evil Inclination, 1-2; through it fell the 
mighty Men of old, the Watchers and their Children, 3-5; and all Flesh and also the Sons of 
Noah, 6-iv. 1. 


Now therefore, children, hearken unto me, 
And I will open your eyes to see, 
And to understand the works of God. 


And to choose what He approveth, 
And to reject what He hateth : 


To walk uprightly in all His ways, ‘ 
And not to go about in the thoughts of an evil imagination 
And (with) eyes (full) of fornication. 


and Israelites exactly as in our text. According to Taanith 15 4 these men had to arrange the proper prayers for 
the various days in order that the sacrifices might be favourably received. The head of this body was called 
Toyo wx (Tam. v. 6). In Taanith 27d it is said that if these duties were not fulfilled heaven and earth would 
cease to exist (748) DDY IPN Nd MIDYyD sbiby), Again, in Bikk. iii. 2, these typ ‘wax, whose chief was 
called nynn wn (Tam. v. 6), are described as having to gather in the firstfruits from the districts under their 
charge. The country was divided into twenty-four districts, corresponding to the twenty-four orders of the 
Priests (1 Chron. xxiv. 7-18). The chief city of each such division was called spyo by ay. This office 
existed among the Essenes, amongst whom the ma‘amad constituted the district authority: see Jewish Encyc. 
v. 230. The ma‘amad in our text was composed of Priests, Levites and Israelites, as we may fairly assume from 
the constitution of the party as a whole: cf. xvii. 2, 3, Vv. 7: it would thus consist of the same elements as the 
maamad in Taanith. 

the number and exact statement of their periods, i.e. pMsp wyn_I App». This is very irregular Hebrew. 
It is found, however, three times in the O.T., i.e. in Isa. xi. 2; Ezek. xxxi. 16; Dan. i. 4. Perhaps the suffix in 
nnyp refers, as in Aramaic, to what follows pbyy sx 555. This construction may recur at the end of the verse: 
cf. also v. 1 ¢ note. 

exact statement, l.e. wip. Cf. Awd in Esther iv. 7,X.2. I have rendered the word wy 15 variously as 
‘statement’ (vi. 3), ‘true interpretation’ (ii, 10): wp (vi. 10) ‘this means’ &c. 

that .. . have been, i.e. ny2—referring to the past as in Sir. xlii. 19: so also Lagrange. 

moreover whatsoever, i.e. 1) TNY. So I punctuate the text nm Sy. Lévi takes it to be the equivalent of 
the Syriac xo Tp. 

g. raised Him up. See i. 7. 
called by name. Cf. vi. 2 note. 
to leave aremnant. See i. 4 note. 


fill the face of the earth (San ‘sp bib). From Isa. xxvii. 6. 

10. And...He shall make them know. So we must render DY") i.e. oY); for according to ix, ro (B 
the Messiah had not come when our author was writing. But the word \nwnp may simply =‘ His anointed one’ 
in this case Zadok. 

His Messiah. Cf. viii. 2, ix. 10(B), 29(B), xv. 4; xviii. 8. See note on i. 7, where it is shown that the 
Messiah is distinct from ‘ the teacher of righteousness ’. 
His holy spirit. Contrast use of the phrase ‘ holy spirit’ in vii. 12, viii. 20. Bacher here proposes to read 
‘by His holy spirit’. 
in the true interpretation of his name. Possibly here the name of the Messiah hinted at may be pyaA 
‘the Righteous One’. Cf. 1 Enoch xxxviii. 2, iii. 6. As He is pyyn, they are the oypwn as in 1 Enoch 
XXXVill. 3, Xlvii. 1, 2, 4, &c. 
their names. Cf. vi. 3. 
them He hated He made to go astray. Cf. i. ro. 
III. 1. open your eyes. Cf. ii. r. 
2. walk uprightly. Cf. i. 16 note. 
to go about in the thoughts of an evil imagination : i.e, MOWK JY’ Manos ~ynd. If we take this line 
with the next, it would suggest that the writer had Num. xv. 39 in his mind poy sry po235 nx monn xd 
DANS Ot OnNN “ws. But our author has changed the construction. 
the thoughts of an evil imagination: i.e. NOW IY’ Miawnn. The OWN “sy! is here equivalent to the 
804 


PRG MENYS OETA ZADOKITE WORK 8. 3—4.°1 


For many were led astray by them, 
And mighty men of valour stumbled by them from of old [and until this day]. 


Because they walked in the stubbornness of their heart the watchers of heaven fell. 
By them were they caught because they kept not the commandment of God. 


And their children whose height was like the loftiness of the cedars 
And whose bodies were like the mountains fell thereby. 


All flesh that was on dry land perished thereby, 
And they were as though they had not been. 


Because they did their own will, 
And kept not the commandment of their Maker, 
Until His wrath was kindled against them. 


By them went astray the sons of Noah and their families: 
Because of them they were cut off. 


yan “sy. “s' alone has this meaning in Sir. xv. 14 YY V3 WN ,.. INA SIW.. omnbsx = ‘God created 
man ...and put him into the hand of his inclination’, On the two inclinations see T. Asher i. 3 (note on my 
edition): 2 Baruch, pp. 92-3 (in my edition) and the literature referred to there. 

eyes (full) of fornication. Reading ‘xy for %3y with Schechter, who compares Sifre 35a Mit it DD DY. 
We might compare Sir. xxvi. 9 mopveia yuvatkds ev perewpicpois dpOarpav... yrocOnoera, and xxiii. 4; also 
T. Issach. vii. 2 ‘I never committed fornication by the uplifting of my eyes’ and T. Benj. vi. 3; Prov. vi. 25 ; 
2 Pet. il. 14 dfOadpods .. . perrots poryadidos. Lévi retains *y and compares Sir. xlii. 8 mya Any and Eccles. 
i. 13. He renders ‘Vattrait de la luxure’. 

3. many were led astray by them. The ‘them’ refers apparently to the ‘thoughts of the imagination’. 
We have close parallels to, if not the actual antecedents of, the text in Sir. ix. 8 év KddXeu yuvatkds modXol 
exdavnOnoay and T. Reub. iv. 7 ‘Many hath fornication destroyed; because, though a man be... noble . 
he bringeth reproach upon himself’: T. Jud. xv. 2 ‘though a man be a king and commit fornication, he is 
stripped of his kingship by becoming the slave of fornication’. 

by them. The MS, reads o3, but both ‘thoughts’ and ‘eyes’ are feminine in Hebrew. Hence here and 
in the next line I emend p3 into jm3. On the other hand, as not infrequently in the O.T., the masc. suffix may 
refer to these feminine substantives: see note on vii. 2, and Gesenius Hed. Gram.” § 135 0. In iii. 4 d,iv.1a6 72 
should be emended into jn3, or else into 13 in all cases. If the latter, the suffix would refer to the evil inclination 
(i.e. the 7°). 

4. The ae of the fall of the Watchers through fornication is cited also in the T. Reub. v. 6-7. 

walked in the stubbornness of their heart (nad mvawa onda). Cher xi. toy xxiiaa 7, ee OUE 
author is fond of this phrase in various forms. Thus here and in iv. 5, ix. 35 we have the phrase “wa spn 
‘to walk in the stubbornness’: in iv. 9 “Y *9NN “NN ‘to go about after the stubbornness’: in ix. 18 “w2 "NI 
‘to choose the stubbornness’: and in ix. 27 “w3 mp ‘to turn away in the stubbornness’. 

watchers: i.e. '"'y emended by Schechter from "ty. See 1 Enoch vi-xvi and references. 

By them: i.e. ja (i.e. the thoughts of the evil inclination) emended from m3: or we may emend 73 into 
$3 and refer it to 4¥. Cf. iv. 8. 

kept not the commandment of God. Cf. iii. 72; iv. 20. 

5. See 1 Enoch x. 9-10; xii-xvi; Jub. v. 9-11. 

“whose height was like the loftiness of the cedars (O43) DON DD WN). From Amos ii. 9, save 
that our author reads ‘loftiness’? D7 instead of ‘height’ 723, On their height see 1 Enoch vii. 2. 
thereby. Text reads ‘3 which I have emended into j72 or 33. See v. 4. 
6. thereby. Emended as in last line. Cf. Gen. vil. 22, 23. 
they were as though, &c. From Obad. 16: cf. Job x. 19. \ =e 

7. did their own will (or ‘pleasure’). (Cf. iv. 10 a,¢, v. 2 c), that is, they followed the evil inclination, or 
the thoughts of the evil inclination. See iii. 2, note. 

did their own will, And kept not the commandment, &c. Cf. iv. 9 @, 4, and contrast the conduct of 
Abraham iv. 2 4, ¢. 
His wrath was kindled. See i. 17, note. 


IV.1. By them. MS. reads n3 as in iii. 4 4, which I have emended into jn3. In both cases * the thoughts of 
the imagination’ are referred to. The same emendation is made in the next line. Of course it is possible that 
for m3 we should read 13 as in iv. 8, and thus refer directly to the yeser and not to the ‘thoughts’ of the yeser 
(or ‘evil inclination’). Schechter thinks that for N23 we should read D073, and that the sin referred to is the eating 
of blood, but the whole context is against this. 

went astray. Schechter has rightly emended *yn into yn. 
sons of Noah and their families. Cf. Gen. x. 32. 
cut off. Cf. Lev. xvii. 10, 14. 


805 


¥ 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKTT EaW ORI aaa 6 


IV. 2-9. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob walked not after the evil Inclination of the fleart, 2-3; but 
the Sons of Israel did in Egypt and in the Wilderness and were punished accordingly, 4-9. 


2 Abraham did not walk in them, 
And he was (recorded) friend because he kept the commandments of God, 
And chose not the will of his own spirit. 


3 And he delivered (the commandment) to Isaac and Jacob, 
And they observed (it) and were recorded as friends of God, 
And members of the covenant for ever. 


4 The sons of Jacob went astray through them, 
And they were punished according to their error. 


5 And their children in Egypt walked in the stubbornness of their heart, 
So that they took counsel against the commandments of God, 
And every man did that which was right in his own eyes, 


6 [And they eat blood], and He cut off their males in the desert (when He said) to them in Kadesh: 
Go up and possess (the land, but they hardened) their spirit : 


, And they hearkened not unto the voice of their Maker 
[I'he commandments of their Teacher] but murmured in their tents, 
And so the wrath of God was kindled against their congregation : 


sg And their children [perished by it 
And their kings] were cut off by it, 
And their mighty men perished by it, 
And their land was made desolate by it. 


9 By it the first that entered into the covenant incurred guilt, 
And they were delivered unto the sword, 


2. in them. MS. reads 72 which I have emended into jn3. It could be emended into 33 (ie. ‘the evil 
inclination ’) as proposed in note on iii. 3. 
was recorded) friend. Cf. Isa. xli. 8; Jub. xix. 9 ‘friend of God’ (note): xxx. 21 ‘That they should 
fulfil (thecovenant) and be recorded as friends’: James ii. 23 gidos Geod éexkjOn. The MS. is defective here, 
reading according to Schechter 37,,,)°, which he reads as SAN mwy' ; but comparing 1 Chron. xxvii. 24, 
2 Chron. xx. 34, for the use of mby in the sense of ‘to be recorded’, we should here, I think, restore the text as 
follows an{x nd)y. If the yp is uncertain, then we might read an3) as in v. 34, or NOP as is implied in 
James ii. 23. 
chose not the will of his own spirit. Contrast v. 9 J. 
3. recorded as friends. This phrase occurs in Jub. xxx. 21, where the text implies exactly the same Hebrew 
as here DYAMN aN>. 
members of the covenant. For the phrase n'13 bya see Gen. xiv. 13. 
4. through them. Read jn3 or 13 instead of p32. See v. 2 note. 


according to. Reading »5$ with Schechter for »396, 
5. Stubbornness of their heart. See note on iii. 4. 
did that which was right, &c. From Judges xvii.6: cf, Deut. xii. 8: cf. ix, 17 @, v.2¢,and contrast v. 24, c. 
6. The original form of this verse seems wholly lost. 
[And they eat blood]. I have bracketed this as an interpolation. 
eat blood. Cf. 1 Enoch vii. 5; Jub. vi. 9, 12, 135 Vu. 28,20, &c. 
(when He said) to them... (the land, but they hardened) their spirit. I have with Lévi supplied 
the words in brackets. wey PINT MN... WS from a comparison of Deut. i. 21, 46; Ps. evi. 33. 

7. and they hearkened... Maker (nm wy dypd yyw yd). From Ps. cvi. 25 save for the change of min into 
nnwy. It is possible that the choice of the latter divine name is due to the fact that it rhymes with nmSays in 
the next line. 

the commandments of their Teacher. For pn‘) I read with Lévi pp. 
murmured in their tents. From Ps. cvi. 25. 
wrath of God was kindled against their congregation. Cf. Ps. cvi. 40. 

8. The tristich can be restored by excising ‘perished by it and their kings’ as an interpolation, or a dittograph 
of line 3. The reference to ‘kings’ at this period would be an anachronism. ‘ 

their land was made desolate by it. From Jer. xii, rz. A strange statement in regard to this period 

9. By it, i.e. 12. This must mean the evil inclination as in il. 4 4, iv. 1, &c. 

the first that entered into the covenant. The Israelites at Sinai. 
entered into the covenant. See ii. 1 note. 


806 


10 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 4. 9—5. 5 


Because they forsook the covenant of God: 


And they chose their own will, 
And went about after the stubbornness of their heart, 
Every man doing his own will. 


V. God confirms the Covenant with the faithful through fresh Revelations, 1-3; when Israel 


Ee again God forgave them, 4-6; and confirmed His Covenant with them through 
zekiel, 6-4. 


But with them that held fast by the commandments of God, 
[Who were left of them], 

God confirmed the covenant of Israel for ever, 

Revealing unto them the hidden things 

Wherein all Israel had erred : 


His holy Sabbaths and His glorious festivals, 
His righteous testimonies and His true ways, 
And the desires of His will [the which if a man do, he shall live by them] He opened before them. 


And they digged a well of many waters: 
And he that despises them shall not live. 


But they wallowed in the transgression of man, 
And in the ways of the unclean woman, 
And they said that it belongs to usf. 


But God wondrously pardoned their sins, 
And forgave their transgression, 


forsook the covenant of Ged: And they chose their own will. Cf. ill. 7 a9. 

10. chose their own will. Cf. iil. 7 @, iv. 2¢, 5¢, 10 ¢. 

went about after. The rare construction ‘=n& Wn which occurs here is found in Num. xv. 39, which we 
know was in the mind of the author when writing iii. 2 dc. See iii. 4 note. 

stubbornness of their heart. Cf. ill. 4 note. 

Every man doing, &c. See iv.1oa@note. Cf. Esther i. 8 ‘to do according to each man’s pleasure’. 

V. 1. that held fast by, &c., i.e, 2 opin. Cf. ix. 4, 12, 50; Prov. ili, 18s Isa; lviig 3 T Naphein 2: 
[Who were left of them]: i.e. The Remnant. Cf. i. 4 4, note. But it appears to be an interpolation. 
the covenant of Israel. I have, with some hesitation, so rendered Synod smoqa—an Aramaism, such as 

we find in ii. 8. But 5ynysS may be a gloss. In that case we should render ‘ His covenant ’, Schechter gives 
the natural rendering ‘ His covenant with Israel’, but this does not go properly with the preceding line. 
the hidden things: i. ec. those in the next verse. 

2. His holy Sabbaths and His glorious festivals, &c. It is not improbable that the writer refers here to 
the Book of Jubilees: cf. i. 14 ‘they shall go astray as to new moons, and sabbaths, and festivals, and jubilees, 
and ordinances’. In vi. 33, 34 it is said that, if Israel neglects to observe the right reckoning of the years, ‘they 
will disturb all their seasons . . . and they will neglect their ordinances... and... the new moons, and seasons, 
and sabbaths’; in vi. 38 ‘they will go wrong as to the new moons and seasons, and sabbaths, and festivals’ : 
and in xxiii. rg ‘they have forgotten commandment, and covenant, and feasts, and months (? ‘new moons 7 
i.e. own), and sabbaths, and jubilees, and all judgements : 

the which if a man do, &c. Bracketed as an interpolation from Lev. xvill. 5. 
opened before them: i.e. pasado nna. Cf. Luke xxiv. 32 duvoryey . . . ras ypadas. 

3. digged a well, studied or rather restudied the Law. See viii. 4-6; ix. 28. 

4. wallowed ... in the ways of the unclean woman. Ciax. 150; 
transgression of man. Cf. Prov. xxix. 6. 
+it belongs to ust, i.e. NT 125. " 

5. wondrously. The MS. reads yop "3. Schechter emends the first word into 273 and renders ‘in the 
abundance of His wonder’. But this gives no sense. I emend the phrase into nixed, which gives a possible 
sense. Or comparing Xvi. 1 (xb ny22) it is not improbable that the text read 1xbp *onna ‘by His wondrous 
mercy’. See text Xvi. 2. aur 

pardoned, i.e. 1y2 152. This phrase with God as the subject is derived from 2 Chron. xxx. 18, This 
subject recurs frequently: cf. ii. 3, vi. 6, ix. 54, Xvill. 8. 

forgave (oywab nw). Cf. il. 3, Xvi. 2. 

transgression: cf. il. 3. 


807 


6 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 5. 5—6. 6 


And He built them a sure house in Israel [the like of which never arose from of old nor until this 
day]. 


6 They who hold fast to Him are for the life of eternity, 
And all the glory of man is for them ; ; ‘ 
As God confirmed it to them through Ezekiel the prophet, saying : 


‘The priests and the Levites and the sons of Zadok, that kept the charge of My Sanctuary when 
the children of Israel went astray from them, they shall bring near unto Me fat and blood. 


VI. Migration of the Penitents to Damascus. Sons of Zadok hold office in the end of the Days, I-3. 
Law to be obeyed and relations with ¥udah broken of in the Period in which Belial ts let 
loose, 4-12. 


1 _ The priests are the penitents of Israel who went forth out of the land of Judah: and (the 

2 Levites are) they who joined them. And the sons of Zadok are the elect of Israel called by 

3 the name, that are holding office in the end of the days. Behold the statement of their names 
according to their generations, and the period of their office, and the number of their afflictions, 
and the years of their sojournings, and the statement of their works. 


4 The first saints whom God pardoned, 
Both justified the righteous, 
And condemned the wicked. 


5 And all they who come after them must do according to the interpretation of the Law, 
In which the forefathers were instructed 
Until the consummation of the period of these years. 


6 In accordance with the covenant which God established with the forefathers 


built them a sure house (joN) m3 pnd j2). The phrase is found in xr Sam. ii. 35, I Kings xi. 38. 
The sure house is the pontifical dynasty of Zadok. 
[the like of which... this day]. An interpolation. 
6. They who hold fast. For phrase, cf.v.1@. This line shows that the author believes in a blessed immortality. 
7. This verse, which is in prose, is a quotation from Ezek. xliv, 15: NIOwOTNS Ow AWN prty 22 OSA OAT 
on adn 5 aapnd ,., rds aap nn Syn Sysye 99 mynd ‘wap. The most important divergence in our 
text from the Massoretic is the insertion of an ‘and’ before ‘the Levites’ and an ‘and’ after them. But the first 
‘and’ our author probably found in his text; for it is attested in the Syriac and Vulgate Versions, though it is 
absent (and rightly) from the LXX. The second“‘and’ may be due to our author. Our author reproduces the 


above quotation as follows: yw omy Seay J Mynl wapd nanweny ow saws pray sa) onda) pomon. 
on adn. Here wap is clearly a clerical error for ‘wpa and so I have translated, 


VI. 1. the penitents. We should here punctuate ‘aw as ‘2Y ‘penitents’: cf. li, 35 vill. 6; ix. 24 (A & B). 
Cf. Isa. i. 27 maw and lix. 20 appa YW ‘Iw. It could also be punctuated ‘AW ‘captivity’ with Schechter. 
But the former seems right. The New Covenant was one of repentance: cf. ix. 15 (B). 

Israel who went forth out of the land of Judah. Cf. viii. 6. This migration to Damascus possibly 
took place somewhere about 170 B.C. See notes on i. 6, viii. 1-10. 

and they who joined them; i.e. onpy ondom. These words denote the Levites; for our author carefully 
distinguishes the Priests and the Levites, xv. 5, 6. The word ondsn ‘who joined’ seems to be a play on 
ondn ‘the Levites’ in v. 7. I have restored the words in brackets. 

2. The Zadokites are the spiritual successors of the ‘ penitents’,. but they were not to be known by this name 
apparently till ‘the end of the days ’—long after 176 .c. in the time of the Teacher of Righteousness. See 
Introd. § ro. iv. 

called by the name. own ‘np. Cf. ii, 9 ‘called by name’. 
that are holding office (i.e. pvp). We have elsewhere in our text qnyy — < office e 
in the end of the days, i.e. oN nSMND. CF Gen. xlix. 1 ; Dan, xii. 13. 
3. This verse appears to refer to some record or apocalypse no longer existing in the text, 
Statement of their names (om now wip). See ii. 10d. On this meaning of wy see ii. 8. 
the period of their office (nunyn YP). Cf. ii. 8, where the corresponding phrase is ‘ years of (their) office ’, 

4. The first saints, i.e. DIw<NI O)wwpm. This seems the simplest restoration, Lagrange reads 
Dw wespn and renders: ‘they sanctified the years when God pardoned them’, and takes the words as 
referring to the first period of the sect—the reign of the Saints. Schechter emends Dw! wpA into Dw. 

justified, &c. Contrast i, 14. 

5-6. They were to act according to a certain interpretation of the law to a certain time limit. God will 
forgive the followers of Zadok as He forgave the forefathers. 

5. must do, i.e. mys, 


808 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 6. 6-11 


In order to pardon their sins, 
So shall God make atonement for them. 


7 And on the consummation of the period [of the number] of these years 
They shall no mere join themselves to the house of Judah, 
But shall every one stand up against his net. 


8 The wall shall have been built, 
The boundary been far removed. 


9 And during all these years Belial shall be let loose against Israel, as God spake through Isaiah 
the prophet, the son of Amos, saying: ‘ Fear and the pit and the snare are upon thee, O inhabitant 
10 of the land.’ This means the three nets of Belial, concerning which Levi the son of Jacob spake, 
tr by which he caught Israel and directed their faces to three kinds of trighteousness}. The first is 
fornication, the second is the wealth (of wickedness), the third is the pollution of the Sanctuary. 


6. In order to pardon, &c. Cf. v. 5 note. 

7. When the limit of time referred to in v. 5 was reached, they should break off relations with Judah and 
ae its overtures. I have bracketed ‘of the number’ as an explanatory gloss on ‘of the period’ (ypn). 

COs BC. 
They shall no more join themselves (nanwn> wy px). Cf. Isa. xiv. 1. 

8. The wall shall have been built, The boundary been far removed (i.e. pina pny TWIN AM23). These 
words are derived from Mic. vii. rr ‘In one day thy walls shall be built, in that day thy boundary shall be 
far removed’ (Pm pmo’ sian oY 7 nsad ny). I have here, as in Micah, rendered pin by ‘boundary’, but it 
may mean ‘statute’ or ‘decree’. If the above rendering is right, then the sense is that the community will at 
the end of these years of trouble be securely established and its boundaries extended afar. 

g. during all these years. ‘The words refer apparently to the time of the Antichrist. 

Belial shall be let loose. Cf. Jubilees i. 20 ‘ Let Thy mercy, O Lord, be lifted up upon Thy people... and 
let not the spirit of Beliar rule over them... to ensnare them from all the paths of righteousness’: xv. 33: 
T. Reub. ii. 2 (8). This name for Satan has disappeared from Talmudic literature. 

Fear and the pit, &c. Quoted from Isa. xxiv. 17. 

10, This means. Literally, ‘its explanation is’. 

the three nets of Belial. According to our author (v. 11) these three are: fornication, wealth, and 
pollution of the Sanctuary. This enumeration is not found elsewhere, so far as I know, but a list of three deadly 
sins is found several times in Jewish literature. In Jubilees vii. 20 they are fornication, uncleanness and iniquity. 
‘Owing to these three things came the: flood upon the earth’ (vii. 21). These words of Jubilees may have been 
in the mind of St. Paul when he wrote: ‘No fornicator, nor unclean person, nor covetous man... hath any 
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God... for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the 
sons of disobedience’ (Eph. v. 5-6). According to the Ber. rabba 31, the three causes of the flood were idolatry, 
incest and murder. 

Levi the son of Jacob spake. The words attributed to Levi are not found in the Test. Levi. In 
ix. 9, however, of that Testament the priests are charged with fornication and pollution of the holy place—two 
of the deadly sins mentioned here. Further, in v. 16 of the Aramaic and Greek Fragments of an original source 
of this Testament Isaac warns Levi and his sons against fornication and uncleanness (see my edition of the 
Test. Twelve Patr., p. 229). Finally, in Test. Lev. xiv. 5-6, the priests are accused of stealing the sacrifices, of 
covetousness, fornication, and profaning the priesthood and polluting the sacrifices, xvi. 1. Cf. also T. Reub. 
Wietptiavin >; L. Sim.v. 3; (Jos. vii: 1; Jub. vii. 21, xx. 3, 5, 6, xxili. 14, xxv. 7, xxxiil..20, |. 5. 

by which he caught Israel and directed their faces (07°35 DIN" Ssawa pAa wan NI ws). The agent is 
here Belial. The phraseology, on the other hand, is in part borrowed, as Schechter observes, from Ezek. xiv. 4, 5, 
where it is said that God ‘catches’ Israel. This change of agent is typical in later Judaism. The Hebrew of 


Ezekiel is: Syaw’ ma nx wan tynd... wp noo oe iny Swan. 

4righteousness+. The text undoubtedly reads pty here, but it seems to me to be a slip of-a scribe for 
mbyy. Hence read ‘wickedness’. 

11. The first sin, i.e. fornication, is dealt with in vii. 1-7; in vii, 8-17 the third—the pollution of the 

Sanctuary. ‘The second is referred to in vill. 12; ix. 14. 

wealth (1m). In Test. Lev. xiv. 6 the Sadducean priests are charged with ‘covetousness,’ i.e. mAcove€ia, 
which in the LXX is the rendering for Y¥3. If the text is original, our author, like a fanatic, makes, not, the sinful 
desire, but the object of the desire a sinful thing in itself. In Jubilees xxiii. 21, where the writer is speaking of the 
Hellenizing priesthood in the time of the early Maccabees, he states that ‘ they will exalt themselves to deceit 
and wealth (i.e. wealth won by wrong)... and they will defile the holy of holies .. - with... the corruption of 
their pollution’. Here unrighteous gain is said to be the object of the priesthood. And so it appears to be in 
our text. For in viii. r2 we have ‘the polluted wealth of wickedness’ (Noon Aywnn j\7) and in ix. 14 ‘the 
wealth of wickedness’; also in 1 Enoch ciii. 5 ‘your sinfully acquired wealth’, Ixiii. ro ‘our unrighteous gains’, 
and see Luke xvi. 9 papuova ris dducias. Hence I have restored ‘of wickedness’ (nywnn) to the text. | Cf..Targ. 
on Isa. v. 23 “Pw jit. 

80g 


7 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 6, 12—7,. 9 


12 He that cometh up from this shall be caught by that, and he that escapeth from this shall be caught 


by that. 
VII. 1-7. The Sin of Fornication. Divorce forbidden. 


1 The builders of the wall who walk after law—the law it is which talks, of which He said : 
Assuredly they shall talk—are caught [by two] by fornication in taking two wives during their life- 


2,3 time. But the fundamental principle of the creation is ‘Male and Female created He them.’ And 


4 they who went into the Ark, ‘ Two and two went into the Ark.’ And as to the prince it is written, 

5 ‘He shall not multiply wives unto himself.’ But David read not in the Book of the Law that was 
sealed, which was in the Ark; for it was not opened in Israel from the day of the death of Eleazar and 

6 Joshua, and the Elders who served Ashtaroth. And it was hidden (and was not) discovered until 

7 Zadok arose. Now they glorified the deeds of David save only the blood of Uriah, and God 
tabandoned them to himf. 


VII. 8-18. The Sin of polluting the Sanctuary. 


8 And they also pollute the Sanctuary since they separate not according to the Law, and lie with 
9 her who sees the blood of her issue. And they take (to wife) each his brother’s daughter or his 


the pollution of the Sanctuary. I have here, of course, followed Schechter’s emendation of “Dv into 
nxio. The profanation of the sanctuary by the priesthood is a very frequent accusation in the O.T. Cf. Zeph. 
iii. 4 ‘her priests have polluted the sanctuary’: also 1 Sam. ii. 12, 17, 22; Ezek. xxii. 26, xliv. billy (oky Ch 
12. He that cometh up from this shall be caught (wpn') by that, &c. Our author returns to Isa. xxiv. 17 
from which he had drawn the quotation in v. 9. The present words are not a quotation but are based on 
Isa. xxiv. 18 ‘He who fleeth (037) from the noise of the fear shall fall into the pit; and he who cometh up 
(npivn) out of the midst of the pit shall be taken (725%) in the snare’. These words are reproduced in 
Jer. xlvili. 44. It will be observed that whereas the participle ‘he that cometh up’ (nbyyn) has a fitness 
in Isaiah as applying to ‘the pit’ it has lost this fitness in our context. 
VII. 1. This verse seems to be directed against the Pharisees and their exposition of the Law. The text 


seems hopeless 5%) FON WON AWN FD NIT INT IY INN om wE NT N32. pin is to be emended into ynn as 
‘in ix. 21, 26(B). The phrase pynn ‘213 ‘builders of the wall’, is borrowed from Ezek. xiii. ro. It recurs in 
ix. 21,26, On the meaning of this phrase see note on ix. 21. Possibly sy is corrupt for N1W in both cases. If so, 
we might translate : ‘the builders of the wall who walk afier vanity (cf. Hos. v. 11, LXX, Syr.)—the vanity it is which 
talks of which it is said: &c.’ Lévi retains the text and translates: ‘ Les batisseurs de murailles, qui poursuivent ¢aw 
(les lois)—et ¢aw, c’est le bavardage & propos duquel il est dit: “ils ne font que bavarder ”—ont été pris dans deux.’ 
[by two], i.e. D’Nw3 a dittograph from the *nyw following. - 
two wives during their lifetime. Schechter is of opinion that the text is ‘not only directed against 
polygamy but also against divorce which certain Jewish sects forbade’. This is probably right though the 
suffix, i.e. ‘their’, is masc.—on"n3—and if taken strictly would refer to the men. But not infrequently in the 
O.T. the masc. suffix is used in reference to feminine nouns: cf. Ruth iv. 11 pny referring to Rachel and 
Leah: see Gesenius Gram. § 1350. But the reference to David in 2. 7 would imply that we have here to do 
with polygamy only. 
2. fundamental principle, i.e. )D°. 
Male and Female, &c. From Gen. i. 27. Cf. Matt. xix. 4; Mark x. 7. As Schechter points out, 
Aboth @’ R. Nathan, p. 5 a, uses the same argument against polygamy but does not give the verse, 
4. The word for prince here is x'w3, which is used by Ezekiel. Leévi thinks that it is chosen instead of 
‘king’ to belittle the Davidic dynasty. 
He shail not multiply, &c. From Deut. xvii. 17, 
5. The explanation of David’s polygamy. 
Joshua. The text has here a dittograph yw pyrn. 
served Ashtaroth. Judges ii. 13. 
6. And it was hidden (and was not) discovered. Here I follow Schechter’s emendation of mdz3 nal 
into Abra (xds) jon. 
Zadok. Some ancient worthy, but who he was cannot be determined. 
. ve es author clearly disapproves of the praise of David in 1 Kings xv. 5, which seems to have been in his 
thoughts. 
glorified (or extolled), i.e. by. Cf. Ps. cxxxvii. 6 for this use of the verb. It is a Talmudic use also. 
Schechter emends sbyy into wordy, i.e. ‘concealed ’. 
abandoned them to him. Does this mean: abandoned Israel to the sway and example of David? 
8. separate. Here 5439 must of necessity be changed into m*S4an. 

_, Blood of her issue (nay 4). Cf. Lev. xv. 19. In the Pss. Sol. viii, 13 the Sadducean priests are charged 
with similarly profaning the altar and temple, emdrovy 7d Ovovacrnpiov Kupiov amd maons dxabapoias, Kai ép apédpe@ atparos 
epiawov tas Gvoias. But the charge here is brought against the Pharisees. 

9. brother’s. For on’nN read tnx. There is a for the two changes made by Schechter. 
Io ; 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 7. 10-19 


Io sister's daughter. _ But Moses said ‘Thou shalt not approach thy mother’s sister: she is thy 
tr mother’s near kin’. So the law of intercourse for males is written, and the same law holds for 
females ; and let not the daughter of the brother uncover the nakedness of the brother of her 
father: he is near of kin. 
They also polluted their holy spirit and with a tongue of blasphemies they opened the mouth 
3 against the statutes of the covenant of God, saying: They are not established. But abominations 
they speak regarding them. 
14 They are all ‘kindlers of fire 
And setters aflame of firebrands’ : 


15 “The webs of spiders’ are their weavings 
And ‘the eggs of cockatrices’ are their eggs: 


12 


16 He who comes near them shall not be innocent : 
He that chooseth them shall be held guilty /unless he was forced]. 


17 Aforetime God visited their works, 
And His wrath was kindled because of their devices. 


18 For ‘it is a people of no understanding’: 
‘They are a nation void of counsel,’ 
[ Because there is no understanding in them]. 


19 For aforetime arose Moses and Aaron through the prince of the Lights. But Belial raised 
Jochanneh and his brother with his evil device when the former delivered Israel. 


10. Thou shalt not... kin (i.e. 8 JON ANY DPN nb JON NINN by). This is a free reproduction of 
Lev. xviii. 13 SIN JON NW °D mdan Nd JON nin ny: cf Jebam. 35 ad. 

Ii. intercourse, i.e. M497—a Rabbinic term. 

let not the daughter of the brother, &c. The text reads oN) ‘and if’ which I have emended into Ssy Sand 
let not’. This argument that, ifa man must not marry his aunt, a woman must not marry her uncle is found 
among the Caraites, but it is earlier. Similar reasoning is attributed to the Sadducees in Baba Bathra 115 4, 
Megillat Taanith 5. 

12. their holy spirit, i.e. DTWIP M7. Cf. viii. 2 note. Late Hebrew Test. Naph. x. 9 (in my edition of the 
Test. Twelve Patr. p. 227), ‘Blessed is he who does not defile the holy spirit of God which hath been put and 
breathed into him, and blessed is he who returns it to its Creator as pure as it was on the day when He entrusted 
it to him.’ Schechter compares Wertheimer, ii. 14 137pav ons mn xno soy ons wx mwa on. 

They are not established (1233 nb). This passage is directed against the Pharisees, who by their casuistry 
set at naught the Law. 

14. all kindlers of fire... firebrands (Mp ‘7y3D) WN NTP nd>). These words are drawn from Isa. 1. 11 
though with a change: pnaya mpya.. ..935 mp yr IND WN MP Dd. 

15. The webs of spiders. From Isa, lix. 4. 

the eges of cockatrices. From Isa. lix. 4. 

16. He that chooseth them. The text reads the unintelligible owx’ inva 71ND. Schechter emends the first 
word into panm>. Thus we have: ‘like a thing accursed shall his house be guilty.’ But the parailelism points in 
a different direction. OWN ‘shall be held guilty’ is right; for it corresponds to ‘shall not be innocent’ in the 
previous line. We require now a parallel to ‘he that cometh near them ’—in other words, we expect a participle 
behind “33, i.e. 773. inva is there corrupt for nna. Thus we arrive at the above. Lévi suggests the change 
of “nD into np = ‘speedily’, and renders ‘bientdt sa maison est vouée 4 la destruction’ and is herein 
followed by Lagrange, but neither this clause nor yet the clause which follows admits readily of the meaning 
they attach to them. 

unless he was forced (yn: oN %2). An obvious gloss. The words BN °> that follow are with Schechter 
to be rejected as a dittograph. Lévi and Lagrange: ‘ assuredly it will be destroyed’ (referring to the ‘ house ’). 

18. The first line is verbally drawn from Isa. xxvii. 11. The second and third lines are from Deut. xxxii. 28, 
put the last line, which I have bracketed as a gloss, diverges slightly, i.e. A DAI PN WD whereas Deut. 
xxxii. 28 has 79)3N O73 js). 

19. This verse seems to have no connexion either with what precedes or what follows. 

“prince of the Lights, i.e. p-NT Ww. This may be the angel Uriel who, according to 1 Enoch, was set 
over the lights of heaven. Schechter suggests that we should read D5 for DMN. _We should then have ‘ the 
prince of the Presence’ who succoured Moses, against Mastema (i.e. Belial) Jub. xlviil. 2, 9. 

Belial, i.e. Satan: cf. ix. 12. 7: 
Jochanneh and his brother. These are the two Egyptian magicians, Jannes and Jambres, mentioned in 
2 Tim. iii. 8, who withstood Moses, Exod. vii. 11 sq. In Menachoth 85 a they are called NnDD) ‘2M. See 
: , i. 2327 Sqq. 
Be. the ea delivered Israel. The text Ae mwsan ms bev» yoya. Schechter emends nsx 
Br 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 8. 1-8 


VIII. When the Land was laid desolate God would raise up wise men who would restudy the Law 
and goin Extle to Damascus, 1-5; and according to its Precepts the repentant ones should walk 
till the Teacher of Righteousness arose (i.e. after 176 B.C.), 7-10. 


1 And during the period of the destruction of the land there arose those who removed the landmark 

2 and led Israel astray. And the land became desolate because they spake rebellion against the com- 
mandments of God through Moses [and also through His holy anointed one], and they prophesied 
a lie to turn away Israel from God. 


3 But God remembered the covenant with the forefathers : 
And He raised up from Aaron men of understanding, 
And from Israel wise men: 


4 And He made them to hearken, 
And they digged the well. 


5 ‘A well the princes digged, 
The nobles of the people delved it 
By the order of the Lawgiver.’ 


6 The well is the Law, and they who digged it are the penitents of Israel who went forth out 
of the land of Judah and sojourned in the land of Damascus, all of whom God called princes. 
7,8 For they sought Him and His glory was not turned back in the mouth of one (of them). And the 
Lawgiver is he who studies the Law, in regard to whom Isaiah said, ‘ He bringeth forth an instrument 


into ny and renders ‘when I. was delivered for the first time’. But this would require nyn. I emend as 


follows: wean Ssaw nx pwr. On this order of object and subject, cf. Gen. iv. 15; Joshua xiv. rr; 
2 Sam. xviii. 29 ; Isa. xx. 1, &c. The error arose through the transposition of the nN. ‘The former’ are of 
course ‘Moses and Aaron’, Here Lévi and Lagrange render m21wN77 MN ‘ pour la premiére fois’ ! 


VIII. 1-10. The period here referred to seems to be the same as ‘the period of wrath’ in i. 5 when evil men 
arose who rebelled against the commandments of God (v. 2). But God raised up men of understanding, who 
studied the law (4-5) and went forth out of the land of Judah to Damascus (6). In this law and its precepts 
they should walk till the Teacher of righteousness arose (10). We have already seen (see i. 7 note) that this 
teacher was raised up ‘in the period of the wrath’ (i. 5), which began or prevailed about 196 8. c. Inv. 10 
this period is called ‘the end of the days’. 

I. the period of the destruction of the land. See i. 5 and preceding note. 

who removed the landmark. Cf. i. 11 note ; ix. 13, 49. These wicked leaders may be the Hellenizers it 
the date is early, or the Pharisees if it is late. Perhaps the same as ‘the scornful man? spoken of in i. 10; for he 
‘talked to Israel lying words and made them go astray’ (i. 10; cf. viii. 2, 1) so that they ‘should remove 
the landmark’ (i. 11: cf. viii. gs 

2. the land became desolate, i. e. through the Syrians. 

spake rebellion. Cf. xiv. 5 (i.e. AD 1929). From Deut. xiii. 6. 

and also through His holy anointed one, If these words are genuine they may refer, as Lévi suggests, 
to Aaron. Moses and Aaron would in this case be conceived as the revealers of God’s commands. But since 
the text reads wip mwa on it would be more natural to translate ‘and also through His holy Messiah’ : 
cf. ix, r0(B), 29, xv. 4,-xviil. 8, ° See note on i. 7. There isa difficulty with regard to this phrase in ii. ro. 

3- remembered the covenant, &c. Cf. i. 4 note. 

Aaron...and Israel. Cf. ix, 10(B); xv. 4; xviii. 8. Schechter may be right in deducing from this 
verse (viii. 3) the conclusion that the Zadokite Party ‘insisted that the lay element should be represented in all 
important functions’. 

made ...tohearken. The text reads Byw*, which with Schechter I have emended into Dy'nw’. Bacher 
retains the text and translates ‘assembled them’ (cf. 1 Sam. xv. 4). 

the well. Cf.v.3. The well is the Law (v: 6). 

5» From Num. xxi. 18. 

the Lawgiver (i.e. ppinen). A very narrow definition is given to the Lawgiver in v. 8. He is ‘a student 
of the Law’. It is quite in keeping with the absolute autocracy of the Law. The Lawgiver (viii. 8, 9) is in ix. 8 
called ‘the Star’, whose duties are described in the same terms. 

6. the penitents of Israel ... land of Judah. Cf. vi. 1. 

land of Damascus. Cf. v, 155 1X. 5, 28, 37. 

7. His glory. The text reads onINS payin (= ‘their bough was... turned back’) which I take to be 
ce NAN AIwin = ‘His glory was... turned back’. This term is used frequently of God in 

OPO he 

8. the Lawgiver, i.e. ppinnn. He appears to have been the founder of the Party at Damascus. 

Studies the Law, i.e. m-ynn way. 

He bringeth forth, &c. From Isa. liv. 16. 


812 


9 


Io 


II 


12 


FRAGMENTS OF.A ZADOKITE WORK 8. 9-12 


for his work.’ “And the nobles of the people are those who came to dig the well by the precepts in 
the which the Lawgiver ordained that they should walk throughout the full period of the wickedness. 


oe save them they shall get nothing until there arises the Teacher of Righteousness in the end of 
the days. 


VIII. 11-20. Conditions under which they can act as Priests in the Sanctuary. 


And none who have entered into the covenant shall enter into the Sanctuary to kindle His altar 
but they shall shut the doors concerning whom God said, 

‘O that there was one among you to shut the doors, 

So that ye might not vainly kindle the fire upon My altar, 


Unless they observe to do according to the true meaning of the Law until the period of the 
wickedness, and to sever themselves from the children of the pit, and to hold aloof from the 
polluted wealth of wickedness under a vow and a curse, and from the wealth of the Sanctuary: 


g. in the which. The text reads nO... WN an obvious corruption for O73 “x. 
period of the wickedness. Cf.v. 12. In Ezek. xxi. 30 we have ‘the time of the wickedness of the end’ 
(yp jw ny). 
wickedness. The text reads yw which I have emended into nywn. This phrase refers to the kingdom 
of wickedness (nyw7n myad2) as opposed to the coming Messianic kingdom. 
ro. From the founding of the Party till the teacher of righteousness arose, i.e. after 196 B.c., no new teaching 
or light should be given. See note on vili. 1-10. 
until there arises, &c. Cf. Ezra ii. 63 ; Neh. vii. 65 for a like idea. 
the Teacher of Righteousness, i.e. Payn M7. See i. 7 note. 

11-20. These verses form one sentence, in which the conditions are given, on the fulfilment of which the 
priests can administer their office in the Temple. 

11. And none who have entered into the covenant shall enter into the Sanctuary, ie. Nain awe 55 
wapan bs sia ynbad nmna3. I bave here, as Schechter suggests, emended 3x30 into 1N2. As regards the 
translation, there are two possible ways. I have, with Schechter, given the above rendering, but Lévi, citing 
Jer. xxxiv. 10 D3 Jay *nda>.,, ay NN WN nowh means wa wwe... own 55 and 2 Chron. xv. 12, insists 
that we must connect the words as in these passages. If this is necessary the translation would run: ‘ And all 
those who had entered the covenant not to enter the Sanctuary to kindle His altar, and had shut the doors.’ 
But, if we accept Lévi’s rendering, the connexion and grammar of the entire passage are destroyed. In order 
to carry it out, Lévi is obliged to render x5 pN as ‘because... not’(!) in v.12, and to make vv. 11-20 
a nominativus pendens, which does not find a predicate to v. 41, and which, when it is resumed in v. 21, has quite 
changed its meaning! Lagrange accepts Lévi's suggestion but avoids rendering xd DN as Lévi has done. He 
rightly takes these words as meaning ‘unless’. But the passage then becomes no more intelligible in his 
hands. v.11 is a vom. pendens which is apparently explained in v. 12, which forms the beginning of a long 
protasis extending from v.12 to v. 20, and then ends without an apodosis. He tries to get over these 
difficulties by suggesting that xd ox forms the beginning of an oath. But there is nothing in the text to suggest 
such an idea. aes 

Hence I conclude that if the passage is to be construed intelligibly, it is to be taken as I have given it. 
The apodosis of the sentence comes first in v. 11, and the protasis follows in 12-20. For another long sentence 
where the protasis consists of four verses, see iX. 50-54. No priest of the Zadokite party is to take part in the 
Temple services (v. 11), unless he fulfils the conditions laid down in 12-20. In case the Zadokite priests fulfil 
these conditions, they are in v. 21 given the assurance of an everlasting covenant. 

none... shall enter, i.e. N13 snbas.,.. 52. This construction recurs in vi. 5, 7 (dcs), 1X. 2, 12, X. I, XX. 7. 

none... shali enter into the Sanctuary to kindle His altar. These words refer to the Temple in 
Jerusalem : cf. v. 12 where the wealth of the Sanctuary is spoken of, and i. 3 note. 

have entered into the covenant. See il. 1 note. 

doors. Text reads ind5 corrupt for p’n?7 as also in the quotation that follows. 

O that ... upon My altar. From Mal. i. 10, save that our text omits OD) and by a slip puts nbs 
for pnbt. That it is the Temple in Jerusalem that our text refers to follows inevitably from this quotation. 

12. observe to do. Cf. Deut. xii. 1. : 

until the period of the wickedness, i.e. YW ypd. Perhaps 7? should here have its ordinary meaning 

¢ > 
5 ine pit, nnwn va. Cf. Jub. x. 3, Xv. 26, where the phrase denotes those who refuse circum- 
cision. In xvi. 7 it undoubtedly means the uncircumcised. In Ezek. XXX. 24, &c. ‘Sheol’ or ‘ the pit’ (713 xxxii. 29 
or nnw xxviii. 8) is spoken of as the final habitation of the uncircumcised. 
to hold aloof... under a vow and a curse, ie. to take a vow to separate themselves and invoke a curse 
on themselves in case they failed. ee 
& hold aloof ie. no. Ch Num. vi. 2,5, 12. The form 37nb is found in viii. 18. 
the polluted wealth of wickedness. See note on Vi. II. 


813 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 8. 13-20 


13 And in respect to robbing the poor of His people, 
So that widows may be their spoil, 
And they may murder the fatherless: 


14 And to make a difference between the clean and the unclean and to make men discern between 
t5 the holy and the profane: And to observe the Sabbath according to its true meaning and the 

feasts and the day of the Fast according to the utterances of them who entered into the New 
16 Covenant in the land of Damascus: To contribute their holy things according to the true inter- 
17 pretation: To love every one his brother as himself, and to strengthen the hand of the poor 
18 and the needy and the stranger, and to seek every one the peace of his brother : To hold aloof 

from harlots according to the law: and that no man should commit a trespass against his next 
19 of kin: To rebuke every one his brother according to the commandment, and not to bear a grudge 
20 from day to day, and to separate from all the pollutions according to their judgements. And no man 


to hold aloof... from the wealth of the Sanctuary. Can this be a pregnant expression for ‘to hold 
aloof... from robbing the wealth, &c.’? If so, we might compare Test. Lev. xiv. 5 ‘The offerings of the Lord 
ye shall rob, and from His portion ye shall steal choice portions’. The chief Pharisee of the time of Jannaeus, 
i.e. Simon ben Shetach, is said to have appropriated to his own use half the offerings of 300 Nazarites. See 
Schiirer’, i. 279 sq. But the text may mean that the priests of the Party are not to avail themselves of the 
wealth of the Temple. 
from the wealth, &c. Reading smn instead of Na. In vi. rr (see note) evilly-acquired wealth is spoken 
of. The same charge appears here to be brought against the wealth of the Sanctuary. If this is so, the 
Sanctuary in question cannot be the sanctuary of the Party ; for they would not in any case admit that its 
(small) wealth was of this nature. Hence the text can only refer to the Temple in Jerusalem. 
13. in respect to robbing... the fatherless. This verse is a quotation from Isa. x. 2 “9y paw dypyby 


na DynNnN) Bey nibs nnd spy, but our author omits pawn and changes 12) into inyq, which, as Lévi 
observes, is drawn from Ps. xciv. 6 iny4) Din. 

in respect to robbing. The text reads 5y5 and I have translated accordingly, but this may be corrupt 
for Sy = ‘from robbing’. 

14. This verse is a quotation from Ezek. xxii. 26, save that our author has transposed the two verbs and 
read: yn wpa pa yindys ainud spn pa beyond). In connecting Ssan with the first clause he may have 
been influenced by Lev. xi. 47 which does so. 

15. the day of the Fast, i.e. the Day of Atonement. 

utterances. The text reads xy which I take to be corrupt for *S¥i2, But Schechter is possibly right 
in emending it into ny = ‘command’. 

the New Covenant. Cf. ix. 28, 37. See note on ii. 1. The phrase appears to be derived from 
Jer. xxxi. 31. It was called ‘new’ because it was a covenant based on repentance, ix. 15 (B) (Fawn na). 
This involved a spiritual transformation, and corresponds to the words in Jer. xxxi. 33 ‘I will put my law in 
their inward parts, and in their hearts will I write it if 

the land of Damascus. See viii. 6 note. 

16. contribute, i.e. ond. 

their holy things (nwapn). These words may refer to the tithes of the oxen and the sheep. These are 
mentioned in Lev. xxvii. 32 and 2 Chron, xxxi. 6 only, but were unknown to Nehemiah (x. 37-39, xii. 44— 
47, &c.). The literal tithing of the oxen and sheep is maintained in Jub. xxxii. 15 (see my note zz loc.), but 
Rabbinic tradition sought to make it out as merely a tithe of the yearly increase. 

17. To love... as himself, i.e. mDD INN MN ws ainnd. In Lev. xix. 18 we have ‘neighbour’ instead of 
‘brother’. The question arises here, who is ‘the brother’? In Judaism it was always limited to fellow country- 
men, and the context here favours this idea. See the Lest. Twelve Patr. for the noblest pre-Christian enforcement 
of this duty: T. Sim. iv, 7; T.lsscv. 2, viin6» LT. Gad iv. 2, Vi. I, 3, vii. 73 -T. Benj. ii. 3, iii. ame 

to strengthen ... needy (}»3N) »y 33 prnnd). From Ezek. xvi. 49. ; 
seek ... the peace (now ny., , wid). Cf. Deut. xxiii, OPT et. <xaK 7. 

18. I have transposed the two clauses of this verse, 
harlots. For nyt we should perhaps read ny ‘fornication’ with Schechter. Cf. iii. 2, vii, 2. 
his next of kin (i.e. wa TINY). Cf. ix. 17; Ley. xviii, 6, XXV. 40. ; 

Tg. rebuke... his brother (mn my... mi). The commandment is in Lev. xix. ry NOX nN mon 
Cf, x. 2, 5 of our text. 

not to bear a grudge. Cf. ix, 16, xX. I note. 
to separate from all the pollutions. Cf. Ezra vi. 21. 
20. no man shall make abominable his holy spirit, i.e. »wSD m4 ny WN pow xd. This is clearly 


a reproduction of Lev. xx: 25 with a change of phrase: oa nwa) Ds wpwn xd © Ve shall not make your souls 
abominable : See our text xiv. re. Thus the ‘spirit’ (MI =mvedpa) is for our author identical with the soul 
(WD) = ux) alike in essence and function as in 1 Enoch xxii. 3,5 &c. See my Eschatology, 195, Sq. See vii. 12 note 


814 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 8. 20—9. 3 
shall make abominable (with these) his holy spirit, according as God separated (these) from them. 

21 As for all those who walk in these things in the perfection of holiness according to all the 
ordinances, the covenant of God 


Dexty A: hextB: 
standeth fast unto them to preserve them to | standeth fast unto them to preserve them for 
a thousand generations. thousands of generations. As it is written, ‘ Who 


keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love 
Him and keep His commandments to a thousand 
generations.’ 


IX.1. Zhe Law as to binding and loosing. 


9: And if they settle in camps according to the And if they settle in camps according to the 
order of the land and take wives and beget | statutes of the land which were from of old and 
children, they shall walk according to the Law, | take wives according to the custom of the Law 
and according tothe judgements of the ordinances | and beget children, they shall walk according to 
according to the order of the Law as He spake, | the Law and according to the judgements of the 
‘between a man and his wife, and between a | ordinances according to the order of the Law as 
father and his son’. | He spake, ‘between a man and his wife, and 

between a father and his son.’ 





IX. 2-3. Threatened Judgement on those who rejected the Statutes. 

2 Butas for all them that reject... when God | But as for all them that reject the command- 
will bring a visitation upon the land they shall | ments and the statutes they shall be requited with 
be requited with the recompense of the wicked; | the recompense of the wicked; when God will 
when there shall come to pass the word which is | bring a visitation upon the land, when there shall 
written in the words of Isaiah the son of Amos | come to pass the word which is written by the 

3 the prophet, who said : ‘ He will bring upon thee | hand of Zechariah the prophet : ‘ O sword, awake 
and upon thy people and upon thy father’s house | against My shepherd and against the man that 
days that have (not) come from the day that | is My fellow, saith God ; smite the shepherd and 
Ephraim departed from Judah.’ the sheep shall be scattered, and I will turn Mine 

hand against the little ones.’ 





separated (these) from them (ond me bq3n), i. e. separated the unclean things from them. From Lev. xx. 25. 
21. As for all those who walk in these things ... the covenant of God standeth fast unto them. These 

clauses recur in Xvi. 12. 

perfection of holiness or ‘ holy perfection’ (wtp oven). Cf. ix. 30, 33. 

ordinances. The text reads "10 or "71D" (= ‘ disciplinings’), which must be emended as in ix. 1 (A? and B) 
into po’. Cf. xi. 2. 

the covenant ...standeth fast unto them. Cf. xvi.12. From Ps. Ixxxix. 28 b nos] 3. I have 
changed nv) into NONI as in the Psalms. - 

21. B. Who keepeth covenant... generations. From Deut. vii. 9; Lhe Sand and the ‘myn are to 
be read as waned and yniyn. 


IX. 1. camps. According to Lévi the name of the Jewish quarter even at the present day in Persia is 
‘camp’, referring to Elkan Adler D"B "33, Pp. 3- 7 ; 
order (or ‘regulation’ or ‘arrangement’), i.e. JD a Rabbinic word. It recurs in x. I, Xv. I, 4, XVI. I, 
xvii, 1. Observe that in B we have ‘pin, but later in this verse it is found both in A and B. "Dis found in 
vv. 29, 30 of the Aramaic Fragments of an original source of the Zest. Twelve Pair. In the Greek, which is 
here happily preserved, rags appears as the equivalent of 71D. Both the Aramaic and Greek Fragments go back 
to a Hebrew original. See my Greek Versions of the Test. Twelve Patr., p. 250. Cf. 39D = ‘administrators 
ine Dane Vii 3; 4, &c. 
ordinances, i.e. OD in B and Ar); which latter could also be read p'71D’. 
between a man and his wife...son. From Num. xxx. 16 save that for ‘son’ (123) the O.T. reads ‘daughter’ 
(1n3). We have here a summary reference to the law of binding and loosing, which is more fully treated in xx. 2-12. 
2. will bring a visitation. ‘This is the visitation through the Messiah: cf. vv. 9-10, 12-13. 
they shall be requited with the recompense of the wicked. Tam doubtful as to the rendering here. 
The text reads ody oye dws swnb. This use of the infinitive is frequent in our text. For the phrase 
cf. Joel iii. 4, 7. ( 
3. The great difference of the two recensions here is to be observed. 
3. A. This verse is quoted from Isa. vii. 17. It recurs in part in xvi. r1—a fact which may support the A 
recension. For Nia’ we must read 3’, and X? must be restored before wNI as in xvi. rr and in the O.T. 
that have (not) come... Ephraim. These words recur in Xvi. IT. 
3. B. This verse is quoted from Zech. xiii, 7. Our nee has changed N}NI¥ " into by. 
15 


NS 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 9. 4-10 


A 


IX. 4-9. Foundation of the Zadokite Party and its Expectations: the Law, the Prophets, 
and the Messiah. 


4 When the two houses of Israel separated, [Ephraim departed from Judah, and] all who proved 

faithless were delivered to the sword, and those who held fast escaped into the land of the North. 
5 As He said, ‘And I will cause to go into captivity Siccuth your King and Chiun your images, 
6 (the star of your god which ye made for yourselves) beyond Damascus.’ The books of the 

Law are the tabernacle of the King, as He said, ‘And I will raise up the tabernacle of David that is 
7 fallen.’ The King is the congregation and Chiun the images are the books of the Prophets, whose 
8 words Israel has despised. And the Star is he who studied the Law, who came to Damascus, as it 

is written, ‘There shall come forth a star out of Jacob, and a sceptre shall rise out of Israel.’ The 
9 sceptre is the prince of all the congregation. 


IX. 10-20. The Messiah will destroy those who were faithless to the New Covenant: their 
moral Derelictions through Hellenizing Influences. 


A B 
to =©-AAnd when he arises ‘he shall destroy all the And ‘ they that give heed unto Him are the 
sons of (battle) din’... . These shall escape during | poor of the flock’. These shall escape during the 
the period of the [first] visitation, but those who period of the visitation, but the rest shall be handed 
proved faithless shall be delivered to the sword. | over to the sword when the Messiah comes from 


4. [Ephraim... and]. Bracketed as a dittograph from the preceding sentence. So Landauer. 
all who proved faithless. Cf. v. 10. 
those who held fast. See v. 1 note. 
land of the North, i.e. Damascus. 

5-9. The extraordinary piece of exegesis which we find in these verses has for its object the removal from 
the Messianic hopes of the expectation of a Messiah descended from David. No kingly but a priestly Messiah 
is to be looked for. 

5. This verse is quoted from Amos v. 26-24, but with a few changes. Two are accidental and owing to 
copyists. The first of these is the omission of the clause ‘the star of your God which ye made for yourselves’, 
The second is the corruption of 5 aygap = ‘beyond’ into ‘onx ‘from the tents of’. The entire context 
of our author requires the former. The words “beyond Damascus’ denote the destination of the captivity— 
called ‘the land of Damascus’ in viii. 6, ix. 28, 38. If our author deliberately changed 5 axdan into ‘Smxp he 
would not have done so unless it was of importance to him. That it was not is patent from the fact that no 
allusion to ‘tents’ occurs in what follows. 

There is, however, one deliberate change of the text of Amos, namely, the substitution of im5any ‘and 
I will cause... to go into captivity’ from v. 27 for DnNwo) ‘and ye shall carry’ in v, 26. 
6. tabernacle. Here mynp ‘ Siccuth’ or ‘Saccuth’ is read as N3D = ‘ tabernacle ’. 
And I will raise up... fallen. From Amos ix, Ir, save that for OPN our text reads sn pm. 

7. whose words Israel has despised. Cf. Test. Lev. xvi. 2 ‘Ye shall set at naught the words of the prophets ’. 
The meaning may be, as Lévi suggests, that Israel had treated the books of the Prophets as worthless idols. 

8. The Star does not symbolize the Messiah, but the religious leader of the party of penitents that went to 
the land of Damascus. Hence there is no connexion between the idea in our text and in Test. Lev. xviii. 3; 
Test. Jud. xxiv. 1, where the Star does symbolize the Messiah, and where both passages are based on Num. 
xxiv. 17. Since the Star is said to ‘ study the Law’ (ANNA wt) and likewise to have gone forth at the head 
of the penitents to Damascus, he is the same as the Lawgiver in viii. 5, 8, 9. 

There shall come forth a star, &c. Quoted from Num. xxiv. iy 

9. The sceptre appears to denote the Messiah: cf. v. 10(B). He is a militant Messiah, This reference to 
the Messiah is proleptic. 

to. he shall destroy all the sons of (battle) din. Quoted from Num. xxiv, 17. I have here given one of 
the most likely renderings of nw, 

The two recensions must be used here to supplement each other. A is wanting in a clause at the 
beginning, which B preserves, 

10 A. shall escape: reading wp for 10, as in 10 B, 

the period of the [first] visitation. I have bracketed ‘first’ (wn which should, if correct, be ADWwesan) 
as an interpolation. It is not the first but the second or final visitation that is referred to, as is clear from B. 

those who proved faithless. Cf. v, 4. Here B has pn xwon ‘the rest’, 

Shall be delivered. Here I emend 30h into y43p" (cf. Dd in B). The Hophal apn is found in this 
sense in v7. 11 (B). 

10 B. they that give heed... flock. This is a quotation from Zech. xi, II, save that our author has 
changed ‘nix = ‘Me’ into myx = ‘Him’. 

816 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 9. 11-17 


A 
11 [ Lost. ] 


12 And this also shall be the judgement of 
all them who have entered into His covenant, 
who will not hold fast to these (statutes): they 
shall be visited for destruction through the hand 

13 of Belial. This is the day on which God shall 
visit (as He hath spoken) : 


‘The princes of Judah were (like them that 
removed the landmark): 
Upon them will I pour out(My)wrath (like water).’ 


14 For they are too sick to be- healed, 
And they have been at the head of all the rebels. 


15 Because they have not turned from the way of 
traitors, 
But have wallowed in the ways of harlots, 
And in the wealth of wickedness and (in) revenge. 


16 And every man beareth a grudge against his 
brother, 
And every man hateth his neighbour. 


17 And they committed trespass every man against 
his next of kin, 
And drew near to unchastity : 


from Aaron and israel. 
see note on i. 7. 
Il. spake. 





B 


Aaronand Israel: Just as it was during the period 11 
of the first visitation, concerning which He spake 
through Ezekiel ‘to set a mark upon the fore- 
heads of them that sigh and cry’, but the rest 
were delivered to ‘the sword that avengeth with 
the vengeance of the covenant’. And this also 12 
shall be the judgement of all them that have 
entered into His covenant, who will not hold fast 

to these statutes: they shall be visited for destruc- 
tion through the hand of Belial. This is the day 13 
on which God shall visit, as He hath spoken: 


‘The princes of Judah were like them that 
remove the landmark: 
Upon them will I pour out (My) wrath like water.’ 


Because they entered into. the covenant of 15 
repentance : 

And yet have not turned from the way of traitors : 

But have dealt wantonly in the ways of fornication, 

In the wealth of wickedness and in revenge. 


And every man beareth a grudge against his 16 
brother, 
And every man hateth his neighbour. 


And they committed trespass every man against 17 
his next of kin, 
And drew near to unchastity : 


I have here preferred 2 before both these words in accordance with ix. 29. 


By a slip a scribe inserts ‘Ezekiel’ as the subject of ‘ spake’. 


set a mark... cry (i.e. Op) ON? My dy pnw ninnd). From Ezek. ix. 4 minyo Sy yn minm 


D*PININ OMINITA Own. 
that avengeth, .. covenant. Cf. i, 12d. 
12. entered into His covenant. See ii. 1 note. 
will not hold fast. Cf. v. 1 note. 


they shall be visited, i.e. papa. This idiomatic construction with the infinitive is frequent in our text. 


See note on villi. 11. 
through the hand of Belial. 


Belial in later pre-Christian Judaism is simply another name for Satan. 


One of the three functions assigned to satanic spirits in 1 Enoch is that of the punishment of sinners. 


13. God shall visit. See v. 2 note. 


The princes of Judah, &c. From Hos. v. 10. _ The text of A is defective and corrupt. 


For Jays amdy 


‘nay oD it reads MAIN omy Pown wwe. B agrees exactly with the Massoretic Hebrew, save that it reads 
may for ‘n7ay. For the meaning of ‘princes of Judah’ in our text see viii. 6. 
14. In A only and very corrupt. The text runs xpind 5m 95 jot S5 nvopt, where I propose to read 


mp 1D and emend the vox nulla DyOps into wp’. 
‘and He will take vengeance on all the rebels’. 


15-19. Breaches by the Princes of Judah of the moral conditions laid down in viii. 11 a-19c. 


But the text remains a problem. Lévi suggests 1 ap 


Thus 


contrast ix. 15 @ with viii. rr @: ix. 15 ¢ with viii. 18a: ix. 15 d with viii. rac: ix. 16 @ with vill. 19 6: ix. 164 
_with viii. 17 @: ix..17 @ with viii. 18 6: ix. 17 6 with vill. 19 ¢: ix. 184 with vill. 19 ¢. 


15 B.. entered into the covenant. See ii. 1 note. 


covenant of repentance, i.e. ATwN 3. 


This is the covenant mentioned in Jer. xxxi. 30, 32. 


15 A. wallowed, i.e. 5m (A). But B reads ysym. Either verb does very well. Butv.4(A)supports the former. 


harlots, i.e. mia (A). 
‘harlots ’. 
wealth of wickedness. 

16. beareth a grudge. Lev. xix. 18. 
hateth his neighbour. Lev. xix. 17. 
17. committed trespass. 


B reads mr which punctuated M3} = ‘fornication’, and punctuated nit = 
Since we have abstract expressions following, probably we should read ‘fornication * here. 

See note on this phrase in vi. II. 

See x. 1 note. 


So with Schechter I emend wabyn’ (A, B) into yy as in viii. 18, where this 
817 


3G 


18 


19 


20 


2I 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 9 17-21 


A 


And exalted themselves with a view to wealth 
and unjust gain, 

And every man did that which was right in his 
own eyes. 


And they chose every man the stubbornness of 
his heart, 
And they separated not from the people. 


And they cast off restraint with a high hand 

To walk in the way of the wicked, concerning 
whom God said: 

‘Their wine is the poison of dragons 

And the cruel venom of asps.’ 


The dragons are the kings of the Gentiles and 
their wine is their ways, and the venom of asps 
is the head of the kings of Javan, who came to 
execute vengeance upon them. 


B 


And they made themselves strong with a view’ 


to wealth and unjust gain, ; ony 
And every man did that which was right in his 
own eyes. 


And they chose every man the stubbornness of 18 


his heart, 
And they separated not from the people and their 
sins. 


And they cast off restraint with a high hand 

To walk in the ways of the wicked ; concerning 
whom God said: 

‘ Their wine is the poison of dragons 

And the cruel venom of asps.’ 


The dragons are the kings of the Gentiles 
and their wine is their ways, and the venom of 
asps is the head of the kings of Javan, who came 
to execute vengeance upon them. 


IX. 21-23. Werther to these things nor to Moses did the Builders of the Wall give heed. 


But despite all these things they who builded 
the wall and daubed it with untempered mortar 


But despite all these things they who builded 
the wall and daubed it with untempered mortar 


line recurs. But we might retain wbyny and change “NW into "Nw and derive the text from Isa. lviii. 7 
and translate ‘hid themselves every man from his own flesh ’. 
exalted themselves with a view to wealth and unjust gain. The text reads yyad) nad q22n+ where 


I have emended 1933n’ into aan’ or 133 (cf. B yaa’) on the strength of Jub, xxiii. 21, ‘They will all exalt 
themselves with a view to deceit and wealth.’ Here the Ethiopic word for ‘deceit’ is a rendering of mdecoveéia, 
which in turn is a rendering of yy3 in Judges v. 19: or of déckia, which is similarly a rendering of the same Hebrew 
word in Prov. xxviii. 16: cf. Ps. ix. 24. yy2is also rendered by dvouia. Thus our text is clearly dependent on 
Jub. xxiii. 19, which latter would be better rendered ‘they will all exalt themselves with a view to unjust gain 
and wealth’. In B the verb is 1923n', ‘made themselves strong ’, which may be right, though it is not the word 
implied by Jub. xxiii. 21. Its appearance here may be due to v. 54 ¢c in our text, where it occurs in a good sense. 
every man did that which was right, &. See iv. 5c. Here B reads "wn w'N NX an obvious 
transposition of (WT NN WN. 
18. chose... the stubbornness, &c. See iii. 4 note. 
stubbornness’, but the translation adopted is more likely. 


separated not (171) nd). This separatist character relates the party so far to the Pharisees, See v. 24. 
19-20. The degradation of Israel through Hellenizing influences and their punishment at the hand of Javan 
i.e. the Greek rulers of Egypt and Syria. 3 
1g. cast off restraint, i.e. yp. Cf. 2 Chron. xxviii. ro. 
Their wine ...asps. Quoted from Deut. xxxii. 33 
Db O33n non 
TWAS DYIND Wx 
20. This verse refers to the invasions of Palestine by the successors of 
equation of Greece and Syria points to the early date of our author. 
head, i.e. w87. Our author, as Lagrange recognizes, plays here on the two different meanings of wN7 
Javan. Cf. Daniel viii. 21, x. 20, xi. 2. ‘ ; 
21. builded the wall. Cf. 26; vii. 1. 
the wall ("n weodrorxoy Eph. ii. 14). What is meant by ‘the wall’? 
which the Pharisees, especially the legalistic side, raised about the Law. 


command amin? se wy ‘make a fence to the Torah’. As Taylor (Sayings of the Jewish Fathers?, p. 134) 
‘writes: ‘In theory and practice the law required a fence, as a written Torah needs i ; 

Wane sie ; a margin to safeguard the 

But could the Zadokite party object adsoluiely to ‘the fence’, seein ita inci i 
ec ct A g they adopted it in principle in 
reference to the Sabbath, xiii. 1, where it is required that in order to avoid recta it some of the: time 
preceding it should be kept holy? Besides, this party must have adopted, and in fact did adopt, as we know 
from this work, a number of the traditional halacha. Hence we conclude that it is not to the principle of ‘the 
fence’ in itself, but to its abnormal growth in the form of oral tradition, that they objected. That there were 
818 


Possibly we should render here ‘chose in the 


Alexander in Egypt and Syria. This 


Does it mean ‘the fence’ (i.e. D) 
In Pirke Aboth i. 1 we have the 


19 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 9. 22-25 


A B 
22 perceived not— For one who was {perturbed} | perceived not— For one who twalked in wind 22 
of spirit and talked lies talked to them— that | and weighed storms}, and talked lies to man 
the wrath of God was kindled against all His con- | (talked)— that the wrath of God was kindled 
gregation : against all His congregation : 
23 Nor that Moses said,‘ Not for thy righteous- Nor that Moses said to Israel, ‘Not for thy 23 


ness or for the uprightness of thine heart dost | righteousness nor for the uprightness of thine 
thou go in to inherit these nations, but because | heart dost thou go in to inherit these nations, but 
He loved thy fathers and because He would | because He loved thy fathers and because He 
keep the oath.’ would keep the oath.’ 


IX. 24-27. The Penitents like the Forefathers were loved of God for their Faithfulness to the 
oe but as He judged the Builders of the Wall, so shall those faithless to the New Covenant 
e judged, . 


24 And such is the case of the penitents of Israel Such is the case of the penitents of Israel (who) 24 
(who) turned aside from the way of the people. | turned aside from the way of the people. Owing 25 

25 Owing to the love of God for the forefathers who | to the love of God for the forefathers who 
stirred up (the people to follow) after Him, He | admonished the people (to follow) after God, 
loved them that came after them ; for theirs is | He loved them that came after them, for theirs 


ample grounds for their opposition we learn from the words of Shammai, who lived in the first century B.c. 


This Rabbi said: ‘ We have two Toroth, the written Torah (ansaw myn) and the oral Torah (np Syaw mon), 
According to the Jer. Peah ii. 6 the latter are the ‘more precious’, while Rabbi Jochanan in Jer. Berakoth 1. 7 
declares that ‘the words of the Sopherim are ... more beloved than words of Torah’ (see Taylor, of. cét., p. 14). 
In Berakh. 8a, 13, B. Mez. 33 a, Chag 1o@ the comparative values of the Torah and the Mishna and Talmud 
are dealt with, much to the disadvantage of the Torah. In the Aboda Zara 35a R. Dimi explained 
Canticles i. 2 as meaning: ‘the words of thy loved ones (i.e. the scholars) are better than the wine of the Law’ 
(an Sy my an yy 935). In the late work Aboth R. N., Book i, p. 3, the consciousness of this evil is 
present to the writer, since it is urged that the fence (713) was not to be made excessive lest it should overpower 
the root or plant it was intended to protect ("p'yn jd “Ny). 

Another fact, i.e. our author's use of yn instead of 3D, may point in the same direction. The latter 
means a fence round something and 1D is ‘to fence about’, but the former is a partition-wall. Now it is quite 
possible that our author may have deliberately used y'n instead of »p. Thus by naming the fence yn the 
Zadokites implied that the Pharisees did not by this means so much protect the Law against profanation from 
without as create division among the ranks of the faithful within. We might compare St. Paul’s designation 
of ‘circumcision’ (mepurouf) as mere ‘mutilation’ («araropy) in Phil. iii. 2. It is worth noting in this connexion 
that whereas our author brands the abnormal growth of the oral law with the name ‘ partition-wall’, St. Paul, in 
Eph. ii. 14, brands the entire Law—written and oral—with the same designation. 

daubed it with untempered mortar (Sn smo). From Ezek. xiii, 10, 11, 14, 15, xxii, 28. 

22. Owing to a false prophet the builders of the party-wall did not perceive that God’s wrath was stirred up 
against all the congregation. For the phrase, ‘ wrath of God,’ &c., cf i. 17. 

+perturbed} of spirit, i.e. m0 Sman (A). Breads mo son, and adds mp dpe (szc). See Appendix 
on p. 834 for restored text and rendering. 

talked lies (210 10D). So A. In i. 10 we have 313 “OND ADT and in ix. 40 3I37 WN. The text, 
therefore, is probably sound. B reads a> pos PDD, where apparently we have a transposition of the 
preposition as in v. 17 above, and also of the nouns. That is, we should read oid ar mom. Hence my 
rendering. It is hard to say whether the pnd or the own is the original. See App. on p. 834. 

the wrath of God was kindled. See note onl. 17. f 

23. Nor that Moses said (nwo 7mN wei). These words are the object of 3237 xd in v. 21. See 
last lines of Appendix on p. 834. 


Not for thy righteousness ... to inherit these nations. Quoted from Deut. ix. 5, save that our author 
has changed ‘ their land’ into ‘these nations’ (nbsn vii). 
but because... the oath. From Deut. vii. 8, save that our author has replaced the sacred name ™ by 


the pronoun and changed ‘ you’ into ‘ your fathers’. 


24, See v, 18 4. 
ge case, i.e. pawn. God loves ‘the penitents of Israel’ as He loved the forefathers because they kept the 


covenant. The ‘builders of the wall’ had forsaken the covenant by introducing illegitimate changes of the Law. 


penitents of Israel. See vi. 1 note. 
2g. stirred up. A reads 1p (i.e, Mpn) and B ywyn. The latter reading also gives a good: sense 


‘admonished’ or ‘exhorted solemnly’. After the verb A is defective and B corrupt. Where A gives merely 
yans yn Breads Sy sane pyr by y yn. B supplies part of the missing text but the Hebrew is impossible. 
819g 3G4 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK’ 9° 26-37 


A B 


26 the covenant of the fathers. But since He hated | is the covenant of the fathers. But God hates 26 
the builders of the wall His wrath was kindled. | and abhors the builders of the wall and His 
wrath was kindled against them and against all 
27 And such (will be) the case of all who reject the | who follow after them. And such (will be) the 2y 
commandments of God, and forsake them and | case of all who reject the commandments of God, 
turn away in the stubbornness of their heart. and forsake them and turn away in the stubborn- 
ness of their heart. 


IX. 28-39. LExcommunication of those who fall away from the New Covenant. 


So are all the men who entered into the New 28 
Covenant in the land of Damascus and yet turned 
backward and acted treacherously and departed 
from the spring of living waters. 


28 This is the word which Jeremiah spake to 
Baruch the son of Neriah, and Elisha to his 
servant Gehazi. All the men who entered into 
the New Covenant in the land of Damascus. 








B 


29 They shall not be reckoned in the assembly of the people, and in its register they shall not be 
written, from the day when there was gathered in the Unique Teacher until there shall arise the 
30 Messiah from Aaron and from Israel. And such is the case for all that enter into the congregation 
31 of the men of the perfection of holiness. And as for him who abhors doing precepts of upright 
men [he is the man who is melted in the furnace], when his deeds become known he shall be 
expelled from the congregation, as though his lot had not fallen among them that are taught of God. 


First of all by cannot stand. Next we might emend pyn into oyn and add sbnb from a comparison of the 
last clause in the next verse in B, There God’s wrath is kindled against ‘all who Jollow after them’ (i.e. the builders 
of the party-wall). In contrast to these the people are exhorted to follow after God in the present verse. 
theirs is the covenant of the fathers. Cf. Rom. ix. 3-4 ‘Israelites whose . . . are the covenants’. 
26, God’s wrath against and judgement (cf. v. 27) on the builders of the party-wall. 
since He hated. We must here change ‘x21w2 into INDwd. 
the builders of the wall. See vii. 1 note. 
His wrath was kindled, &c. See i. 17 note. 
27-28. As was the judgement on those who built the party-wall, so shall be the judgement on those who fall 
away from the New Covenant. 
27. in the stubbornness, &c. See iii. 4 note. 
28 @ (A). I do not know what our author refers to. 
B. the New Covenant. See viii. 15. 
in the land of Damascus, Cf. viii. 6, 15, ix. 5, 38. 
B. The spring of living waters, i.e. the Law. See v. 3 a, Vili. 6-8. 
29. They shall not be reckoned... written. Quoted from Ezek. xiii. g but with some slight changes. 
waht 8d yansay py wos wae» 9, 
the Unique Teacher. Cf. ix. 39, where again the death of this teacher is referred to. See i. 4 note. 
the Messiah from Aaron and from Israel. See i. 7 note. 
30. congregation, le. MOY. 
the men of the perfection of holiness, i.e. wap o'Dn ‘woN. So also in v. a3) 
perfection of holiness. See v. 33, viii. 21. 
31. And as for him who abhors. The text reads pp, which I have emended info ypm. We have here © 
a nominativus pendens. 
precepts of upright men, i.e. Dw “pp. This is probably a corruption of Dw amp ‘upright 
precepts’. 
he is the man . . . furnace, i.e. 912 71n2 Jn wn NIM. These words are in substance an interpolation 
from Ezek. xxii. 20. They are wholly foreign to the text. There is no question here of divine and final 
punishments, but of ecclesiastical. 
when... become known. The text reads ypina, which = ‘when ... shine forth’, as in v, 49. But this 
meaning 1s impossible here and in v, 33. The word is apparently a corruption of yam. = ‘when... become 
known’, Schechter proposes 7113 = ‘deteriorate’, But this is not the point here. The man abhors in thought 
ae: but it is not till his actions become known that judgement can be taken. The clause recurs 
as though... not, ie. xSw ws. This is the only instance where we have w for Wwe in our text. 
taught of God. In Isa. liv. 13 we have the phrase » »y195, 


820 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 9. 32-43 
B 


32 According to his trespass they shall record him as a perverted man until he come back to stand in 
33 the office of the men of the perfection of holiness. And when his deeds become knowa, in accor- 
dance with the midrash of the Law in which walk the men of the perfection of holiness, 
no man shall consent (to be) with him in wealth and labour ; for all the saints of the Most High have 
34 cursed him. And such shall be the case of every one who rejects the first and the last, who have 
35 placed idols upon their hearts and walked in the stubbornness of their hearts. They have no share 
36 in the House of the Law. With a judgement like unto that of their neighbours who turned away 
37 with the scornful men, they shall be judged. For they spake error against the statutes of 
righteousness, and rejected the covenant and the pledge of faith, which they had affirmed in the land 
38 of Damascus; and this is the New Covenant. And there shall not be unto them nor unto their 
39 families a share in the House of the Law. And from the day when there was gathered in the Unique 
Teacher until all the men of war were consumed who walked with the man of lies about forty years, 
40 [And during this period there shall be kindled the wrath of God against Israel as He said, ‘ there 
41 is no king. and no prince’ and no judge, and none that rebuketh in righteousness,| Those who 
42 repented of transgression (in Jacob) observed the covenant of God. Then they spake each man 
43 with his neighbour (to strengthen one) another: ‘Let our steps hold fast to the way of God.’ And 
God hearkened to their words and heard, and a book of remembrance was written (before Him) for 
them that feared God (and) that thought upon His name until salvation and righteousness be revealed 


32. record him as a perverted man, i.e. MY! won amwor, The text reads ‘win, which is obviously 
a slip. Schechter, however, retains it and inserting Oy after the verb renders ‘record him (with) the men of 
perversion’. How he can explain this Hebrew construction in nid ‘wax I cannot see. 

33. become known. Emended as in 2. 31. 

: midrash, i.e. wo. With the expression cf. 2 Chron. xiii. 22 ‘Midrash of the prophet Iddo’, xxiv. 27 

‘midrash of the Book of Kings’. Midrash in our text means ‘ right interpretation’ probably. 

men of the perfection of holiness. See vill. 21 note. 

consent, i.e. Nix’. I supply nynb. 

34. rejects. See v. 27. 

the first and the last, i.e. DNND) OWI. These appear to be the first recipients of the two 
covenants—-the Law and the New Covenant. 

placed idols, &c. In a symbolic sense. Cf. Ezek. xiv. 3, 1 Enoch xcvi.7. 

stubbornness of their hearts. See iil. 4 note. 

35. the House of the Law, i.e. TNT M3. This clause, which recurs in v. 38, appears to be a designation 
of the Party. The Zadokites are par excellence the representatives of the Law. Bacher thinks it designates 
a school or a place for teaching the Law. 

36. the scornful men. Ci. 1. ro. 
37. spake error (ny1N 173°). The phrase is found in Isa. xxxii. 6. 
in the land of Damascus. See vili. 6 note. 

the New Covenant. See il. 1 note. 

39. when there was gathered in the Unique Teacher. Olax 0. 

the Unique Teacher, i.e. TMM MAY. See i. 7 note. 

man of lies. See i. 10 note. 

40. I have bracketed this verse as an interpolation. Verse 39 1s only the protasis of a sentence: the apodosis 
is to be found in v. 41. 
the wrath of God, &c. See i. 17 note. 
there is no king and no prince (WW >) bo wx). From Hos. iii. 4. 


no judge... in righteousness, 1. e. PT¥3 M21 PR) DEW p'X—a reminiscence, as Lévi observes, of Isa. Xi. 4 
mown) O57 pqya Dae. | . 
41. Those who repented of transgression, i.e. JWD ‘AY. The phrase is from Isa. lix. 20. If we retain 
v. 40, we should translate * But those who’, &c. 
in Jacob. So Schechter supplies the lacuna. 
42. Then they spake... neighbour iy Sx wx 1272 18), From Mal. iii. 16. The letters with dots 


underneath are uncertain. oe ey 4 
(to strengthen one) another. So Lévi restores the text, which reads as follows; IN DS WINS PCNA)?. 


Schechter’s transcription of the facsimile here is inaccurate. 
our steps hold fast (bss S772 wiys yom). For the phrase see Prov. v. 5- I have taken poy’ ‘their steps’ 


as corrupt for wipy ‘our steps’. a5 , 
; ‘And God hearkened ...name. [rom Mal. iii. 16. The words “before Him’ are obliterated in 


the MS., but there is room for yond in the facsimile but not in Schechter’s transcript. 


be revealed. The MS. reads nby and not nby ie Schechter deciphers. 
21 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 9. 44-53 


B 
44 for (them that fear God. Then shall ye return and discern) between the righteous and wicked, 
45 between him that serveth God and him that serveth Him not. 


And He showeth mercy (unto 
thousands) of them that love Him and keep (His commandments) for a thousand generations. 
city. And they trusted in God 


people with few words shall all be judged, each according to his spirit in 
And as for all those who have broken down the landmark of the Law 


there shall shine forth the glory of God to 
, and with all those who do wickedly of Judah 


and coming in according to the Law, 


46,47 +From the house of Peleg} that have gone out from the holy 
throughout the period that Israel trespassed and polluted the Sanctuary and returned again to 
48 molten images. The 
49 the counsel of holiness. 
amongst those who entered into the covenant, when 
Israel, they shall be cut off from the midst of the camp 
in the days of its testing. 
IX. 50-54. The faithful shall confess their sins and be Sorgiven and blessed. 
50 But all they who hold fast by these judgements in going out 
and listen to the voice of the Teacher and confess before God (saying) 
51 ‘We have done wickedly, we and our fathers, 
Because we have walked contrary to the statutes of the covenant, 
And true is thy judgement against us:’ 
52 And (who) lift not the hand against His holy statutes, His righteous judgement, and the testimony 
53 


Deut. vii. 9. The words ‘Showeth mercy unto thousands’ are 


of His truth ; and are chastised by the first judgements with which the children of men were 
and give ear to the voice of the Unique Teacher of Righteousness : 
of righteousness when they hear them: 


judged : 
and reject not the statutes. 


44. From Mal. iii. 18. The words in brackets are obliterated, but Pa on ona 5s ows) may be regarded 
as having stood in the original. 


45. 7 -bxd Cymiyy) [ypoowdy wamed.,..., Jon nwyy. This verse is a combination of Exod. xx. 6 and 
from the former and the rest of the verse from the 
latter, Cf. Dan. ix. 4. After 9pm there is a space for six letters, ice. for nxadxd = ‘unto thousands’. 

His commandments. Omitted by the scribe by mistake. 


46. Two words have been hopelessly obliterated at the beginning of this verse, which is as a whole 


unintelligible. 


47. The Hebrew of this difficult verse is apparently to be read as follows: 5yny» Sy ypa by by yw 
JD3 Oe sy 10 wipion NN wor. If the above rendering is right, the period may be that of Antiochus IV and 
of the Hellenizing priests before him. Lagrange has seen that 72 is the reading, not 7'D9. 


48. with few words... all. The text reads nb, , by oat. I restore the last two words as 


follows: obs payp. 


49. the landmark. The text refers, apparently, to those who had adopted the views of the Pharisees. 
Cf. i. 11 note. 


entered into the covenant. See ii. 1 note. 
who do wickedly of Judah, i.e. m5)" wy. 
by Judah’. Cf. Dan. xi. 32. 
50-53. These four verses form the protasis of the sentence: 
51. Because we have walked. The text reads pnoba (= 
corrupt for 13n353, since the verse refers to the first person. 
53. the first judgements. Temporal judgements. 
with which the children of men. The text reads TA WIN 193 +++ WN, where TNT wIN may be corrupt 
for Dn Ow Ix. The on3 goes, of course, with the wx. The corruption could easily arise from the presence of - 
PIS 79") in the next clause. But rather n'n has been wrongly transposed from the following clause, where, as 
in ix. 29, 39, we should read, not ‘the Teacher of Righteousness’, but ‘ the Unique Teacher of Righteousness ie 
In that case “wx can be taken as ‘as to which ’, Or we may emend °33 into D732, but the latter is unnecessary. 
Unique. This epithet has been restored from the preceding clause, into which it was wrongly transposed 
See the preceding note. ; 
reject. The facsimile reads, so far as I can make it out, MX 13% not Sy yaw 
Hence my rendering. The other construction would be difficult to explain, 
the statutes of righteousness, i.e. as set forth by the Unique Teacher. 


822 


This phrase might also be rendered ‘who dealt wickedly 


the apodosis begins with v. 4. 
‘because they have walked’), but this is clearly 


as Schechter deciphers it. 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 9. 54—10. 6 


54 They shall rejoice and be glad, 
And their heart shall exult, 
And they shall make themselves strong against all the children of the world, 


And God will pardon them 
And they shall see His salvation ; 
For they trust in His holy name. 


XS 
X. 1-6. A man is not to avenge himself or bear a Grudge. 


10 « Every man who puts under the ban a man [amongst men] according to the ordinances of the 
Gentiles is to be put to death: 

2 And as for that which He hath said: ‘Thou shalt not take vengeance nor bear a grudge 
against the children of thy people, every man of those who have entered into the covenant, 
who brings a charge against his neighbour whom he had not rebuked before witnesses, and yet 
brings it in his fierce wrath or recounts (it) to his elders in order to bring him into contempt, 

3 is taking vengeance and bearing a grudge. But naught is written save that, ‘He taketh vengeance 

4 on His adversaries, and He beareth a grudge against His enemies.’ If he held his peace with regard 
to him from day to day, but in his fierce wrath spake against him in a matter of death, he hath 
testified against himself because he did not give effect to the commandment of God, Who said to him, 

5,6‘ Thou shalt surely rebuke thy neighbour and not bear sin because of him.’ As regards the oath, 
touching that which He said ‘ Thou shalt not avenge thee with thine own hand’, the man who makes 
(another man) swear in the open feld—that is, not in the presence of the judges, or owing to their 
commands—hath avenged himself with his own hand. 


54. exult, i.e. the text reads sy which Schechter has rightly emended into toy. 
make themselves strong. This verb has already occurred in ix. 17 (B). 
God will pardon them. See v. 5 @ note. 

X. 1. Every man, &c. (N17 mond... DIND DIN aN AWS DIS S53). The construction mond ‘is to be put 
to death’ is found several times in our text. See note on viii. 11. I have bracketed DOND, i.e. ‘amongst men « 
But cf. Lev. xxvii. 29 nov nw,..787 jo DN WS DIN b>. This suggests that for D718 DM we should read 
pan’ and translate ‘ No man who is put under the ban by man’, &c. 

Schechter thinks that the text contains ‘a prohibition against acknowledging the jurisdiction of the Gentiles 
(Oo by misay), which is also forbidden by Rabbinic law’. But this is very doubtful. 

>. Thou shalt not ...of thy people. From Lev. xix. 18. See viii. 19, ix. 16 of our text. 

entered into the covenant. Here '~30 is to be read instead of *"’20. See note on ii. I. 

neighbour. The text reads wy corrupt for ny. f 

whom he had not rebuked. The text reads N33 xd wy, where the last word is corrupt for 0333. Or 
possibly for N27 or Ha = ‘which was not proved’. The text would then refer to slanders. 

prings it, i.e. Nn. Schechter supposes this to be a corruption for 1727 ‘ smites him’. But this brings in 
an idea alien to the context, which deals with a charge brought hastily in anger and unsustained by evidence. 

3. From Nahum i. 2, save that the divine name " is omitted. The implication here is that no consideration 
is due to an enemy. Be 

4. If a man knew of his neighbour committing a capital offence and yet did not mention it till overtaken 
by a burst of passion, he should be accounted guilty. her 

If he held his peace...from day to day. ¢ nyS oo ad yoann ox. The diction here is from 
Num. xxx. 15- ; 

testified against himself, i.e. 12 73). Cf. 1 Sam. xii. 3 for this construction: there is no need to emend 73) 
into ‘ny with Schechter. 

5. Thou shalt surely ... because of him. From Lev. xix. 17, save that our author has changed Jny into Py. 

6. Thou shalt not avenge thee with thine own hand, i.e. —b 7) yyw. The phrase is borrowed from 
1 Sam. xxv. 26,31. This verse in Samuel does not give a command, but this is a small matter in Jewish exegesis. 

in the open field (77W7 °35 by). Cf. Lev. xiv. 7. , 

in the presence of. The text reads oad corruptly for v0). heist 

owing to their commands. The text reads oN, which can be punctuated as eee) = ‘owing to 
their having (so) commanded ’, or * owing to their command’, but hardly as DW} their word’ (Schechter) ; 
for this would give no sense here. 


$23 


re 


by 
‘ 


8 


9 


Io 


It 


FRAGMENTS. OF A ZADOKITE WORK 10. 7-11 


X. 7-9. The law as to lost property. 


And as for anything that is lost, should it not be known who has stolen it from the property of the 
camp in which the thing has been stolen, its owner shall proclaim (it) by the oath of cursing, and 
whoso hears, if he knows and declares it not, shall be held guilty. As for any restitution made by 
him who returns that which has [not] an owner, he who returns (it) shall confess to the priest, and 
(that which was lost) shall be given back to him, besides the ram of the guilt-offering to the priest. 
And so everything (that was) lost (and) found and has no owner shall be given to the priests ; for 
he who found it knows not its law. If its owner is not found they shall take charge (of it). 


X. 10-17. The Number of Witnesses necessary in the case of Capital and other Offences. 
The Character of the Witnesses. 


If a man in any matter trespasses against the Law and his neighbour and none but he sees 
it, if it be a matter of death, he shall make it known to the Censor in the presence of the 
accused in discharging the duty of reproof: and the Censor shall write it down with his own 
hand: If he do it again before another, he shall return and make it known to the Censor. 


7-9. These verses refer to lost property. vv. 7-8 refer to lost property, the owner of which is known: 
v. g to lost property, the owner of which is unknown. This is clearly the meaning, though the text is corrupt 
and needs to be emended. ; 

7. According to Deut. xxii. 1-3 restoration of a lost article was to be made to its owner, if a ‘ brother’ or 
‘neighbour’. According to the Baba Kamma 113 6 (where there is a long discussion on this and kindred 
questions) such restoration was not to be made to a Gentile. According to the Rabbis there was in Jerusalem 
a “stone of decision’ (? }11 jx) to which the losers and finders of property came, and had its ownership settled 
(Baba Mez. 28 2). 

And as for anything that is lost, i.e. 72)xn 55), According to later Hebrew this could be translated 
‘and as for any one who loses (anything)’. But the context is in favour of the classical meaning of 73s here. 
The question first and foremost is that of lost property, not of the losers of it. The latter question necessarily 
follows. When property is lost, the loser is either known or unknown. 

from the property of the camp, i.e..mnDn IND. This extraordinary use of this word recurs in xiv. ro. 
Else I would propose nN» = ‘of the people of the camp’. Leévi feels dissatisfied and suggests Jin ‘from 
the midst of the camp’. 

proclaim, i.e. yw emended from yay» by Schechter. If we retain the text, render ‘shall adjure (the 
people concerned) by the oath of cursing’. : 

8. restitution made by him who returns, i.e. 2W OWN. I have here emended vp into 2 wb, just as 


-a few words later 3w¥9n must be changed into awn. The phrase owxn awnd “to return the compensation ’ 


is found in Num. v. 7, 8. 

which has [not] an owner. The negative is here an intrusion. The Hebrew is bys PS ws. The 
PX was inserted by an unintelligent scribe, in the place of a lost 15 or nb, Schechter, Lévi, and Lagrange have . 
failed to observe this intrusion and therefore to see the meaning of the text. 

(that which was lost) ... to the priest. The MS. reads 55m owen Sx aad 1b mm, which Schechter 
accepts and translates ‘and it shall all belong to him besides the ram of the guilt-offering’. But this is 
manifestly wrong. The priest in neither case became the owner of the lost property. Where the owner was 
unknown they were to take charge of it till he was discovered: where the owner was known it was, of course, to 
be restored to him. The priest’s share in such a case was the ram of the guilt-offering. Now in the text it is 
clear, first of all, that 5m is corrupt for n>. Thus we get ‘besides the ram of the guilt-offering to the priest’, 
The preceding words then must refer to the owner of the lost property, but the restoration of the original is 
doubtful. Possibly we might retain the text 15 mn) and translate ‘and it (i.e. the lost property) shall become 
his’, i.e. that of the man who lost it. But the property could not well decome his since it was his already. 
Accordingly in my translation I have supposed that 421Nn has fallen out before 425 and emended mn) into 
Ind) or 3Ww. It is also possible that the text ran 925 sax in2) “and it shall be given back to him that lost 
it’, &c. Lévi emends 55m into opon and Lagrange excises it. But the emendation I have suggested appears 
to satisfy every requirement. 

9. shall be given. The text reads mn’m) “shall belong’, which I have emended into pany. 

10-12. ‘Three witnesses required in the case of a capital offence. 

Io. the Censor (1papn). This official corresponded to the émedyrjs of the Essenes and to the erigkorros 
of the Early Christians. See note on XVI. I. 

in the presence of the accused in discharging the duty of reproof, i.e. m>)75 payd. But the words 
may be corrupt for nay3n yd “in the presence of the impeached ’. 

11. If he do it. The text reads inwy ay, which I have emended into ‘wy ON as at the beoinning of 
the next verse, i 
another. The text reads TMS, which I have emended into -nw. Cf. Us sts. 
824 


il 


Pee Gyn fs OF AUZADOKITE WORK 10.*12—11. 3 


12,13 If he shall be caught again before another, his judgement shall be executed. And if they are 


two and they witness against him (each) on a different thing the man shall be only excluded from 
the Purity, provided that they are trustworthy, and that on the day on which they have seen the 
14 man they make it known to the Censor. And accordirig to the statute (they shall) accept two 
15 trustworthy witnesses, and not one to exclude the Purity+. And there shall arise no witness before 
the judges to cause a man to be put to death at his mouth, whose days have not been fulfilled so as 
16 to pass over unto those that are numbered (and who is not) a man who fears God. None shall be 
believed as a witness against his neighbour who transgresses a word of the commandment with a high 
hand until they are cleansed through repentance. 


XI. Regulations as to the Judges of the Zadokite Party. 


1,2 And this is the order in reference to the judges of the congregation. (They shall amount) to ten 
men selected from the congregation according to the time (defined) ; four of the tribe of Levi and 
Aaron, and six of Israel learned in the Book of tthe Hagu} and in the Ordinances of the Covenant, 

3 from five and twenty years old even unto sixty years old. But none shall be appointed when he is 


Bee th only two witnesses appear and their testimony relates to different charges, the man is to undergo a form 
of excommunication. Yet see v. 15. 
14. (they shall) accept. Only the letters 149 or 5D survive. But probably Schechter is right in re- 
storing yap». 
and not one. So Lagrange well emends the text INN Sy into InN Sy. Cf. Deut. xix. 15. 
15. The meaning of this verse is somewhat doubtful. If it refers to a witness it means that a certain age 
and character were required in a witness. 


there shall arise no witness (4) Dip" by). The words are from Deut. xix. 15. For y the text corruptly 
reads 3\y. But it is possible that ty should be retained, and the verse understood of the qualification of a judge. 
‘None, moreover, shall become (wp? which is possibly the real reading of the MS.) judges to put a man to 
death at his word whose ... and who do not fear (o's x5) instead of s) God.’ The other rendering is more 
probable. 

at his mouth (\'5 by). Cf. Deut. xvii. 6. 

to pass over unto those that are numbered (O™Np|aNn by 29). The phrase is from Exod. xxx. 13, 14. 
It seems here to denote the age at which a man attained his political majority—in other words, was reckoned in 
the census of the males of the nation. 


{and who is not) (xb). Supplied with Schechter. 
16. with a high hand (7105 72). Num. xv. 30. 


XI. 1, order. -See ix. 1. 

2. according to the time (defined), i.e. nyn ab. This may mean the period of office or the date of 
election. Or, again, the phrase might be translated ‘ according to the circumstances’ (Lévi), the number ‘ten’ 
not being always necessary. 

tribe of Levi and Aaron. Cf. Ps. cxxxv. 19 sq. for a like terminology. 

the Book of tthe Hagut, i.e. 17 TDD. Ch xy. 5, xvil.'5. ~ Ihave, with some hesitation, marked this 
phrase as corrupt. It was possibly a secret book of halachic decisions or, at all events, a book the knowledge of 
which was necessary for the rulers of the Party. Nothing is known of Hagu. It is possible that we have 
in nn a corruption of .3n, i.e. Haggai. Now we know that a number of halachoth are attributed in the 
Talmud to Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi as the last three prophets, Naz. 53 @, Chull. 137 4, just as certain 
legal decisions were assigned to Moses; nay, more, we know that at times the name of Haggai alone was put 
forward as the source of certain traditions, Kidd. 43 a, and that it was claimed by teachers of later generations 
that they sat in his actual chair, Jeb. 16 a. Certain decisions are traced to him: that it was permissible to bring 
sacrifices independently of the existence or presence of the Temple, Mid. iii. 1; Zeb. 62 ¢(?) (°B by AS Papo 
ma pxw), Jer. Naz. ii, 7: that the month Adar should be intercalated, Rosh ha-Shanah 19 d. Besides these 
several others are attributed to him. See Jew. Zncyc. vi. 146. * 

It is possible, therefore, that a book may have circulated under Haggai’s name, which contained traditional 
lore, seeing that in after times many traditions were said to be derived from Haggai. If there was such 
a book it is not improbable that it is that referred to in our text. That the book in our text was not the 
prophetical book of Haggai is clear; for the books of the prophets are freely quoted, whereas the knowledge of 
this book is committed to the leaders of the Party, and it is probably, therefore, a secret Look containing traditional 
decisions: Cf. XVil. 5. : sah 

Lévi suggests that the book in question was a treatise commencing with the word 137 ‘mediate’. 

Ordinances (or ‘ Foundations’), i. e. "71D". CE vill. 2:08 ; 

from five and twenty years old, &c. This was the age at which the Levites began to serve: cf 
Num, vili. 24. 

825 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK ‘11,412; 4 


4 sixty years old and upward to judge the congregation. For through the trespasses of man his days 
were minished, and when the wrath of God was kindled against the inhabitants of the earth, He 
commanded their intelligence to depart from them before they completed their days. 


XII. Levitical Law as to Bathing. 


12 :« Asto being cleansed in water. No man shall wash in water (that is) filthy or insufficient for a 
2 man’s bath. None shall cleanse himself in the waters of a vessel. And every pool in a rock in 
which there is not sufficient (water) for a bath, which an unclean person has touched, its waters shall 

be unclean like the waters of the vessel. 


XIII. 1-11. Laws regarding the Sabbath. 


13 1 Astothe Sabbath, to observe it according to its law, no man shall do work on the sixth day from 
the time when the sun’s orb in its fullness is still without the gate, for it is He who has said, ‘ Observe 
the Sabbath day to keep it holy.’ 

2,3 And on the Sabbath day no man shall utter a word of folly and vanity. No man shall lend aught 
4,5 to his neighbour. None shall dispute on matters of wealth and gain. None shall speak on matters 
6 of work and labour to be done on the following morning. No man shall walk in the field to do the 
7 work of his business. On the Sabbath none shall walk outside his city more than +a thousandt 


4. trespasses, i.e. Syn. 
his days. 1° is to be read instead of $p.. 
his days were minished. Cf. Jub. xxiii. 9 ‘After the Flood (the days of the forefathers) began to grow 
less .. . by reason of the wickedness of their ways’. 
commanded their intelligence to depart from them, &c. pm» nN wrdy» xd sy anys ms 105 7x. 
Cf. Jub. xxiii, rr. ‘Their knowledge will forsake them by reason of their old age’ (? or ‘their godlessness’). 


XII. 1. insufficient for a man’s bath. The text reads wx +t “ID DMwH. I have emended the 
impossible Sy into yn. Schechter emends into Symp, and translates ww Sapp Mp DD yp) ‘not sufficient 
for the immersion of aman’. But is this rendering possible ? 

waters. MS. reads 7193 corrupt for ‘3. 

2. every pool... in which there is not sufficient water. According to Yoma 31 a the cubical contents of 
such a pool should be one cubit wide, three cubits long, and one cubit deep—the size of an average human 
body—jna mdy si dow. Cf Ley. xv. 13. See also Erub. 4 4, Pes. 109 a, Suk. 6 a. 

for a bath. The text reads Syn, which I have emended into pmnn. 
like. 1 of the MS. is to be changed into 5. 


XIII. 1. This verse deals with the time before and after the Sabbath that should be observed as the Sabbath. 
Technically it was called the NEDA ‘addition’. This view is practically enforced in Shabb. 150, where it is 
forbidden to carry on work to the very beginning of the Sabbath or renew it at its very close. In Yoma 81a the 
addition before and after the Day of Atonement is treated of. The object is given in the words 5y Syn Pp DD 
wapn. 


sun’s orb, ic. wown 5253. In Talmud apn 5353. Ch x Enoch Ixxviii. 4 (= kdKdos rod mAtov), which 
postulates this very phrase. 


in its fullness... gate. That is, the gate where it sets. On the various gates where the sun sets, see 
1 Enoch Ixxii. The text reads yb Tywn jd pinn. And the literal translation is: ‘is distant from the gate 
as to its fullness.’ This means just before the sun touches the horizon. 

Observe the Sabbath ... holy. From Deut. v. 12. 


2. aword of folly and vanity, i.e. poy 5a 325, where pa, as Lévi has pointed out, is corrupt for p. Schechter 
compares 5in ‘434, i.e. matters of a secular nature, and refers to Shabb. 150@. The source of the regulation 
is found in Isa. lviii. 13 ‘Call the Sabbath a delight .. . not speaking (thine own) words’, Perhaps we should, 
with Bacher, read py San as in Isa. xxx. 7. 

3- No man shall lend aught to his neighbour. 55 wmyna aw by. The phraseology is from Deut, xv. 2, 
but not the sense. According to Shabbath 148 aa man might ask wine or oil from his neighbour on the 
Sabbath, provided he did not say ‘lend them to me’. Lévi rightly observes that this prescript is not in place 
here, and proposes mw’ instead of nw = “let no man complain aught of his neighbour’. It is strange that 
both Schechter and he mistranslate py» as ‘exact a debt’. 

5. on the following morning, i.e. pws. This use of the words is Mishnaic : it occurs in Bikk. iii. 2.’ 

6. to do. nwwyd. Perhaps we might render ‘to prepare’ or ‘to provide for’. Cf. Oxf. Heb. Lex. 794 6. 

of his business. The text reads ‘vpn, which with Lagrange (cf. xiii, tr) I have changed into $ypn. 

7, ta thousand}. Here aby is corrupt for pYabs. Cf. v.14. 2,000 cubits was the limit of a Sabbath 
day’s journey: cf. Erubin iy. 3, V. qs. See Jub. Snore, 


826 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 13. 8-24 


8 cubits. No man shall eat on the Sabbath day aught save that which is prepared or perishing (in the 

9, to field). Nor shall one eat or drink unless in the camp. (If he was) on the way and went down to 

11 wash he may drink where he stands, but he shall not draw into any vessel, No man shall send the 
son of a stranger to do his business on the Sabbath day. 


XII. 12. Laws as to unclean Garments. 


12 No man shall put on garments that are filthy or were brought by a Gentile unless they were washed 
in water or rubbed with frankincense. 


XIIL. 13-27. Laws regarding the Sabbath. 


13,14 Noman shall fast of his own will on the Sabbath. No man shall walk after the animal to pasture 
15 it outside his city more than two thousand cubits. None shall lift his hand to smite it with (his) fist. 

16 If it be stubborn he shall not remove it out of his house. No man shall carry anything from the 
house to the outside or from the outside into the house, and if he be in the vestibule he shall not 

17 carry anything out of it or bring in anything into it. None shall open the cover of a vessel that 

18 is pasted on the Sabbath. No man shall carry on him spices to go out or come in on the Sabbath. 
19, 20 None shall lift up in his dwelling house rock or earth. Let not the nursing father take the sucking 
21 child to go out or to come in on the Sabbath. No man shall provoke his manservant or his maid- 

22 servant or his hireling on the Sabbath. No man shall help an animal in its delivery on the Sabbath 
23,24 day. And if it falls into a pit or ditch, he shall not raise it on the Sabbath. No man shall 


8. save that which is prepared. See Jub. ii. 29, 1. 9 note; Beza i. 2. 
(in the field) (i.e. 773). Only tw6 out of the four letters are to be made out. 
10. (If he was). We must with Lévi understand m'n ox. What follows is at the beginning of a new page 
in the MS. and there may be a gap here. 
he shall not draw into any vessel. The same command is given in Jub. |. 8. 
11. Cf. Shabbath 150 a, where a man is not allowed to commission his neighbour to do what he might not do 
himself on the Sabbath. Here of course it is a non-Jew that is referred to. ; 
12. Gentile. The text reads 11, which Schechter emends into 3. 
13. fast. The text reads 24yn’, to which Leszynsky proposes to attach the meaning ‘to set an ‘erub’. 
I propose myn ‘shall afflict himself by fasting’, ‘ shall fast’. It was forbidden to go without food till noon on 
the Sabbath, Jer. Taan. iii. 1 ; Judith viii. 6. In Jub.1. 12 fasting is strictly forbidden on the Sabbath and feasting 
enjoined, |. 9-10. It was the duty of every good Israelite to take three or four meals on the Sabbath, Shabb. 1174, 
and these of the best food procurable, of. cz#. 118. Lévi, Bacher, and Kohler propose 3y"n. 
TA OCCU. J 
16. Cf. Jub. i 29. y 
No man shall carry anything, &c. This law is derived from Jer. Xvil. 21, 22, 24, 27. Cf. Neh. xiii. 19. 
It is enforced in Jub. ii. 29, 1. 8. It is also a Rabbinic law: cf. Shabbath vii. 2. 
carry...bring. Read x*yv and Ny’) instead of N¥Y and “2 respectively. The natural difficulties brought 
about by this law were got over by the Pharisees by the principle of “Erub or the merging of several private 
precincts into one in order to transfer food or vessels to any distance desirable beyond the 2,000 paces, which 
was called the Sabbath limit (nawn oinn). This regulation is worked out in the Mishnah Tractate Erubin. 
the vestibule (or ‘ entrance’), i.e. 731, which may be corrupt for the Hebrew N13 or the late Hebrew ‘30. 
17. open. For nnd we must read nnd. 
18. This law is found in Shabbath vi. 3 (? 3). 
19. his dwelling house. The MS. reads nawid na. The second word is corrupt for wit. The phrase is 
found in Lev. xxv. 29. Schechter emends naw into naw ova. If this were the idea then it would be best to 
restore Naw3 as in the next verse. i 
20. the nursing father... child, i.e. P27 NN fOINT NY. From Num. xi. 12. According to Shabbath XVill. 2, 
a woman might lead a child out on the Sabbath only on the condition that the child makes certain movements 
with its feet. 
a1. his hireling. We must change ‘21y into 12. 
22. This regulation is found in Shabbath xviii. 3 in reference to a feast day—a1» OVI npnan ns wd ps, 
but it is added that notwithstanding ‘they give help’ (j7yoD bay), and then the various kinds of help are 
numerated. 
; 23. This regulation has a close parallel in Shabb. 128 4, where Rabba Jehuda in the name of Rab says 
that if an animal falls into a well it is lawful to provide it with food if possible ; but, if not, mattresses and 
cushions are to be placed under it that it might get out by its own exertions. The implication here is that 
it might not be raised by human agency from the pit as in our text. Yet other views are advanced. — Cf. Beza 
iii, 4, where it is said that, ‘if a firstling fall into a pit... a wise man will descend and... raise it up. 


827 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 18. 25-14. 5 


25 rest ina place near to the Gentiles on the Sabbath. No man shall suffer himself to be eae ie 
He Sabbath] for the sake of wealth or gain on the Sabbath. And if any person falls into a place o 

27 water or into a place of ... he shall not bring him up by a ladder or a cord or instrument. No man 
shall offer anything on the altar on the Sabbath, save the burnt-offering of the Sabbath, for so it is 
written }‘ Excepting your Sabbaths ’.+ 


, XIV. 1-4. Levitical Laws as to Uncleanness. 


t Noman shall send to the altar burnt-offering or meat-offering or frankincense or wood through 
the hand of a man (that is) unclean through any of the uncleannesses allowing him to defile the 
altar, for it is written: ‘The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination, but the prayer of the righteous 

2 is like an offering of delight.’ And none of those who enter into the house of worship shall enter 

3 when he is unclean even though washed. And when the trumpets of the Congregation sound, it shall 
be (done) before or after, and they shall not put an end to the whole service : (the Sabbath) is holy. 

4 No man shall lie with a woman in the city of the Sanctuary to defile the city of the Sanctuary by 
their impurity. 


XIV. 5. Law as to Necromancy. 


5 Any man who is ruled by the spirits of Belial and speaks rebellion shall be judged by the judge- 
ment of the necromancer and wizard. 


Cf. Yoma viii. 6, 7, where it is said that the question of life takes precedence of other questions. The teaching 
in our text conflicts strongly with Luke xiv. 5. : 
24. rest. nav must be changed into maw’. Schechter notes: that a similar law prevailed among the 
Samaritans and Karaites, comparing Wreschner, p- 14 sq. 
25. suffer himself to be polluted, i.e. bm—that is, ritually by contact with the dead (Lev.-xxiog)i an 
Lev, xxi. 1-4 the exceptions are enumerated in which a man might submit to such defilement, What our text 
seems to demand is that even in thesé cases defilement should not be incurred on the Sabbath. 


[the Sabbath]. A scribe’s slip. Schechter would emend bn» into 55m» in order to explain this phrase. 
But the sense would then be unsatisfactory. 

26. If the text is complete as it stands, then its teaching is in conflict with Yoma 844, where it is distinctly 
taught that life should be saved on the Sabbath nwa wa) MPD PAPA j239 wn. The following instances are 
given: if a child fall into the sea, it may be saved by means of a net ; if into a pit, by a ladder. Apparently the 
person might be saved if he could be saved without resort to the means just mentioned. 

27. This verse is corrupt. 

tExcepting your Sabbaths}. Cf. Lev. xxiii. 38. The meaning here given to 4aSy is found in the LXX 
and Vulg. Our author attaches quite a different meaning to Lev. xxiii. 38 in his interpretation of it. 

XIV. 1. allowing him, i.e. ynwwind.  Lévi compares Sir. iii, 21 mowoyn. 

The sacrifice ... but the prayer. These words are from Prov. xv. 8. The words ‘of the righteous... 
of delight’ (4 nnww> Q{*)P 7S) are a partial paraphrase of the words that follow in Prov. xv. 8 ‘of the upright 
is His delight’. 

2. the house of worship, i.e. minnwn nn by. Though this phrase is, so far as is known, never applied to 
a Jewish place of worship, there is no inherent reason why it should not. In Shek. vi. x it is stated that thirteen 
bows or prostrations were made (generally) in the Temple wopoa ya mvinnwn anwy why and fourteen by the 
houses of Gamaliel and Hananiah. Cf Isa. Ixvi. 15. Lévi defends it as applied to the Temple, but sug- 


gests that possibly the text may be corrupt for mmnwnd 5x na 5y “into the house of God to worship’. 
Bacher takes it as referring to a Synagogue. We might compare Zech. xiv. 16, where it is said that all that 


remain of the Gentiles shall go up to Jerusalem to worship (mnnwnd), 


though washed (D135). Cf. 2 Chron. xxiii. 19. Schechter inserts °S3 before this word and so obtains 
‘without washing’, Cf, Lev. xv. ro. Probably the latter is right. 

3. Congregation, i.e. bap, as in v. 6. 

4. This verse is not directed against lawful cohabitation, but against carnal union that was accompanied by 
Some ceremonial impurity; for the word for ‘impurity’ here is 193. This impurity was due to the menstruation 
of the woman. In the Pss. Sol, viii. 1 3 the Sadducean priests are charged with approaching the altar when 
Stained with this defilement. See note on vii. 8. There is no ground for Proposing the violent emendation of 
it into niwn ova. We might compare Isa. xlviii. 2, li, 1 wpa ay. 

5. Cf Lev. xx. 27; Deut. xviii, Us 

Tuled by the spirits of Belial. For the idea and expression cf, Jub. i. 20, x, ay, 
speaks rebellion, i.e. 44D 735, from Deut. xiii. 6. Cf. our text, vill. 2. 
necromancer and wizard, i.e. ‘yp 7) INF. 


828 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 14. 6-15 - 


XIV.6. Law as to the Sabbath. 


6 And he whom he leads astray into profaning the Sabbath and the Feasts shall not be put to death ; 
but it shall be the duty of the sons of man to watch him; and should he be healed of it, they shall 
watch him seven years and then he shall come into the Congregation. 


XIV. 7-11. Laws as to Intercourse with the Gentiles. 


7 None shall stretch out his hand to shed the blood of any man from among the Gentiles for the 
8 sake of wealth or gain. Nor shall he take aught of their wealth lest they blaspheme, unless by 
g the counsel of the Community of Israel. No man shall sell an animal or bird that is clean to the 
10 Gentiles, lest they sacrifice them. Nor shall he sell them aught from his threshing-floor or his 


tz winepress for all his property. Nor shall he sell them his manservant or maidservant who entered 
with him into the covenant of Abraham. 


XIV. 12-16. Laws as to unciean Foods and Causes of Uncleanness. 


r2 No man shall make himself abominable with any living creature or creeping thing, by eating of 
13 them : or of the defilements of bees or of any living creature that moveth in the waters. Nor shall 
14 fish be eaten unless they were split alive and their blood was shed. But all the locusts after their 

kind shall come into fire or into water whilst they are still living, for this is the manner of their 
rs creation. And all wood and stones and dust which are polluted by the uncleanness of man are 


6. he whom he (i.e. Belial) leads astray into profaning, i.e. bbb myn) AWS $3. We have here the case 
of all but involuntary sins through demonic influence. With the text cf. Isa. SKK, 24M] Hs KV Wie 
may also translate: ‘he who goes astray so as to profane.’ 

it shall be the duty of the sons of man to watch him, i.e. WD DINT %3 Sy. For the construction 
cf. 1 Chron. ix. 27, where we have nw. 

8. Community, i.e. an. Cf. the phrase on the coins of the Maccabees B10 13M. ; 

g. The Jews were forbidden to sell large cattle or calves, provided they were ‘undamaged ’ (oD2w), to the 
Gentiles, Abod. Zarah i. 6, on the ground that they might be made to work on the Sabbath, of. cz#. 15a. It was 
forbidden to sell hens to Gentiles when it was suspected that they were required for idolatrous worship, 14 ad. 

10. for all his property, i.e. 17ND b53. That is, when the Gentile would give all that he had for it. See 
note on x. 7. 

11. The Gentile who had become a Jew could not be sold to a Gentile. 4 

12. No man shall make himself abominable with any...creeping thing. From Lev. xi. 43. See our 
text, vill. 20. 

by eating of them (0719 bond). Cf. Lev. xi. 42. . 

or of the defilements of bees. The text reads pyiaIT ID. Since sy follows, it would seem that 
we have here the idiom 3Y,,. 1, 1-¢. ‘both... and’, or in this context ‘or...or’. Besides, ayn is meaningless. 
Nor is xy better. Accordingly, I have emended ay into yx or rather sya. Hence the above rendering. 
Schechter simply takes “77 sbay in the sense of “17m nya ‘beehives’. But there seems to be no’ ground for this 
identification, and even if it were just, it would be of no service; for one does not eat a beehive. Schechter 
himself suggests here that as the bee was an unclean insect, Bechoroth 7 4, the text may refer ‘to particles of the 
bees which are mixed up with the honey’, and that * though Rabbinic Judaism had no scruples in this respect and 
allowed the honey as it came from the beehives (see Shulchan Aruch, Joreh Deah, § 81)... the Karaites... 
insisted on a preparation of the honey (through filtering) ’. This suggestion supports the above emendation. 

or of any living... waters. From Ley. xi. 46 with the change of nwa into wynan 2 

13. Schechter thinks that this regulation is ‘ directed against the Rabbinic opinion permitting the eating of the 
blood of the fish. See Sifra 39 a, and Kerithoth 20 b.’ The Samaritans ‘forbade the eating of fish that died in 
the water or were found dead on the shore’. Lévi points out that in the Pirke R. Eliezer ix the blood of fish 
must be shed. 

14. In the Pirke R. Eliezer ix (Lévi) it is said that locusts are not created from water. Schechter compares 
Chullin 27 4 and deduces from it the conclusion that the mode of killing should be connected with the element 
out of which the animal was created. 

15-16. Our text declares unconditionally that the wood, stones, dust, nails, and pegs in a house are 
made unclean by the uncleanness of the man. Schechter says that this regulation is in contradiction to the 
Rabbinic law. But this is only partially true. For according to Kelim xii. 7, unfinished wooden vessels, unless 
the wood was box, were capable of pollution, and likewise tent-pegs (MinwnNT MIN), op. cet. Xiv. 3. According 
to Kelim vi. 1, if three stones were secured together with lime to support a pot on the floor, they were subject 
to pollution. Similarly with regard to two stones. | But if one stone was secured with lime and the other not, it 
was not subject to pollution. As to whether a nail (719d) under certain conditions, Kelim xii. 5, was capable 
of pollution or not, Rabbi Aqiba and the wise were at variance. But all were agreed that, if a nail was driven 
in with-a view to fastening an object, it was capable of pollution. In short, in place of all this hair-splitting and 


829 


15 


16 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 14, 16—16. 1 


16 polluted like them. According to their uncleanness shall be unclean he who toucheth them. And 
every instrument, nail, or peg in the wall which is with the dead in the house shall be unclean, like 
the uncleanness of an instrument of work. 


XV. 1-3. Summary Reference to Laws of Uncleanness. 


1 The regulation of the dwellers in the cities of Israel, according to these judgements, that a difference 
may be made between the unclean and the clean, and to make known (the difference) between the 

2 holy and the common. And these statutes are to give instruction so that the whole nation may 

3 walk in them according to the Law always. And according to this law shall walk the seed of Israel, 
and they shall not be cursed. 


XV. 4-6. The Ruler to be a Priest or a Levite, 


4 And this is the regulation of the dwellers (according to which they should) act during the period 
of the wickedness until there arises the Messiah (from) Aaron and Israel, up to ten men at least, 

5 to thousands and hundreds and fifties and tens. And when there arise ten, the man who is a priest 
learned in the Book of {the Haguf shall not depart. According to his word shall they all be ruled. 

6 And if he is not expert in all these, but a man of the Levites is expert in these, the lot shall be that 
all those that enter into the camp shall go out and come in according to his word. 


XV. 7-8. Law as to Leprosy. 


7 And if there be a judgement regarding the law of leprosy which is in a man, then the priest shall 
8 come and stand in the camp, and the Censor shall instruct him in the true meaning of the law. And 
(even) if he is lacking in understanding he shall shut him up; for unto them (ie. the priests) is the 
judgement. 
XVI. The Duties of the Censor. 


1 And this is the regulation of the Censor of the camp. He shall instruct the many in the works of 


endless casuistry, our text simply declares that the uncleanness of a man affects the uncleanness of the objects he 
touches or is near. It is not certain, however, whether our text implies direct or indirect contact. It is probably 
the latter. If so, its teaching would agree with that of the Sadducees (as against the Pharisees), who extended 
the power of pollution from direct to indirect contact, Yad. iv. 7. 
15. are polluted like them. The text reads o73 tow rr, which Schechter has emended into omy> wey. 
16. like. For 2 we must read 3. 
XV. 1. This verse is of the nature of a title and a fresh statement. 
regulation. See note on ix. 1. 
dwellers in the cities, i.e. y aw. I have here taken the first word in a collective sense: cf. 2 Sam. 
ix. 12; 1 Kings x. 5, &c. But see v. 4, xvi, 9. 
according to. ‘p is to be supplied after 5y with Schechter. 
that a difference .. . between the unclean and the clean. Quoted from Lev. xi. 47. 
between the holy and the common. From Lev. x. to. 
2, to give instruction. yawn) is to be emended into S:ownd with Schechter. 
always, i.e. nyi(ny). So Schechter restores the text. 
4. dwellers (Aw) or ‘settlement’ as Schechter renders it. Cf. xv. 1, xvi. 9. 
{according to which...) act. According to Schechter the text runs:,,,,5nn. +++, Which may, with Lévi 
and Lagrange, be restored (12 13)5an(? Wr). 
the period of the wickedness. See i. 5 note. 
the Messiah. See oni. 7. 
up to...thousands. For 1p Lagrange suggests j1 and “ty in place of 5 before ord, and so arrives at the 
rendering, ‘from ten at least to a thousand’, 
5. Book of tthe Hagut. See xi. 2 note. 
According to his word shall they all be ruled, i.e. ndya pw D Sy. This doubtful Hebrew is modelled 
_ on the equally doubtful Hebrew in Gen. xli. 40. 
6. shall go out and come in according to his word. From Num. xxvii. 21. 
8. The priest was to act in any case. 
A similar law, Schechter points out, is to be found in Neg; iil. 1. 
lacking in understanding, i.e. ‘np. 


XVI. 1. the Censor, i.e. 1papn. See x. 10. In Judaism there were officials who went under this name. 


Their duty was to examine the bodies of the animals brought for sacrifice in order i i 
to guard 
See Keth. 106 a; Jer. Bez. ii. 61 ¢. Z ; en 


830 


PRAGMUNIES OR A ZADOKITE WORK’ 16; 1—17. 5 
God, and shall make them understand His wondrous mighty acts, and shall narrate before them the 

2 things of the world since its creation. And he shall have mercy upon them as a father upon his 
3 children, and shall for(give) all that have incurred guilt. Asa shepherd with his flock he shall loose 
4 all the bonds of their knots... oppressed and crushed in his congregation. And every one who 
joins his congregation, he shall reckon him according to his works, his understanding, his might, his 
5 strength, and his wealth. And they shall record him in his place in accordance with his position 
6 in a lot of the (camp). No man of the children of the camp shall have power to bring a man into 
4 the congregation (without) the word of the Censor of the camp. Nor shall any man of them who 
have entered into the covenant of God do business (with) the children of the pit (un)less hand to 
8 hand. Noman shall do (a thing as buy)ing and sell(ing) un(less he has spoken) to the Censor of 
the camp, and he shall do (it in the ca)mp and not...and so to him who casts forth... they, 
g and he who is not connected with... And this is the settlement of the camps. All... 
~ 10, 11 shall not succeed to settle in the land.... that have not come from the day that Ephraim 
12 departed from Judah. And as for all who walk in these the covenant of God standeth fast unto 

them to save them from all the snares of the pit, for suddenly. .. . 


XVII. 1-5. The four Orders of the Community. 


1,2 And the regulation of the dwellers of all the camps is: They shall be numbered all by their names, 
3 the Priests first, the Levites second, the children of Israel third, and the proselyte fourth. And 
they shall be recorded by their names one after another, the Priests first, the Levites second, the 
4 children of Israel third, and the proselyte fourth. And so they shall be seated and so they shall 
5 ask with regard to every matter. And the Priest who numbers the many (shall be) from thirty 
years old even unto sixty years old, learned in the Book (of the Hagu and) in all the judgements 

of the Law to direct them according to their judgements. 


His wondrous mighty acts, i-e. xDD nyW22. The text reads the second word as sdb. On the phrase cf. v. 5. 
things, i.e. nvm. Cf. ii. 7. ; 
since its creation. The text reads m’n7b3 ‘in detail’, which I have emended into 1n730. 

2. forgive. ‘The text is imperfect, i.e... w, which I complete as bw, ie. mod: cf. ii. 3, where the noun 
(mim >d) derived from this verb occurs. See also v.3. This forms a good parallel to ‘have mercy’ (Bn) in the 
preceding clause. Ke 

all that have incurred guilt, ie. oy 53. So I emend n2n79 S>, Perhaps the original was simply 
oan 55 ‘all their guilt’. 

3. As a shepherd does his flock. From Isa. XLT; 


loose...their knots (An WP Masan b> sm). Cf. 1 Enoch v. 10; Dan. v. 12 paNp NIwP. Also 
Isa. lviii. 6 (Lévi) nA yen nyayoan. ' 
oppressed and crushed. Deut. xxviii. 33. These words are in the masc. sing. 
5. position. The text reads ini ‘S3 which I take to be a corruption of tiny ‘53, which I find Lévi 
has already proposed. = 
of the (camp), i.e. {7InD)F. So also Lévi. 


6. shall have power, i.e. ?1W0’. 
without. There isa gap here. Supply Na. 
4. entered into the covenant of God. See il. 1 note. 
Nor . .. do business, i.e. the Rabbinic phrase jn’ bey nw Sy. Cf. Shabb. 31 4, B. Mezia 48 a. 7 
children of the pit. So Laszynsky emends "wn %23 ‘sons of the morning’ into nnwn %3. Cf. viii. 12. 
Schechter proposes 3337 °33 as in xili. 11. 
8. a ine ee buying or selling. ‘So Schechter restores the text 72(1D)D (npn? AS, 
him who casts forth, i.e. Y232, which could mean also ‘common land’ if differently pointed. 
. settlement. See xv. 4 note. ee 
a This fragment of Isa. vii. 17 has already been quoted in ix. 3 and with the same divergence from the 


Massoretic text, ie. nD for ond. Oi 
ae And as for all. .. standeth fast unto them. These words have already occurred in vill. 21. 
suddenly. The following letters 29) are legible, which Lévi would complete as 1293) ‘ shall be wounded’. 


_ The Hebrew reads wx before these words corruptly for ns. 
as care 1. ee years old. T’hese words could be connected with ‘the many’, i.e. the 
congregation as a whole, but the next verse is in favour of making them refer to the priest. 
“Yearned in the Book (of the Hagu). See note on x1. 2. 
learned, i.e. }213 as in xi. 2. i 
to direct them, &c. oppvn2 D137. i 
3 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK i 36-=1670 


XVII. 6-8. Duties of the Censor. 


6 And the Censor who is over all the camps shall be from thirty years old even unto fifty years 
7 old, a master in every counsel of men; and in every tongue... According to his word shall come 
8 in those who enter the congregation every man in his due order. And as regards any matter on 
which it shall be incumbent for any man to speak, he shall speak to the Censor in regard to any 
suit or cause. 
XVIII. 1-5. Almsgiving. 
1,2  <And this is the regulation for the many in order to provide for all their needs. The wages of 
two days every month is the rule. And they shall give it into the hands of the Censor and the 
3 judges. From it they shall give . .. and (from) it they shall strengthen the hand of the poor and 
4the needy. And to the aged man who... to the vagrant and him (who) was taken captive of 
5 a Strange people. And to the virgin who has (no dot) (and to him whom) no man careth for: every 
6,7 Work ... and not... And this is the explanation of the settlement... And this is the 
8 explanation of the judgements which . . . (The Messiah from) Aaron and Israel. And He will 
9 pardon our sins . . . in money and he shall know... punishment six days and who shall 
to speak . . . against Mos(es) .. . 


XIX. Laws as to Oaths. 
rt... hall not swe)ar either by Aleph Lamed or by Aleph Daleth, but by the oath (written) in 


6. from thirty years old, &c. The Levites were to enter on office the thirtieth year according to 
Num. iv. 3, 23, 30; 1 Chron. xxiii. 3: the twenty-fifth according to Num. viii. 23-26: the twentieth according 
to Ezra iii. 8; 1 Chron. xxiii. 24, 27; 2 Chron. xxxi, 17. 

a master in every counsel, i.e. 110 553 bys, Here I have changed the MS. reading by into bys. 
Lagrange has here anticipated me. Lévi emends into pina ‘expert’. 
Des We alee? Wyse 
in his due order, i.e. 3. Cf. Esther ii. r2 for the idiom. 
8. suit or cause. 2 Sam. xv. 4. 
XVIII. 1. the regulation for the many. D395 1p. 
to provide for, &c., i.e. oyan 59 pond. 

2. two days, i.e. O1 “2. This is one possible way of reading the MS. according to Schechter. The other, 
he says, ison jnomn. But this, though he translates it, is not possible in itself, nor does it, even if corrected, 
give any fitting sense. 

the rule, i.e. O(DwY)n. 

3. give... The MS. is torn and faded here. Schechter thinks that py... Wa can be made out, 
and suggests oy Sy3 ‘for the poor’. But as the phrase WAN *3Y occurs immediately after, this is unlikely, 
Possibly the original was 5 “ya ‘on behalf of the Levites’. But the matter is wholly uncertain. i 

and from it. The text reads °29,} for DD). 

strengthen the hand of the poor and the needy, i.e. {PINT UY WA DIN Wop. From Ezek, xvi. 49. 
4. the vagrant, i.e. yi. wy. But the reading is doubtful. 

to him who. Text reads, , Nd, ice. Caw)xd. 

5. and to him whom. 1(wb1) is to be read here; for after the preceding words there is room for four letters, 
For the clause, see Jer. xxx. 17. 

7. (The Messiah from). See note on i. 7. 

8. And He will make atonement. Since in the other four passages where atonement is mentioned God 
is the agent, we conclude that it is so here. See v. 5 note. 

9. money, i.e. fio. Cf. Aboth ii. r2 qbws poy aan T73N fi 4 for the earliest use of this term. 

10. Mos(es). Doubtful. The next line, which is the last of the page in the MS,, is lost. 

XIX. It is quite uncertain. whether this chapter which begins with the t 
immediately on what precedes. One or more folios may be lost. : Ps OF She Ne aa ea 

I. swear. There is room for yaw at the beginning of the line, but only y remains. 

by Aleph Lamed or by Aleph Daleth, i.e. nd bya Br 19) Absa Di. That is, the first two letters 
respectively of the divine names, Sy of pny (Elohim) and 4N of ‘35% (Adonai). The divine names were used 
freely in oaths by the Jews. In Shebuoth iy. 13 it is said that if a man adjure another by the divine names Aleph 
Sept sega. i. : i paves ee but not if he adjures by the terms ‘ by heaven and earth 2 
A Ripe B97 WA NT FONT: PAD YON YN PANS) DwA rpamibsonn,.. amby oe yawn. They were 
1 to swear by the Temple, Jerusalem, or their own heads. See Lightfoot on Matt.y, 33-36. The Samaritans 
according to. Jer. Sanh. 28 4 (Schechter), were accustomed to use the sacred name of Yahweh in their oaths, 
but by the oath. This restrictive clause shows that no form of the divine name was to be used in taking 

> 


6932 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 19, 2—20. 1 


2.3 the curses of the covenant. But the Law of Moses he shall not mention, for. . . And if he swears 
4 and transgresses he profanes the Name. And if by the curses of the covenant ... the Judges. 

3 And if he transgress he shall be held guilty: but if he confess and make restitution he shall 
6 not bear (the penalty) of death. And whosoever in all Israel shall enter into the covenant by a statute 
for ever, together with their children who are (not of an age) to pass over into the number of those 

4 who are enrolled by the oath of the covenant, shall confirm it on their behalf. And this is also 
the law throughout the entire period of the wickedness for every one who returns from his corrupt 

8 way. On the day when he speaks with the Censor of the many they shall enrol him by the oath 

9 of the covenant that Moses established with Israel—the covenant to re(turn to the Law of 
M)oses . . . with all (his) heart . . . (and with all his) soul: as regards that which there is found 

10 to be done tby them} ... And no man shall make known to him the laws until he stand before the 
a tr Censor (who) shall search out concerning him when he examines him. And when he imposes it 


upon him to return to the Law of Moses with all his heart and all his soul... Of Hingis 
12 And every thing that was revealed of the Law with regard to a suit... in him... the Censor 
him and shall command him .. . until . . . killed him . . . and the madman and all . . . (loss of 


13, 14 five lines) covenant with you and with the whole of Israel. Therefore the man shall impose it 
upon himself to return to the Law of Moses; for in it everything is accurately treated. 


XX.1. Reference to the Book of Jubilees. 


20 x And as for the exact statement of their periods to put Israel in remembrance in regard to all 
r these, behold, it is treated accurately in the Book of the Divisions of the Seasons according to 
their Jubilees and their Weeks. 


an oath. Only the oath of the covenant was allowed. In 2 Enoch xlix. 1-2 swearing by heaven or earth or any 
other ‘created thing’ was forbidden, The Essenes forbade all swearing : cf. Jos. Bolo. 8.6 Philo a 2458. 
written. So Lévi supplies the lacuna. 

2, This seems to mean that a man is not to swear by the Law. 

for. There is a loss of ten to twelve letters here. 

3. own nN bbmy say) yaw oni. This verse is a paraphrase of Lev. xix. 12. A false oath is a profanation 
of the divine name. 

4. covenant. Schechter proposes to fill up the lacuna by 1395 Nay ‘shall be brought before’. 

5. he shall be held guilty. Cf. the concluding words of Lev. v. 2, 3, 4. 

confess. Cf. Lev. v. 5. is 
the penalty. I restore the lost word by W329. Cf. Prov. xix. 19. 
6. This verse is difficult, The rendering I have given is purely tentative. The text seems to be corrupt. 
The lacuna is possibly to be supplied as follows: (xd) Wwe. 
together with their children, i.e. D3 NN. We have only xan before=‘he who enters ’ but this is taken 
as the plural. 
pass over into the number of those who are enrolled, i.e. ONPANR by syay>. This phrase is from Exod. 
XXx. 13 or 14. With these words we should perhaps connect ‘ by the oath of the covenant’ as in v. 8. 
shall confirm it. The text reads wp’, which is to be emended to 19»p ‘shall confirm ’. 
7. period of the wickedness. See i. 5 note. 
8. enrol. See note on v. 6. 
—the covenant. The text is grammatically impossible. 

g. to return to the Law of Moses. The text is to be restored as in v. 11 AWK n-nyd (nw. 

10. search out. The MS. is torn in the middle of the word, which, according to Schechter, looks like "Mn, 
and which he emends into wpm’. So I have rendered. It is worth noting that the two verbs wan and &47 are 
combined in Lam. iii. 40. Jah 

11. imposes it upon him, i.e. soy 1mN orp’. Cf. Esther ix. 21, 31. It could also be reflexive: i.e. ‘imposes 
it upon himself’. Cf. Esther ix. 27, 31. 

to return to the Law of Moses. Cf. v. 14, XX. 2. 

12. a suit. Cf. xvii. 8. Of the next two lines only odd words survive, and the remaining eight (?) lines 
are wholly lost. 

14. impose it upon himself, Here I emend np’ into op and 75) into Wa). See v. 11 note. 

to return to the Law, &c. See v. II. 
accurately treated. i.e. puprm. A Talmudic term. 


XX. the exact statement of their periods. This phrase has already occurred in ii. 8. 
to put Israel in remembrance in regard to all these. The text reads mos San “wr mad which I have 


emended into bx baa “ew ~y2In?. . 

the Book of the Divisions of the Seasons according to their Jubilees and their Weeks. This 
appears to be the Book of Jubilees, though, among the many titles under which this book was known, this title 
nowhere appears. (See my edition, p. xiv sq.) It recalls the Prologue to this book, which runs: ‘ This is the 


1105.2 833 ; 3H 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 20. 2-12 


XX. 2-12. Laws as to Oaths and Vows. 


2 And on the day on which the man imposes it upon himself to return to the law of Moses the 
3 angel of Mastema will depart from him if he make good his word. Therefore Abraham was 
4 circumcised on the day of his knowing it. As to what he said, ‘ That which is gone forth from 
5 thy lips thou shalt keep’ to make it good—No binding oath, which a man imposes upon himself 
with a view to perform a commandment of the law, shall he cancel even at the risk of death. 
6 Nothing which a man (imposes) upon himself with a view to (frustrate the la)w shall he make 
7 good even at the risk of death. (As for) the oath of the woman, whose oath Mos¢es sa)id should 
8 be disallowed, no man shall disallow an oath which no man knew. It is to be confirmed. And 
whether it be to disallow or to transgress the covenant, he shall disallow it and not confirm it. 
9 And so is also the law for her father. As to the law of the of(fer)ings no man shall vow anything 
1o for the altar under compulsion. Nor shall the (prjiests take anything from the Israelites .. . 
11 (Nor) shall a man dedicate the food .. . this is what he said, ‘They hunt every man his brother 
12 with a net.’ Nor shall de(vote)... of all... his possession . . . holy . . . shall be punished 
he... who takes a vow... to the judge... 


history of the division of the days... of the events of the years, of their weeks, of their jubilees.’ Here, as in 
our text, ‘the weeks’ are ‘ weeks of years’. 
2, imposes it upon, &c. See xix. 11, 14. The text reads dw’ here, which may be right, i.e. ‘stand upon 
himself to return to’. But it may be best to read Dy. 
angel of Mastema. Cf. Jubilees x. 8, xi. 5, 11, xviii. 9, &c. 
4. That which is gone forth, &c. Quoted from Deut. xxiii. 24. 
5. binding oath, i.e. IDN nyyaw. This phrase is from Num. xxx. ney 
cancel. ‘T’he text 175) ‘redeem’ is emended into yp" as Schechter suggests, 
risk of death, i.e, nip NY. 
6. im poseth, i.e. Dp’ of which only the survives. 
to frustrate the law, i.e. madinn anyd. 
- (As for). We may supply by here as in z, 9 and xiii. r. 
Moses said, i.e. nW(1D 1)0ON. 
should be disallowed. Cf. Num. xxx. 6-9. 
which no man knew, i.e. O4(N myn») xd awe. 
It is to be confirmed. i.e. xyn orpnd. Cf. viii. 12 on this construction. 
8. The same rule holds with regard to the law and the covenant. 
9. offerings, i.e. n\(39))n. 
under compulsion. Cf. 2 Cor. ix. 7 ‘ Not grudgingly nor of necessity ’. 
10. the priests, ie. Dn(37). 
11. They hunt every...net. The text reads pn 1T..+.17. TN ww, which is to be restored in accordance 
with Micah vii. 2 OA YY) AN NN vO. 
12. The fragments here translated are all that survive of eight (?) lines of the MS. 


wr 


APTEND IX) (ONS sory 


Tuus clause is clearly derived from Mic. ii, 11 mt oyn AOD AM... aS sper mn da ew 0S. Our 

. . aay een ES GEARS: Gta 
author says that the Pharisees heed neither the facts of the present as to God’s wrath against the nation nor the 
words of Moses in the past owing to a false prophet. The clause referring to this false prophet is corrupt both 


in A and B, but by a comparison of the two we can in some measure recover the original. A and B are as 
follows—she words dependent on Micah, whether corrupt or not, being underlined— 


A BA? yon a AUD nn Smsn 
=e OPI inst 
Bo -3332 DIN POD» [mr mai] Open mn bin 


Here Smyay in A is a wrong emendation of 75yn which B has preserved. Next, py in B is corrupt for “py 


as in Mic. ii. tr. But the corruption Sow led to the addition of nypyp in order to give some meaning to Sow, 
ND is a dittograph of mpi. Again, 312 as object of yO in A seems right and not ab. Further, o7N 
cannot be right, whereas ond can stand. Hence we would restore as follows: 


ond syn 3D FPODY PEA AN Abin 
and translate: ‘For one who walked in the spirit of falsehood and talked lies talked to them.’ 


OF course, it would be possible to translate nos $53, which I have rendered ‘despite all these things’, as 


meaning ‘all these things ’, and render thus: ut all these things they erceived no i 
| cee ae nliiees 
wrath of God... Nor that Moses said...» y (i-e.) that the 


834 





INDEX TO VOLS. I AND 


. . s ’ 


3H 2 





SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS EMPLOYED IN THE INDEX 


THE references are to chapter and verse in the case of references to the Text, to the chapter and verse under which the 
note is given in the case of references to the notes, and to sections in the case of references to the Introductions to the 


various books. 
§ prefixed to a number indicates that the reference is to a section in the Introduction to the Book in question. 


+ prefixed to a word or name indicates a corrupt reading. 


VOL. PAGES 


A. & E. Books of Adam and Eve 4 : 5 5 - : - : ‘ Il 123-154 
Add. Esth. Additions to Esther 5 : . . ° 3 A 4 : : I 665-684 
Ah, Ahikar . : : 0 II 715-784 
Apoc. Mos. _ Apocalypse of Moses (text given in Books of Adam and Hive) « ; : F II 138-154 
Arist. Letter of Aristeas . : = 5 II 83-122 
Ass. Mos. Assumption of Moses . - : - 4 II 4049-424 
Azar. Prayer of Azariah and Song of the Three Children . 5 : , 3 I 625-637 
I Bar. First Book of Baruch, Apocryphal Baruch . a : “ I 569-595 
2 Bar. Second Book of Baruch, eee Ce of Baruch . : ¢ 5 II 470-526 
3 Bar. Third Book of Baruch . ‘ = : - 1G 527-541 
Bel Bel and the Dragon : : 3 0 : é - c I 652-064 
1 En. First Book of Enoch, Ethiopian Enoch . : : : : 5 II 163-281 
2 En. Second Book of Enoch, Slavonic Enoch . c : 5 C : 5 II 425-469 
Ep. Jer. Epistle of Jeremy .« : : ‘ : c : 3 - ° Ui 596-611 
1 Esd. First‘Book of Esdras. : 2 : : . : : . : I 1-58 
4 Ez. Fourth Book of Ezra. : - : 5 : é : . “ II 542-624 
Jub. Book of Jubilees . : : é : : : : : 3 5 II 1-82 
Judith Judith . 3 < : . : . : : C 3 I 242-267 
1 Macc. First Book of Maccabees 5 : 3 - 3 5 : = I 59-124 
2 Macc. Second ,, 6 . . 5 : & : ° 5 2 I 125-154 
3 Macc. Third ke » : G f : : : . : I 155-173 
4 Macc. Fourth ,, 3 é 5 s ¢ 3 7 3 5 II 653-085 
Mart. Is. Martyrdom of Isaiah ‘ 6 5 a : Q 5 II 155-162 
1 IN Pirke Aboth, or Sayings of the Fathers . : : 3 : A A II 686- -714 
P. Man. Prayer of Manasses 4 - 5 2 : ° 6 : I 612-624 
Ps. Sol. Psalms of Solomon ; : : : : = ie II 625-652 
S. A. & E. Slavonic Vita Adae et Evac. Se A.& E. : : F : ; II 134-136 
Sib. Sibylline Oracles (Jewish) . A 4 : : : 0 5 II 368-406 
Sir. Sirach or Ecclesiasticus . 3 : : : : c : : : I 268-517 
Sus. Susanna . 2 5 p 5 F 3 A 5 : : : 5 I 638-651 
Test. Testaments . : 5 3 : 9 : : 3 3 5 II 282-360 
T. A. Testament of Asher 3 : 6 : . : 3 : F 5 II 3 Ha 5 
Ab 18}; Fi » Benjamin . F 6 < : i s ‘ ‘ : II 4 — a 
cL): o, », Dan : : 5 : 5 5 G . II oo : 
DG: mG ad) tee ah) ke ie eee ea ee 
cEsIss: sp », Issachar . , : 2 é : 5 4 A 6 II secon 
T. Jos. 5 » Joseph. S “ 6 . : : : : ° II 6- 
Abe A fetel, », Judah R : ‘ x : ; ; ‘ Il ae oe 
CL. re Sy eva . ; - 5 é - - 4 : A II mee 
TN: ni [gg Neaphtali: Go.” 2 "(oO es ih eis ne on fv Ie er 
abs IR, a », Reuben . : : : s ‘ : : : ‘é II per iea 
ats Ist » » Simeon. : e : : : : II aes 
As ee a » Zebulun . F ; ; : II See 
Test. Agp. I First Appendix to the Testaments, i.e. Late Hebrew Testament of Naphtali a 
containing Fragments of the Original Testament . 5 ; ist 361-363 


Test. 4g. 1I Second Appendix to the Testaments, i.e. Aramaic and Greek Fragments 
of an Original Source of the Testament of Levi and the Book of 


Jubilees  . 6 . 3 C A : 5 5 
Tob. Toblt, (ei. a) es plas Ge See ee ae 
Wisd. Book of Wisdom . : é 5 3 C A : - , ’ I ace 
Zad. Zadokite Fragments. : : é 5 - 3 3 c f II Pes 8 34 


836 


Aaron, 1Ksd.8? Sir. 456—%,75 
Wisd, 1821 1En. 8918231,87 2 Bar. 
59! 4Macc. 7 P.A. 172 Zad. 
88; glory of, Sir. 457°; seed 
of, 1Macc. 714; son of, 4Macc. 
712; sons of, 1Esd. 11814 55 
Tob. 17 Sir. 501518, 

— and Israel, judges from, Zad. 
1142; Messiah from, 9! (B) 
29(B) 154 188; religious re- 
vival from, 15 8%. See Mes- 
siah, Zadokite Party. 

— Levi and, Zad. 117; cf. 158. 
See Levi. 

— Moses and, arose through 
Prince of Lights, Zad. 7}9. 

Ab, the month, Ah. 3911 (Syr.). 

Abadias, 1Esd. 8%, 

Abal, Bel. 2. 

Abba Shaul, P.A. 211, 

Abdera, Arist. 31. 

Abel, Jub. 42:24:78! A. & E. 
223:4,5 23152 4845 Apoc. Mos. 
13 22 31:3 408 43! En. 2267 
853,48 T Iss. 54T.B. 74 4Macc. 
18}, 

Abel-Maul, T.L. 2°:5(s), 

Abelsjail, rEn. 13. 

Abestan, wife of Ahikar, Ah. 
49:8312,16 68,6 (Arm.). See Esh- 
fagni. 

Abhorred. See Nations. 

Abietes, Arist. 50. 

Abikam, feigned name of Ahi- 
kar, Ah.6919(Arm. ) 69101 12,18 
(Syz.) 612s14,15-24 (Arab.). 

Abila, T.L. 62. 

Abimelech, Jub. 248184776, 

Abimelech, 3Bar. Pro/. 2. 

Abiram,4Macc.2!". SeeDathan. 

Abisue, 1Esd. 8?. 

Abodes, God’s four on earth, 
=Garden of East ; Mount of 
East; Mount Sinai; Mount 
Zion, Jub. 4”°. 

Abomination, Sir. 1320 153% 1975; 
of desolation set up on the 
altar, 41Macc. 1547,; pulled 
down, 67. 

Abominations, Sir. 278° 49? P. 
Man. 10. 

Abraeus, Arist. 48. 

Abraham, 1Macc. 25? 1271 
2Macc. 12 Tob. 412 147 Judith 
826 Sir. 4419-21 5112* Wisd. 
to® iBar. 284 Azar. 12, Add. 
Esth. C820 Jub. 17 61819 1571s 
15,17,18,22—24,26,80 1 61,2,7,10,18-15, 
80 1,2,4-6,8,15-17 7Q1,10,12-14,17 
1.9113:810,1,15,16 201 211 22h4,6 
16,28,26 232-7,9,10 2 41,2,10,18,22,28 
25 5T)T 2624 2711.22 2 4,16,17,19 
3. 15s7,25,82 3 222,28 3 321 3 =14 361-8, 
612,20 398 4128 445 45315 488 
1En. 89! 935 T.L. 6° 81% 9” 
154 18914 198 T.Jud. 175) 25! 
TD. 72 T.N. 129 T.A. 77 T. 

os. 67 T.B. 1% 104% Test. 
App. 1 888 9% 107 II 11, 17, 22, 





INDEX 


57 Ass. Mos. 3° 2Bar. 44° 572 
4Hz. 6° 7106 | Ps Soll oO)" 184 
4Macc. 739 9% 1317 1420 1528 

162025 yy6 1Q1,21,28 PA, 316 

594922 611 Zad. 428 208; be- 

loved of God, Azar. 12; burns 

idols, Jub. 1212; chose not his 
own will, Zad. 47; chose the 

Lord for his God, and kept 

holy Hebrew language, Test. 

App. 1 8*8; circumcised on 

day he knew the Law, Zad. 

208.) death Jot, Jub. 2357 °; 

delivered the commandment 

to Isaac and Jacob, Zad. 48; 

dying commands of, Jub. 21 2. 

T.L. 9! Test. Add. II. 16, 

17; faithful in temptation, 

1Macc. 252; great exploits of, 

Jub. 1119-8; house of, Jub. 

22%; judgement of, Jub. 4178; 

last words to, and blessing of, 

Jacob, Jub. 221980; learns 

Hebrew, Jub. 1275-27; loves 

Jacob more than Esau, Jub. 

1915-80; —plant of righteous 

judgement, 1En. 93°; prayers 

Ofeyub: 111% 24219528 32659; 

recorded friend (of God), Zad. 

4°; resisted the evil inclination, 

Zad. 42-8; seed of, Ps. Sol. 91” 

184; Shield of, i.e. God, Sir. 

5112; sons of, 4Macc. 612? 

1823; Spartans of stock of, 

tMacce. 1274; tower of, Jub. 

2916,17,19 3620; trials of, Jub. 

1717,18_ten, 198 P.A. 54; = 

white bull, 1En. 8919; words 
of, Jub. 255 39% See Abram. 

Abraham, an elder, Arist. 49. 

Abram, Terah’s uncle, Jub. 1114. 

Abram = Abraham,Terah’s son, 

ub, 1 115,18-20,28,24 7 21,9,12,15,16 
1 31s11,18-15,19,21,28-25,28,29 y 41,12, 
18,18,20-24 y 51,3,7, name changed 
to Abraham, 157. 

Absalom. Seé Jonathan. 

— See Mattathias. 

—enyoy of Maccabaeans, 
2Macc. 1117 ? cf. 1Macc. 134. 
‘Absolution’? pronounced by 

priest, Sir. 50472. 

Abstinence from wine and flesh, 
T.Jud. 154 T.Iss. 7°. 

Abtalion, P.A, 12%11. 

Abu Samik, the executioner, 
Ah, 49 58-10 724,25 (Arab.). See 
Ibn Samik, Nabusemakh, &c. 

Abubus. .See Ptolemy, son of A. 

Abusmaq, the executioner, Ah. 
4O%ll12 58,910 77 (Arm.). 
See Nabusemakh, Nabuéu- 
miskun. 

Abydos, Sib. 5%. 

Abyrus, river, 3Bar. 47. 

Abyss, the, Sir. 2457, 2En, 28° 
2Bar. 59°. ; 

— or depths, dried by the look 

of God, 4Ez. 8°87. 


Abyss, in 1En.—217; of com- 
plete condemnation, 1En. 54°; 
of fire, 1En. 1018 181.217 545 
9078-26 ; of the earth, 1En. 888; 
a great, = place of destruction 
for the earth, 1 En. 8347; 
a narrow, deep, horrible, and 
dark, 88!; in the midst of the 
earth, go%6, cf. 261; place of 
punishment, see Gehenna. 

Abysses, 1En. 77° T.L. 3°; of 
the earth, 1En. 897; of the 
ocean, 607; of the sea, 60%. 
See also Chasm, Deep, Depth, 
Rayine, Valley. 

Accaba, 1Esd. 5°°. 

Accepting person, Sir. 4°", 

Accos. See Eupolemus. 

Accursed, the, 1En, 221 247. 
See Valley. 

Accusation, false, Sir. 26°. 

Achar, 4Ez. 7197, 

Achbor, Jub. 382%. 

Acheron, 1En. 178. Sib. 548°. 

Acherusian lake, Apoc. Mos. 
37°. 

Achilles, Sib. 3477. 

Achior, leader of Ammonites, 
Judith 5522 61,2,5,10,18,16,20 719 
145:6;10, 

Achipha, 1Esd. 5%. 

Achish, king of Persia, Ah. 37 
(Arab.). See Akhi, Shah. 

+Achor, T.Jud. 33:48). 

Achuzan, 2En. 64? 68°. 

Acting presumptuously. 
Presumptuously. 

Acub, 1Esd. 5%. 

Acud, rEsd. 5°°. 

Ada, Reuben’s wife, Jub. 34? 

Adaeus, Arist. 47. 

Adam, Tob. 8° Sir. 331° Wisd. 

1 10! Tub, 228 31-38:6,8,9,15,21,25, 
27,80,82° 47,10,29 (death) 168 
192427 2218 A, & E. 22 31-8 4? 
5) Gl 71:2 81 o? 108 12h? 131? 
148 1748 181 19% 2048 212 221) 
2,45 2328 2412 251 304 317 
3.21 3513 361 40h? 413 42% 431 
44) 4502 462 484458 4ol S.A. 
& E. 281.2 32,2 gai8 eyes 
3542 36154 371 391 40! Apoc. 
Mos. 11:2 2124 32:3 41,2 51,4 68 
71 81 gi-8 1328 159 21h8 22? 
2344 24la7%4 281-8 29%45 3115 
Big2k33% 347 35% 30" 37° 39) 
rEn. 32° 37) 859-7 Sib. 274 

228-246, 2 En, 3010-18 311,86 
3310 41] 581-8 2Bar. § 10, 4317? 
182 234 484 541519 565 3Bar. 

816 QT 4Ez, 3102126 480 664,56 
711,70,116,118 ; — angel, a second, 
2En, 30447.; animals.subjected 
to, 2En.58°; buried by angels, 
A. & E. 48*-§; created alone, 
Wisd. r01z., of earth, Sir. 331°; 
creation of, 2En. 301012; fall 
of, Jub. 324 Sib. 5228-2487, ; four 
letters of, 2En. 30197. Sib. 374; 


See 


837 





God came to earth for his sake 
at creation, 2En. 581,23; hand- 
writing of, 331; in Eden, 312 
—five and a half hours in Para- 
dise, 321; lord on earth, 315; 
named from the four quarters 
of the world, 3018. ; pre-emi- 
nence of, Sir. 491%7.; Satan’s 
designs against, 2En. 318; 
source of death, physical, 2 Bar. 
234”.; premature, 54157. 568; 
spiritual, 484272. ; transgression 
of, brought death, physical and 
psychical declension, spiritual 
evil, 2Bar. § 10, 4Ez. § 10 (1). 

Adam of own soul, each is, 
aBar. 542°. 

Adam, Apocalypse of. 
Adam, Testament of. 
Adam, Second, the, doctrine of, 

Sir. 4916. 

Adam, Testament or Apoca- 
lypse of, A. & E. § 4. 

Adam and Eve, in place of 
punishment, 2En. 411; penance 
of, A, & E, 11-11%, 

Adam and Eve, Books of, ac- 
count, § 1; author, a.Jew of 
Diaspora, § 7; bibliography, 
§ 10; composite text, § 6; date 
of original text, § 5, of ver- 
sions, § 5%; influence on later 
literature, § 8; MSS., § 3; re- 
lation of to 2Enoch, 2En. 
§ 4; theology of Apoc. Mosis, 
A. & E. § 9; titles, § 2; Ver- 
sions, ancient, § 4. 

Adam and Eve, Conflict of, A. & 
E. §§ 4,8; Life of, Slavonic, 
A. & B, § 47°. 

Adam, city, Jub. 13”. 

Adar, month, 1Esd. 75 1Macc. 
748,49 ; twelfth month, 2Macc. 
158; Add.Esth. Be E20 F10, 

Adar-Sheni, intercalary month, 
1Mace. 97. 

Adasa, 1Macc. 744°, 

Adataneses, city, Jub. 71517. 

Adath,son of Barad, Jub. 381%, 

Adath, Jub. 38%. 

Addi, 1Esd. 94. 

+Addition, a feast, Jub. 322729 

Addo, i.e. Iddo, 1Esd. 6}. 

Addus, 1Esd. 5%. 

Adiaphotos = Cain, Apoc. Mos. 
13 


See 


Adibaa, Jub. 342°. 

Adida, city, 1Macc. 1258 13}. 

Adin, 1Esd, 8°. 

Adinu, 1Esd. 54. 

Adnarel, 1En, 8244. 

Adoil, 2En. 2542(A) Idoil (B). 

Adonikam, 1Esd. 574 8%, 

Adora, 1Macc. 137, See Adu- 
ram. 

Adoran the Aramaean, Jub. 38°. 
See Aduram. 

Adu, 2Bar. 55. 

Aduel, Tob. 17. 


Adullam, 2Macc, 12%8 
T.Jud. 8%. 

Adullamite, Jub. 4144. 
Adultery, Sir. 2375; danger of, 
9°; death penalty for, Sus, 22; 
procedure in case of, 32, 34 7. 
Aduram, place = Adora, Jub.38°. 

Aduram, of Aram, Jub. 37°. 
See Adoran. 

Adversity, Sir. 128 209 40%; 
advantageous, 20°, 

Advocate for Israel = Moses, 
Ass. Mos. 1117, 

Aedias, 1Esd, 9?7. 

Aeneas, descendants of, Sib. 3412. 
Aeon, the mighty, a Stoic con- 
ception, Sib. 3°. 
Aesop, Ah, §§ 2, 3. 

780 sqq. 

Aesora, Judith 44. 

Aetolia, Sib. 343°. 

Aferag = Phrygia (?), Jub. 827. 

Afflicted, the, Sir. 43:48, 

Affliction, day of, Sir. 315 610; 
time of, 214 2298. See Day. 
Afra = Africa, Jub, 815, 

Agagite, Add. Esth. A1%z. 
Agar, sons of, 1Bar. 32%. 

Agathocles section of Polybius’ 
history, 3Mace. § 5, 1525-88, 

Age, coming, 4Ez 747 81,52, 
delight to few but torment to 
many, 747, hope of, in divine 
compassion ultimately, 7182~ 
140, not yet awake, 751, solu- 
tion of all difficulties, 422-322. , 
symbolized by Jacob, 68; con- 
summated, 1En. 161, see Con- 
summation; first, 4Ez. 67; 
passing, 620; present, 7112 81,2, 
hastening to its end, 428, hope- 
less, 427, symbolized by Esau, 
6°; world-age, divided into 
twelve parts, 1411, 

Aged, the, Sir, 88.9 25° 32 (G 
35)8, cf. 684; advice to learn 
from, 8°; respect for, 8°; wis- 
dom of, 258-8, 

Ages, two, 4Ez. 759, 

Aggaba, 1Esd. 53, 

Aggaeus, i.e. Haggai, 1Esd. 61 

3 


own, 


See vol. I, 


dite 

Agia, 1Esd. 554. 

Agrippa, farm of, 3Bar. Pro, 
2”. 


Aguaron=Gomorrha, Mart. Is, 
216%, Read Samarii. 

Ahab, Mart, Is, 212:13,15, 

Ahaziah, son of Ahab, Mart. Is, 
218-15, 

Ahikar, Tob, 12422 210 ; 118 410 
§ 8 ili; dependence of Tobit 
upon, § 8 ili; parallels of, 
with Sirach, Sir. § 7 (0); re- 
ferences to in Tobit, originality 
of, Tob. § 9. 

Ahikar, story of, account of, 
Ah. § 1; antiquity of, § 2; 
materials for critical determi- 
nation of text, § 4; (a) Ara- 
maic papyrus, Story of Su- 
dhana Avyadana ; (6-g) Ver- 
sions, Arabic, Armenian, 
Ethiopic, Greek, Slavonic, 
Syriac ; quotations and refer- 
ences, § 3; (a) Democritus ; 
(4) Tobit parallels ; (c) Testa- 
ments of Twelve Patriarchs ; 
(2) O.T.; (e) N.T.; (f) Koran. 

Ahitob, 1Esd. 82, 





INDEX 


Ahitophel, P.A. 6%. 

Ahitub, Judith 81. 

Ahuzzath, Jub. 2426 
Ai, Jub. 1315, 

Air, Satanail’s place in, 2En. 
295, 

ane ben Mahalalel, P.A. 3}. 
Akae, 1En. 6915, 

Akatan, 1Esd. 838, 

Akhi, king of Persia and Elam, 
Ah, 37 (Syr.). See Achish, 

hah. 

Akiba, Rabbi, 1Bar. § 9 ii P.A. 
318-20, 

Akkos, 1Esd, 588, 
Akrabbatine, 1Macc. 53, 
Akrabbim, ‘Fforest of, Jub. 29!4. 
Alagar Zagar = Salmanassar, 
Mart. Is. 32, 

Alcimus, 1Macc. 17539)12;20,21, 28,25 
go) 54-87; desires to be high 
priest, 7°. ; gets high-priest- 
hood, 75° 2Macc. 148:18,26 ; 
dies, 1Macc. 95°; pulls down 
wall of sanctuary’s inner court, 

54 

Alema, Macc. 526, 

Alexander and Aristobulus, sons 
of Herod, Zad. §§ 1, 6, 12. 
See Messiah. 

Alexander Balas, Sib, 3588-4007, . 
‘a side-shoot’, 3897; Alexander 
Epiphanes, i.e. Balas, 1 Macc. 
Lolz, 4515,18,238,47,48,49,51,59,68,88 y 7 
1,2,8;9)12,14,16,16,17,89 - killed, 7 117, 

Alexander the Great, rMacc. 
147 62 1En. 89°%, golz. Sib. 
487% 54-7; divides his em- 
pire, 1 Macc. 18, 

Alexander Jannaeus, 1En. 38572, 
1034157, T.L. 1457.; dispute 
of, with Pharisees, Sus. § Fo 

Alexandra, 1En. § 7. 

Alexandria, 3Macc. 3! Arist. Boe 
109, 173 Sib. 588; Jewish com- 
munity at, Arist. 308, 310; 
Jewsat,rulers of, of Sadduccean 
type, Wisd. 147, Sze Temple. 

Alexandrian citizenship, 3Macc. 
280 321. 

Alexandrine Canon included 
Sirach, Sir. § 8; doctrine ab- 
sent from Add. Esth. § 7; 
ideas in 2 Enoch § 3; litera- 
ture, 3Macc. § 7; theology, 
4Ez, 7102-11577, - views of im- 
mortality, Wisd. § 9 4Macc. 
§ 9. See Immortality. 

All Flesh, See Flesh. 

All-king, i.e. God, Sir. 5015, 

Allar, 1Esd. 536, 

Allegorizing tendency, Arist. 
150z.; in Wisdom, Wisd. § o. 

Allon, 1Esd. 534, 

Alms, Tob. § 10 B (2), 1316 214 
475g.,18 12°sg, 141 Sir. § 4, 380 
4* 7'%%, 127 298 PLA. 12 Zad, 
oben 

Almsgiving, atones for sin, Sir, 
3° Tob. 128, see Atonement ; 
a duty, Sir. 44; = bestowal of 
kindnesses, P.A. 12; = right- 
eousness, Sir. 71%. ; to evil not 
meritorious, 127, See Giving, 
Pharisees, Poor. 

Alphabet, Jewish, Arist, 11 ANGE 
3, 30. See Characters. 

Alphias, 3Bar. 47, 

Altar rebuilt, 1Esd.548; of burnt 
offering, polluted, 1Mace. 154; 


pulled down, 4446; new built, 
447, Sze Altar of sacrifice. 

Altar of incense, 2Bar. 67; pre- 
served and hidden by Jeremiah, 
2Macc. 25. ; 

— of sacrifice, new, and fresh 
fire, for rededicated Temple, 
2Mace. 108, 

Amada=Imlah, Mart. Is. 21272. 

Amalek, T.S. 6%. 

Amana, mountains of, Jub. 82 

4 

+Amanisakir. See Maanisakir. 

Amarias, 1Esd. 8%. 

Amaseqa, Jub. 3879. 

Ambram, T.L, 124, 
ram. 

Ambri, children of, 
95572.87, 

Amen, liturgical use of, P.Man. 
15%. Tob. 8% Judith 1370 

Amilabes = Abel, Apoc. Mos. 
Meaeee 

Amman, Ass. Mos, 14. 

Ammidioi, 1Esd. 52, 

Ammon, Judith 11? 52,5 65 717,18 
Jub. 38°; children of, 1Macc. 
6° Jub. 291 3720: 

Ammon. See Zeus. 

Ammonite(s), 2Macc. 426 - 57 
Judith 145; = ‘foxes’ in rEn. 
894255, 

Amnon, P.A. 529. 

Amorite kings, defeat of, Jub. 
342° T.Jud. 3-7. 

Amorites, Judith 515 Jub. 1438 
2931 34%5 T.Jud. 72 122 Ass, 
Mos, 1116, 

Amos, Tob. 2°, 

Amram, Jub. 4619 479 Test. 
App. Il 74-76, see Ambram ; 
stays in Palestine, Jub. 461° 

Amraphel, Jub. 132%, 

Amulets, 2Macc. 124, 

Anael, Tob. 121. 

Anan, 1Esd. 59°. 

Ananel, 1En. 67. 

Ananias, son of Bebai, 1Esd. 9?9, 

Ananias, son of Emmer, 1Esd. 
21 


See Am- 


1Mace. 


Ananias, 1Esd. 94°. 

Ananias, 1Esd. 948. 

Ananias, Tob. 518@%),14(13)_ 

Ananias, Judith 81, 

Ananias, an elder, Arist. 48. 

Ananias, Mart. Is. 2°. 

Ananias, Azar. 66 4Macc. 13° 
1671 18!?, Sze Children, Three. 

Anathema, 1En. 954. 

Anathoth, 1Esd. 538. See John 
of A, 

Andreas, Arist. 12, 18, 40, 43, 
123, 173. 

Andronicus, deputy of Antio- 
chus Epiphanes, 2Macc. 421; 
murderer of Onias, 484; death, 
438, 

Andronicus, governor at Geri- 
zim, 2Macc. 5%8, 

Aner, Jub. 1329. 

Angel, Tob. 5417.22 64599, 1215, 
seé Raphael ; brings seven 
tablets from heaven in Levi’s 
vision, Jub. 322; destroying, 
Wisd. 18%; fiery, smites con- 
gregation, 4Macc. 7%; good, 
to save Israel, prayer for, an- 
swered, 2Macc. 11%, cf, 102930 
15% 4Macc. 4°; of Abraham, 
T. Jos. 67; of death, 2Bar. 


838 


21°87, ; of God, A. & E. 311 36? 
Apoc. Mos. 318 T.R. 335 5° 
T.S, 22-0. aed. JudekOusns 
21® Tilss.2* 1D: 5*;"of Gods 
with Israel, Ep. Jer. 7; of God, 
once referred to in Add. Esth. 
D8; of humanity, Apoc. Mos. 
32%; of the Lord cast fire on 
false witnesses, Sus. § 9, 60-62, 
brings Habakkuk miraculously 
to feed Daniel, Bel 36-39; of 
Mastema, Zad. 20%, cf. Jub. 
49°; of might, T.Jud. 31°; of 
peace, TD) 6° TAL 68 aBa0r 
meets soul of righteous at - 
death, T.B. 617. ; of the pow- 
ers, 3Bar.187.; of the presence, 
the, Jub.'§ 15, 122722 mers 
T.Jud. 25%, 1En. 40? (probably 
Michael, Israel’s guardian 
angel, 1En. 20° 2En. 22°) ; 
who intercedeth for Israel and 
the righteous, T.L.5%7 T.D. 62. 
See Archangels. 

Angelic mediation, Tob. § 1o. 

Angelic patrons of nations (ex- 
cept Israel), Sir. 171%. See 
Angels, guardian. ‘ 


Angelology of Jubilees,parallels 


of, with N.T., Jub. § 15. 
Angels, Sir. 167 (see Princes) 
4Macc. 41°; anguish of, over 
fall of Zion, 2Bar. 672; armies 
of, 2Bar. 4819 51M, 50910; 
created on first day, Jub. 2? 
2Bar. 21%, ; Cherubim, Sera- 
phim, and Ophannim, created 
from fire on second, *2 En. 
29137.; fall of, Sir. 16’ x En. 
61S, 158 694% 8613 10618 
2En. 18%7 2Bar, 561-1872,, see 
Demonology; fallen,ask Enoch 
to intercede, 2En. 71-5; food 
of, Wisd. 1699 A. & E. 42; 
frighten Apollonius, 4Macc. 
47°; guardian, Jub. 357A. & E. 
33'; guardian, of the nations, 
seventy, Test. 4Zp. I, 84-6; 
help Eve, A. & E, 211; = 
hosts of heaven, P.Man. 15; 
intercession of, for Adam, A. 
& E. 9 Apoc. Mos. 352; me- 
diation of, Tob. § 10 3Bar. 
§ Io, 2—three classes of me- 
diating angels, § 10, 2; only 
reference to in 3Macc., 6187. ; 
orders of, ten, 2En. 2013y, ; 
powers of, A. & E. 485; sym- 
bolized by shepherds, rEn. 
89°90”, stars, 8613 881, 
white men, 872, cf, go1.22; 
titles of—children or sons of 
heaven; children of (the) 
heaven, 1En. 6? 148; elect and 
holy children. . . from the high 
heaven, 391; sons of heaven, 
138; holy ones (or ‘the holy’), 
3 722 1423 39° 472 572 604 
618,10,12 6512 Gg 18 718 875 10619, 
holy ones of heaven, 98, ef. 572, 
61%; holy angels, 201-8 215,9 
228 248 272 326 718 922; host 
of heaven, host of thé heavens, 
powers of the heavens, see 
Heaven, Heavens; sons of 
God, 1En. 611° 1048, cf. 19601 
69%5, of the God of heaven, 
106° ; holy sons of God, 711; 
spiritual ones of the heaven, 
1En.15"; spirits of the heaven, 


151°—of the glory of the pre- 
sence, T.L. 185, see Angels of 
the presence; of God, Sir. 172 
crit, note, marry daughters of 
men, Jub. 51, punishment of 
them and their children, 5°~°, 
final judgement, 510-16; of the 
moon, 3Bar. 95; of natural 
phenomena, Jub. 27 4Ez. 8717z., 
do not observe Sabbath, Jub. 
218; of the presence, Jub. § 15 
127, (one writes history for 
Moses), who went before the 
camp of Israel, 17°, spoke to 
Moses, 2!, observe Sabbath, 
218, see 3114 T.L. 35(8):7: of 
punishment, 1En. 4077. 53° 561 
6211 63! 2En. 1037. ; of sancti- 
fication, Jub. 2%18, observe 
Sabbath, 238; of the spirit of 
the clouds and darkness, 27; 
of the spirits of cold and heat, 
creatures in the heavens, 27; 
of the spirit of fire, of the 
voices, of thunder and light- 
ning, of the winds, of winter 
and the seasons, 22; of sun, 
2En.11%* 3Bar. 618 84; vision 
of, 3Macc. 6%. 
Angels. See Gabriel, Michael, 
Phamael, Phanuel, Raguel, 
Raphael, Remiel, Sammael, 
Saragael, Sarasael, Uriel, 
Zotiel, Powers, Spirits, Vir- 
tues. 


Anger, T.D. 21-44. See Wrath. 

Anguish. See Day. 

Animal worship, Wisd. 124 
Tee 


Animals, treatment of, see Man, 
Strangling; in delivery on 
Sabbath, 1322; fallen into pit 
on Sabbath, 135; kindness to, 
T.Z. 5); under man’sdominion, 
2En: 56°; will not perish till 
great judgement, when they 
will accuse their oppressors, 
5857. 

Anna, Tob. 120 2111 pot 115 r4¥ 

Annas, 1Esd. 9°. 

Annis, 1Esd. 53%, 

Anniversary of martyrdoms, 
4Mace. 12° 14°. 

Annus, 1Esd. 94. 

Annuus, IEsd. 84. 

[Anointed one, holy (=Aaron?), 
Zad. 82. | 

Anointed One = Messiah. See 
Christ, Messiah. 

Anoniram, T.Jud. 9%. 

Anos, 1Esd. 9%. 

Anthropology of 2 Enoch, 2En. 

6 


§ 6. 
Antichrist, Test. § 16, T.D. 597. 
See Beliar, Dan. 
Antigone, city, Sib. 3347. 
Antigonos of Socho, P.A. 1°. 
Antigonus, I En. 10077. 
Antigonus Gonatas, naval vic- 
tory over, Arist. § 1, 180. 
Antilibanus, Judith 17. 
Antioch, 1Macc. 387. 485 698 
108 114456 Sib, 3944 4140; citi- 
zenship of, 2Macc. 4%. 
Antiochenes, 2Mace. 4%. 
Antiochis, mistress of Antiochus 
Epiphanes, 2Macc. 4°. 
Antiochus IIT, the Great,1 Macc. 
110 86 3Macc. 11; victories of, 
Sir. 1087. 





INDEX 


AntiochuslV ,Epiphanes,1 Macc. 
110,16,20 327 61,16,35 2 Mace, 1 14,2, 
220 47,21,87 51,5,17,21 gl_yols 
Azar. gz. 1En. 46%, 10077. 
Sib. 32840072. 4Macc. § 1,.425)21 
RuessLeTO! eT 2eE Oo = attacks 
Egypt a second time, 2Macc. 
51; conquers Egypt, 1Macc. 
1/619; death of, 1Macc. 61-17 
2Macc. 9% 109; defeated at 
Persepolis, 2Macc. 9!:?; dese- 
crates Temple, 1Macc. 12-28 
2Macc. 51521; disease, loath- 
some of, 2Macc.g>}§; largesses 
of, 1Macc. 3°°v.; letter to Jews, 
2Mace. 9!*-*7; not the foreign 
conqueror of Ps.Sol. § 5 (see 
Pompey) ; persecution of,=a 
second visitation, Ass. Mos. 8! 
g’; promise to restore sacred 
vessels, 2Macc. 9!6, and to 
become a Jew, 9!7; repentance 
of, 2Macc. 912-18; =a sinful 
shoot, 1Macc. 1°, cf. Sir. 40!5; 
supplication of, 2Macc. g*®-27. 

Antiochus V, Eupator, son of 
Antiochus Epiphanes, I Macc. 
383 615,17,55 72 »Macc. 2% 95:29 
1010)18 1 123,28 1 31,8,4 ¢ 42. acces- 
sion, 1Macc. 64!7 2Macc. 9” ; 
death, 147. 

Antiochus VI, son of Alexander 
Balass—1 Mace: 715935457 232 
13%!; killed 13°47. (date ?). 

Antiochus VII, Sidetes, son of 
Demetrius I, 1Macc. 15172.21¢ 
11,18,25 Bel § 5. 

Antiochus. - See Numenius. 

Antipater, son of Jason, 1Macc. 
y2'6 7422, 

Anti-Semitism, 3Macc. §§ 5, 6. 

Anxieties of poverty and riches, 
Sil 3 uaaae 

Apame, 1Esd. 4%. 

Aphaerema, i.e. Ephraim or 
Ephron, 1 Mace. 11547. 

Apherra, 1Esd. 554. 

Aphphus. See Jonathan. 

Aphrodite, Sib. 317. 

Aphrodite, the planet, 2En. 
3057. 

Apocalypse of Moses, older 
than Vita Adae et Evae, A. 
& E. §§ 6, 7) 9: 

Apocalypse of Paul, Sir. 4%. 

Apocalypse of Peter, Sir. 41%. 
1En. 10(¢). 

Apocalyptic, a Party at one 
time among Rabbis favourable 
to, 4Ez. 14”. See Pharisaism, 
Reveal, Revelations. 

Apocalyptists, begin survey with 
creation, 4Ez. 347.; calculations 
of, 486-87; imply predestina- 
tion, 45° 377. 

Apocryph. See Jannes 
Jambres. 

Apocrypha, original connota- 
tion of, a secret revelation, 
Jub. 126%. 4Ez. 125%. 148, cf. 
1En. 107°. 

Apollonius, ‘a chief collector 
of tribute’ (= son of Menes- 
theus ?), tMacc. 12%, 31012; 
killed, 31%. 

Apollonius, general of Deme- 
trius I], 1Macc. 106%74)75,77,79, 

Apollonius of Tarsus, 2Macc. 


35:7; governor of Syria, 4Macc. 
1420818210,11 18,14, 


and 





Apollonius, son of Gennaeus, 
2Mace. 127, 

Apollonius, son of Menestheus, 
2Macce. 421; Mysian com- 
See 5°4; massacres Jews, 

Apollophanes, 2Macc. 1087. 

Apostasy, 1 Macc. 15? 215 724 98 
Wisd. 212 1En. 917 Zad. 8? g°°. 

Apostate deeds, 1En. 93°; gene- 
ration, 9°°; nation, Sir. 16°. 

Apostates, 3Macc, : 281 328 710 
Azar.9, 2Bar. 4137. 

Apostolical Constitutions, Sir. 
§8; contain P. Man., P. Man. §3. 

Apparitions, 2Mace. § 3, 345g. 
525g. 118 151459. 

Appearances often 
imi 2Oee te 

Appendices to Testament of 
Twelve Patriarchs. See Levi, 
Naphtali. 


deceitful, 


Appendix to Sirach, Sir. 511% ; 


a Prayer, 511-12; a Poem, 
5118-80; a Thanksgiving, 51 
i-xvi. 

Appetites, 4Macce. 195 3%. 

Apples of Sodom, Wisd. 107. 

Aquarius, Sib. 5°27. 

Aquilo, A. & E. 327. 

Ara, city (of Chaldees), Jub. 
L182 oce Ur. 

Arabia, tMacc. 1136 Judith 27° 
Arist. 119. 

Arabian Nights, Ah. § 1. 

Arabian(s), 1 Macc. 5991 147,391 23 
Sibageie 

Arabs, Jub. 201%; 
2Mace. 121042, 

Aradus, 1 Mace. 15%. 

Arakiba, 1En. 67. 

Aram, Jub. 738 9° 347° 376° 417. 

Aramaean, Jub. 38°. 

Aramaic original of rEn. 6-36, 
1En. §§ I, 9- 

Aramaic version of Tobit, Tob. 


defeat of, 


§ 44. 

Avagiel, 1En. 8%. 

Arara, land of, Jub. 9°. 

Ararat, Tob. 12! Jub. 578 71 $7 
1015:19, 

Aravat, 2En. 20°. 

Aravoth, the tenth (? seventh) 
heaven, 2En. 2217. 

Arbatta, place, 1Mace. 5”. 


Arbela, 1Macc.9%. See also 
Rabael, Robel. : 
Arbelite, P.A. 1%’. See Nittai. 


Arbonai, river, Judith 2%. 

Archangel, A. & E. 25? Apoc. 
Mos. 3? 221 381. 

Archangels, rEn. 20, 40, 2En. 19° 
201 213 2211; as intercessors on 
behalf of mankind, T.L, 35@z. 
See Angels, Intercession, Me- 
diation. 

Archas, 2En. 2642(A.‘Aruchas’ 
B). 

Ard, Jub. 44”. 

Ardat, field of, 4Ez. 97687. 
1249-8172, 135772, 149172. 

Areios, King of Sparta, 1Mace. 
TA 70.20. 

Areli, Jub. 44%. 

Ares, 1Esd. 51° 

Ares, Sib. 3487 5854; the planet, 
2En. 30%. 

+Aresa, Jub. 34%7(= Asser, Tob. 
12) (=Hazor, 1Mace. 11°). 

Aretan, T.Jud. 5}. 


839 








Actas, Arabian prince, 2Macc. 
ae 

Ariarathes, king cf Cappadocia, 
1Mace. 1522, 

Aries, Sib. 5571. 

Arioch, king of Elymaeans, 
plain of, Judith 1°. 

Arioch, king of Sellasar, Jub. 
1322. 

Aristeas, Arist. 19, 40, 43. 

Aristeas, Letter of, author, 
a Jew of Alexandria with 
Pharisaic tendencies, § 4; char- 
acter, § I; contents and pur- 
pose, § 2; date, § 3; editions, 
§ 8; influence on later litera- 
ture, § 9; MSS., § 7; relation 
of 3Macc. to, 3Macc. § 4; 
sources, Arist. §5; theology 
and ethical teaching, § 6. 

Aristobulus I, rEn. 3857. 10077. 

Awistobulus II, Ps. Sol. § 6. 
See Alexander. 

Aristobulus, King Ptolemy’s 
teacher, 2Macc. 11°, 

Ariukh. Seé Orioch. 

Ark, the, in the Deluge, 4Macc. 
15°! Wisd. 148. 

Ark, the, of covenant, preserved 
and hidden by Jeremiah, 2Macc. 
2°, see 2Bar. 6%. ; spoiled, 
4Ez. 107272. 

Armaros, I1En. 67 8% 692. 

Armen, 1En. 69? 

Armenia, Sib. 414, 


Armies ordained for day of 


judgement, T.L. 3%. 

Arodi, Jub. 447° 

Arom, IEsd, 51°, 

Arpachshad, Jub. 718 8}! 94,18 
Tos. 

Arphaxad, Judith § 6, 125s18,15, 
See Arpachshad. 

Arsaces, king of Persia, 1Macc. 
TAH oat 5, 

Arsamos, Arist. 49. 

Arsamos, Arist. 50. 

Arsinoe, 3Macc. 1)-4. 

Arsinoe, wife of Ptolemy Phila- 
delphus, Arist. 41. 

Arsiphurith, 1Esd. 516. 

Artaqifa, 1En. 697. 


Artaxerxes, 1IEsd, 216:17,80 74 
81,6,8;9,19,28 - decree of, § I 
g8-24, 


Artaxerxes Ochus, Judith § 1. 

Artaxerxes= Xerxes I, Add. 
Esth. Ab!8 B! Et; letter of, 
directing destruction of Jews, 
Bl; decree of, revoking pre- 
vious edict, E!~%, 

Artemis, Sib. 52%. 

Artisan inferior to Scribe, Sir. 
3874-30, See Craftsman. 

Aruchas. See Archas. 

Arzareth, 4Ez. 13457. 

Asadias, 1 Bar. 1}. 

Asael, 1En. 67. 

Asam, Jub. 381819. 

Asana, 1Esd. 5%}. 

Asaph, sons of, 1Esd. 128 527°. 

Asara, 1Esd. 591. 

Asbasareth, i.e. 
tEsd. 5°. 

Asbeel, 1En. 69°. 

Ascalon, Judith 278. See Aska- 
lon. 

Ascension, Tob. 122sg.; of 
Baruch, 2Bar. 467; of Isaiah, 
see Isaiah, Martyrdom of; of 


Esarhaddon, 


Raphael, compared with 
Christ’s, Tob. 125-22,2, 

Asceticism, as preparation for 
visions, Mart. Is. 24%, 4Ez. 
5i4-18, See Chastity, Eating 
herbs, Fasting. 

Aseas, 1Esd. 98%. 

Asebebias, 1Esd. 847, 

Asebias, 1Esd. 848. 

Asenath, Jub. 342° 44% T.Jos. 
208(%), 

Aser. See Aresa. 

Asfael, 1En. 822°. 

Ashbel, Jub. 442°. 

Asher, Jub. 2871 3322 3420 386 
443°:20T R.1¢ T.Jud. 252 T.A. 
11,2, 

Ashdod, Arist. 117. See Azotus. 

Ashtaroth, Zad. 75. 

Ashtaroth, city, Jub. 291°. 

Asia, Macc. 8® 111872, 1289 1381 
2Macc. 38 Sib, 3168,842,850,851,858, 
364,367,881,888,391,450,599,611 _,1,71, 
76,79, 145,148 99, 118, 287,292,443, 449, 461, 
465 4Macc. 320, 

Asibias, 1Esd. 96, 

Asiel, Tob, 11, 

Asipha, 1Esd.529, 

Asitho. See Asteho. 

Askalon, 1Macc. 1086 1160 7288 
Judith 278 Arist. 115. 

Asmodens, Tob. 38:17. 

Asmonean, 1Macc. 2172. 

Asom, 1Esd. 938. 

Asonja, 1En, 782. 


Asores = Assyrians, Ah, 4? 
(Arm.). 
Asorestan = Assyria, Ah, 4! 


&c. (Arm.), 

Asphar, pool, 1Macc. 98%, 

Aspharasus, 1Esd. 5°. 

Aspis, mountain, i. e. Sirion or 
Hermon, T.L. 6172. 

Ass, wild = Ishmael, 1En. 8911, 

Assamias, 1Esd. 854, 

Assaphioth, 1Esd. 53°, 

Assaracus, Sib. 58, 

Assemblies of Jacob, Sir. 2428, 

Assembly, the, Sir. 130 47 77 155 
2117 23% 4718 4211 Zad, 29(B) ; 
of the elders, Sir. 684 714; in 
the gate, Sir. 7 4211; of the 
Most High, 24°; of the people, 
-.. of Israel, Ps.Sol. 1078 
17*; of the wicked, Sir. 16° 21° 
precedence in, Sir. 3838, 

Asser = Hazor, Tob. 12, 
Aresa. 

Asses, = a species of giants, 
1En. 864; wild = Midianites, 
1En, 8914018,16, 

Asshur, Judith 214 51 717,20,21 gis 
1315 14281219 756 Tub, 718 93,6 
107686 ; land of, 821 93; moun- 
tains of, 821 96,6, 

tAsshur, Jub. 13}. 

Associate = haber, 
425,28. See Friend. 

Associating, danger of, with 
tich, Sir. 132-8; with Tulers, 
13°15; with one’s opposites, 

with women, see 


See 


P.A. 18, 


1315-20 ; 
Women. 

Associating with wise, Sir. Op 
with ungodly, 814-19 719 7913 
1317, 

Assumption of Moses, 2Macc. 
§ 6; relation to 2Bar., Ass, 
Mos. 39-1372, See Moses, As- 
sumption of, 








INDEX 


Assyria, Tob, 110 14415 Sir, 4821 
Jub. 46° Mart.Is, 32; in Ahikar 
passim, usually as ‘ Assyria and 
Nineveh’, cf. Tobit. 

Assyrian, Sib. 3160,308,809 

Assyrian court, 4Macc. 13°. 

Assyrians, 1Esd. 58° 3Macc. 6° 
Tob. 12° 144 Judith 11,711 21,4 
4: 8° ro" rEn. 895556 TN, 58 
Sib, 3207268 449 5530 4R7, 7340; 
= tigers in 1En, 89°), 

Astad, 1Esd. 5}8, 

Astath, 1Esd. 838, 

Asteho, T.Jos. 75, 

Astrology, Sib. 3227-228 4Macc, 
1482, 

Astronomy, Wisd. 718 P.A. 32°. 
Astyages, Bel 1. 

Astypalaea, Sib. 354, 

Asur, 1Esd. 581, 

Asudi, Jub. 44%. 

Atar, 1Esd. 578, 

Atel, Jub. 8. 

Ater, rEsd, 51, 

Atergatis, temple of, 2Macc. 
eae 

Ateta, 1Esd. 528, 

Athanasius, Sir, § 8. 
Athenagoras, En. § 10(c). 
Athenian, 2Macc. 61854, 
Athenobius, 1Macc. 157882, 
Athens, Jews to be equal to 
citizens of, 2Macc. 938, 
Athletic contest, the martyr- 
dom of the seven brothers 
compared to, 4Mace. § 7. 
Athur = Assyria, Ah. fassdm 
(Syr.). See Nineveh. 
Atipha, 1Esd. 532, 

Atonement, Sir. 387. 557.; alms- 
giving atones for sin, 35%; 
by fasting, for sins of igno- 
rance, Ps. Sol. 39; false doc- 
trine of, warning against, Sir. 
7°10; to man, 20% (gifts do 
not atone to God, they do to 
man); impossible for unfor- 
giving, 28°; made by martyrs, 
4Macc. 6 9% 1218 172059, 
man makes by honouring his 
father, Sir. 3°14; no, Jub.3317; 
through suffering, sickness, 
and death, Sir. 182%, 

Atonement, Day of, Jub. 517-18; 
instituted ontidings of Joseph’s 
loss, Jub. 3.41819, 

Attalus, king of Pergamos, 
1Macc. 15727, 

Attharates, i.e. the Tirshatha, 
IEsd. 94°. 

Attharias, i.e. the Tirshatha, 
TEsd. 54°. See Attharates. 

Attus, 1Esd. 89, 

Auaran, See Eleazar. 

Augia, 1Esd. 538, 

Augustine, Sir. § 8. 

Aulis, Sib, 3488, 

Auranus, 2Macc. 44%, 

Ausonians, Sib. 52%, 

Auteas, 1Esd. 948, 

Avaran. See Eleazar. 

Avith, city, Jub. 3819, 

Awan, Jub. 419, 

Axis, Sib. 5207, 

Azael, 1Esd. 914. 

Azaelus, 1Esd. 9°. 

Azai, ben, P.A. 423, 

Azaraias, 1Esd. 81, 

Azariah, Prayer of, and Song of 
Three Children : account, § 1; 








bibliography, § 9; composi- 
tion, § 6; date, § 6; influence 
on later literature, § 7; MSS., 
§ 3; original language, He- 
brew, § 5; theology, § 8; 
title, § 2; versions, § 4. 

Azariah, the writer of Prayer of 
Azariah, Azar. § 6. 

Azariah, Azar. 2, 26, 66. 
Hananiah. 

Azarias, .1Esd. 9%. 

Azarias, 1Esd. 948. 

Azarias, a Maccabean leader, 
tMacc. 518:56,60, 

Azarias, Tob, 515 67,14 71,10 92 

Azarias = Azariah, 4Macc. 13° 
1671 1812, See Children, Three. 

Azaru, 1Esd. 515, 

Azazel, 1En. 6%, 842 88 (G.) 
g® 1048 131 545 ee 602 8612, 
881. ; all sin ascribed to, 108; 
bound, in desert of Dudael, 104; 
hosts of, judged, 545 554. 

tAzazel, 1En. 692. 

Azetas, 1Esd. 514, 

Azotus, city, 1Macc. 415 588 
1077,78,88,84 7 14 1 484 1610 Judith 
2°8; burned by Jonathan, 1 Macc. 
108, See Ashdod. 

tAzotus, mount, 1Macc. 915, 

Azrial, Jub. 42%. 

Azuchan. See Uchan. 

Azura, Jub. 43:41, 

Azurad, Jub. 87, 


See 


Baal, Mart. Is. 212. 

Baalsamus, 1Esd. 9°, 

Baana, 1Esd. 58. 

Babel, Wis. 105; Jub, 821 1025. 
confusion of tongues at, Jub. 
1018-27; builders of, in second 
heaven, 3Bar. 35-8. See Over- 
throw. 

Babi, 1Esd. 837. 

Babylon, 1Esd, 14941,45,54,56 215 
44407,61 57 615,16,17,21,23,26 g3,6,28 . 
1Mace. 64; Tob. 144; 1Bar. 1% 
4,9,11,12 292,24: Ep, Jer. 1, 2, 3, 43 
Sus. 1, 5; Bel 2, 23, 28, 34, 35, 
36; Add. Esth. A3; Jub .1026 
2012; Sib, 3104,160,301,303,307,384, 
809 493 5 ,28,148,159,434. Bar $5 
102 77712s17,19 ol; 4Ez. 34%31; 
Zad. 1°; captivity of Jews in, 
for seventy generations, Ep. 
Jer. § 2; idolatry of, Ep. Jer. § 
I; name of, intruded into text 
of Susanna, Sus. § 6; =Rome, 
Sib. 51487, 2Bar, 112, 

Babylonia, 1Esd. 458 
2Macc. 829 3Macc. 68. 

Babylonian Sibyl, Sib. 3162-294, 

Babylonians, Ep. Jer.1, 2 Bel 3 
23; = lions in 1En, 8955-66, 

Bacchides, 1Mace., 78:1219,20 9) 
12,14,25,26,29, 2,34, 43,47,49, 57,58,68,68 
10! 2Macc. 859; and Alcimus 
sent against Jews, 1Macc. 78-20, 

Bacchurus, 1Esd. 9%. 

Bacchus, worship of, 3Macc. 
2297, 

Bactra, Sib. 49. 

Baean, children of, 1Macc. 547. 

Baelunan, Jub, 382223, 

Bag-Bag, ben, P.A. 525, 

Bago, 1Esd. 840, 

Bagoas, Judith 12111315 ; 318 
1414 Add.Esth, A2%2, 

Bagoi, 1Esd. 514, 

Baiterus, 1Esd. 517, 


618 8138 


840 








Balaam, P.A. 5922, 

Balak, son of Beor, Jub. 381517, 

Balamon, Judith 8%. 

Balchira, Mart. Is, 57s8:5:8)12, 
Seé Belchira. 

Baliayn, one of the king’s sons 
who question Ahikar, Ah, 210 
(Arm.). See Houday. 

Balnuus, 1Esd. 981. 

Baltasar, king of Babylon, son 
of Nebuchadnezzar, 1Bar. § 4 
Tyg, 12, . 

Ban, Zad. 10, 

Ban, 1Esd. 537. 

Banaias,son of Nooma, 1 Esd.9*°, 

Baneas, an elder, Arist. 50. 

Bani, 1Esd. 518. 

Banias, 1Esd. 836, 

Bannas, 1Esd. 5%°. 

Banneas, 1Esd, 9%°, 

Bannus, 1Esd. 9#4. 

Banquet. See Messianic. 

Banquet, behaviour at, Sir. 32 
(35)2-48; hall, P.A. 421; master, 
rules for, Sir. 321-8; symbol 
of world to come, P.A. 32. 

Bar Cocheba, revolt of, 1Bar. 
§ 9 ii. 

Barad, Jub. 381°. 

Baraka, Jub. 41°. 

Barakiel, Jub. 42°. 

Barakiil, Jub. 4%. 

Baragel, 1En. 642. 

Baraqijal, 1En. 67 $3. 

Barca, Sib. 5187, . 

Barchus, 1Esd, 532, 

Baris, Sib. 49. 

Barnabas, Epistle of, relation 
of to 2Enoch, 2En. § 4. 

Barodis, 1Esd. 534. 

Barrenness, Wisd. 328. 

Barsaba, T.Jud. 82. 

Bartacus, 1Esd. 42°. 

Baruch, Bar. 11:3 2Bar. passim 
3Bar. Prod, 42 1157 41,916, 51 
76 84 9%° 105 Zad. 9%, see 
Pseudepigrapha; to be pre- 
served till consummation, 2 
Bar. 13° 251 762; to die natu- 
ral death, 44? 785 841; various 
books of, 2Bar. § 2; relation 
of 2Baruch to 3Bar., 3Bar. § 4; 
of Rest of Words of Baruch 
(= 4Bar.), 3Bar. §§ 4, 8. 

Baruch, 1 Book of, account, § I; 
author, § 7; bibliography, § 12; 
composite character, § 3 ; con- 
tents, § 2; critical investiga- 
tion, § 4; date, § 7; docu- 
ments—A & B, Hebrew ori- 
ginal, §5; C. Greek original 
(Hebrew, Gen. Zd.), § 6; their 
redaction, § 8; influence on 
Christian and Jewish litera- 
ture, § 10; MSS., § 9; theo- 
logy, § 11; versions, § 9. 

Baruch, 2 Book of, account, 
short, § 1; bibliography, § 12; 
books of Baruch, various, § 2; 
different elements in 2Bar., § 7; 
lost epistle to two and a half 
tribes, §8; MSS., Syriac, § 3; 
relation to 4Ezra, § 93 to Ne, 
§ I1 ; theology, § 10; Version, 
Syriac, date of, § 4; translated 
from Greek, Greek from 
Hebrew, §§ 5, 6. 

Baruch, 3 Book of, account, 
short, § 1; author, § 7; biblio- 
graphy, § 11; composite nature 


See Devote. 


of text, § 6; Christian redactor, 
§ 8; date, §9; MSS., § 3; re- 
lation to other Baruch litera- 
ture, § 4; to other apocalyptic 
literature, § 5; theology, § 10; 
title, § 2. 

Basaloth, 1Esd. 5%. 

Bascama, place, 1Macc. 137%. 

Baseas, Arist. 47. 

Bashan, Sir. 47° Jub. 873, 

Bassai, 1Esd. 51° 

Basthai, 1Esd. 531. 

Batarel, 1En. 6%. 

Bath-q6l, the, 2Bar. 221. P.A. 
6?; to John Hyrcanus, T.L. 
18° T.Jud. 247. 

Bathing, law of, Zad. 124%. 


Bathshua, T.Jud. 828) 10%(8) 
139(8) 1648) 91718), See 
Betasuel. 


Bealoth, Jub. 132°. 

Beasts, wild = Gentiles, 1En. 
85-907. 

Beautiful, three things, Sir. 25!; 
wisdom of aged, 253°. 

Beauty, God the author of, 
Wisd. 13°. 

Bebai, 1Esd. 8%. 

Bebai, sons of, 1Esd. 51% 9”. 

Bebai, city, Judith 154. 

Becher, Jub. 44”. 

Bectileth, Judith 271. 

Bedsuel, Jub. 417. See Betasuel. 

Beelesath, T. Jud. 3”. 

Beelsarus, 1Esd. 58. 

Beeltethmus, a Samaritan,1 Esd. 
916,25. 

Beersheba, Jub.17° 181" 22%. See 
Well of the Oath. 

Beggar, his life no life, Sir. 

028-30. 

Beginning, the, meaning of in 
Sirach, Sir. 1147, 

Behaviour. See Banquet, Table. 

Behemoth and Leyiathan, 1En. 
607:8:24 2 Bar. 2947. 4Ez, 649.5 ; 
reserved for Messianic banquet, 
4Ez. 652. 

Bel, Ep. Jer. 41 Bel 3-4, 6, 8- 
Hipit4,ekS.. 20,622,025 3 the 
Assyrian god, Ah. 6'® (Syr.) 
Ah. 61628 (Arab. ). See Belshim. 

Bel and the Dragon, account, 
short, § 1; author, § 5; con- 
tents, § 2; date, § 5; integrity, 
§6; MSS., § 3; original lan- 
guage, § 4; place of origin 
Alexandria, § 5; theology, § 7; 
title, § 5; versions, § 3. 

Bela, Jub. 44”, 

Belachira, Mart. Is. 25. 

Belchira, Mart. Is, 21272. 31612 
54. See Balchira. 

Belemus, a Samaritan, 1Esd. 
eae: 

Belial, destruction through hand 
of, Zad. 9!2; let loose against 
Israel, 6°; three nets of, 61°; 
raised Jochanneh (against 
Moses), 72°; spirits of, man 
ruled by, 14°. See Beliar. 

Beliar, Jub. 12° 15°° Mart. Is. 
129 24 31. TR. 2208) 4711 68 
TOY 3 IN Ee iter aa oyna | Bs 
Jad. 25% T-.Iss. 64) 77 T.Z. 9° 
(dg) T.D. 17 47 pis10,11 Tone 
263! T.A, 183264 T.Jos. 74207 
TB, 33:48 647 7h? Sib, 36378, 
see Belial; angel of lawless- 
ness, ruler of this world, Mart. 





INDEX 
| 


Is. 24; chief of evil spirits, 
Mart. Is. 18; coming and 
destruction of, Sib. § 6 363-% 
(?= Antichrist, ?Simon Magus) 
3°572.5%7.; has no power over 
the pure, T.R. 44; men to be 
delivered from, T.Z. 980%), cf. 
T.D. 51%"; to be bound by 
Messiah, T.L. 1812; to be cast 
into the fire, T.Jud. 253; sons 
of, Jub. 15° ; spirit(s) of, T.L. 
Bo aud. ako mnsse et Dates 
spirit of, rules, accuses, en- 
snares, Jub. 17°; will of, T.N. 
Ree WOLkSO re Dean SidNer2e. 

Beliar, servant of Ahikar, Ah. 78 
(Arm.). See Nebuhal. 

Belmain, Judith 4 7°. 

Beloved of the Lord, the, Mart. 
N23 

Belshazzar. See Baltasar. 

Belshim, a god appealed to by 
Ahikar, Ah, 14616 (Arm.). 

Belt, the constellation, Sib. 552”. 

Ben Sira, Sir. 51°9; his right to 
give instruction, Sir. 331618 
(361643 525-27): how heacquired 
Wisdom, 511%-*9, 

Benase, 1En. 78?. 

Benedicite, the, Azar. § I, 35- 
65. 

Benefactor, title of, Add. Esth. 
E2:1372, 

Benevolence, danger of indis- 
criminate, Sir. 121-7. 

Benjamin, 1Esd. 2° 5°° 9° Add. 
Esth. Al Jub. 32989 3322 348,20 
388 4249102128 4 o1,7,16 4 428,25 
Mart. Is. 3°! T.Jud. 25? 
T.B. 148 274) 122(8) Test. App. 
Dee oar aesees sy  Osepieean 
vision, T.B. 10!; as a ravening 
wolf, LB. 114; 

Benjamite, 2Macc. 3%. 

Benuzardan, Nadan’s younger 
brother, Ah. 3° (Arab.). 

Beon, Jub. 29! (1Macc. 5%). 
See Baean. 

Beor, Jub. 381°. 

Berachel, son of = Jacob, Test. 
App. I 48. 

Berea, a place, 1Macc. 94. 

Beriah, Jub. 447. 

Berkael, 1En. 8247. 

Beroea, custom of execution at, 
2Macc. 134°. 

Beroth, i.e. Beeroth, 1Esd. 51°. 

Betane, Judith 1%. 

Betasuel, wife of Judah, Jub. 
34, cf. Bathshua, Bedsuel. 

Betenos, Jub. 47%. 

Beth ha-Midrasch, (Jellinek) 
book quoted, T.Jud. 3-7 2. 

Bethha-Midrash, i.e. house of 
instruction, Sir. 512°7.2°7. See 
Yeshibah. 

Bethasmoth, 1Esd. 57°. 

Bethbasi, 1Macc. 9°7.%. 

Bethdagon, idol’s temple at Azo- 
tus, 1Macc. 10872, 

Bethel, 1Macc. 9° Tob. 26 Jub. 
13515 419,26 311,880 3219 44? 
454 T.L. 74 9%? Test. 4p. I 
10. 

Bethhoron, 1Macc. 3184 739 9°° 
Judith 44 Jub. 344; battle at, 
tMace. 315324, 

Bethlehem = Ephrath, Jub. 32%4 
Mart. Is. 27,8!2 3! T.R. 3%. 

Bethlomon, 1Esd. 51”. 


Bethshan, 1Macc. 5°72. 124; 
= Scythopolis, Jub. 29147. 
2Macc. 12"? 

Bethsura, 1Macc. 429°! 67,26,31; 
49,50 952 yol4 7165 147,83 2Mace, 
13122 ; (or Bethsuron), siege 
of, 2Macc. 1157. 

Bethuel, Jub. 191° 271%12 Test. 
App. II 62. 

Bethulia, Judith, §6 47. 6101 
71,8,6,18,20 §3,11 98 149 127 1310 
15398 162123, 

Bethzacharias, 1Macc. 6°. 

Betolion, 1Esd. 57+. 

Betomesthaim, Judith 4° 154. 

Bezeth, 1Macc. 71°. 

Bilhah, Jub. 289171819 942,3,8,22 
343516 4427 T.R, 31413 TJud. 
3 Sb Niy 13920 Ga 1°) Os. 
2086) T.B. 1% Test. AfZ. I. 
ie 

Bigqa, 1En. 69}°. 

Birthday, king’s, 2Macc. 6%. 

Bithynians, Sib. 5124. 

Blasphemy, 1En. 9171 94? 967 
Dio dear eA Ss 

Blessed, ten types of men who 
are, Sir. 2575)". 

Blessing, 1En. 1018 418 454° 

1,2,3 64,18, 

Blessing of the Lord, Sir. 502%z. 

Blind of eye better than blind of 
heart, Ah, 248 (Syr. A). 

Blindness, Tob. 21° 317 510 6° 
Ae: 

Blood, 1En. 9° 154 1001; of 
flesh, 154; righteous, 474; 
sinners, 100%; drink, 154; eat- 
ing of forbidden, Jub. 671148 
728-83 112 rin. 981! (Zad. 4°}, 
to Isaac by Abraham, Jub. 
217; shedding of, a_ sin, 
Jub. 67-18 728-88 112 1En. of 
99° (of Gentiles, Zad. 14"); 
proper use of in sacrifice, Jub. 
611,14, 

Boar, black wild=Esau, 1En. 


8912. 
Boars, wild=Edomites, 1En. 
801272.42-49,66 ; = Samaritans, 


89"? g0!z. 

Boccas, 1Esd. 8?. 

Body, the, an encumbrance, 
Wisd. 9!5; no resurrection of 
in 2Enoch, 2En. § 3 507658; to 
be restored by the earth, 2Bar. 
4282.; resurrection of, 2Bar. 
492-51; resurrection of, not 
believed in by Alexandrian 
Jews, 4Macc. § 9. See Resur- 
rection. 

Bones flourish, Sir. 491°. 

Book, deeds written in, P.A. 
21 33:20, : 

Book, the = Scriptures, Arist. 
316. 

Book, the holy = Scriptures, 
read by Eleazar before battle, 
2Macc. 875, 

Book of discipline of children 
of men, Jub. 361°; of the 
Division of the Seasons (= 
Book of Jubilees), Zad. 201; 
of the +Hagut, Zad. 11. 15° 
175; of the histories of the 
kings of Judaea, 1Esd. 1°°; of 
the kings of Israel and Judah, 
1Esd. 123; of life, 1En. 108% 
Jub. 361%, cf. Books of the 
living; of the memorial of 


841 








life, Test. Ags. II 59; of 
remembrance, Zad. 9*° ; of the 
seventy shepherds, 1En. 89°8- 77 
go17,20; of unrighteousness, 
814) ck 982° 104%; of the 
words of righteousness, 141; 
of zeal and wrath, disquiet 
and expulsion, 391. 

Book, sealed, 1En. 89771, See 
Books, opened. 

Books, the holy, 1En. 103? 
108%, See Tablets, heavenly, 
and cf. 1087. 

Books of deeds of righteous 
and wicked, opened, 4Ez. 67° 
1En. 47°. ; of Enoch’s revela- 
tions, to be transmitted to 
generations of world, 2En. 
33°10, see Apocrypha, Revela- 
tions; of fathers, Abraham 
learns Hebrew from, Jub. 1277; 
of heathen writers, 1Kn. 10419 ; 
of Jacob and his fathers given 
to Levi, Jub. 45'67.; of the 
Law, Zad. 9°; of the living, 
tEn. 4737, cf. 1041 and Book 
of life; of the Prophets, Zad. 
g’; recording sins, opened, 
1En. go” 2Bar. 241 4Ez. 6%. 

Borrowing. See Lending. 

Boser, Jub. 38%". 

Bosor, place, 1Macc. 57538, 

Bosora, i.e. Bozrah, 1Macc. 

26,28. 

Botany, Wisd. 729 Jub. 1012-14 
1 Die Gp eee 

Boudan, Nadan’s brother in 
Ah, 3° (Arm.). 

Branding, 3Macc. 2”. 

Brazen serpent, Wisd. 16°. 

Bread of dead, Tob. 42”. 

Breastplate of High Priest, 
Wisd. 1874, 

Breastplate of understanding, 
Nal fee 

Britains, Sib. 522. 

Brother = Jew, Tob. § 9. 

Brotherly love, Tob. 41°. 

+Bugaean, Add. Esth. 
(vead Agagite). 

Builders of the wall (=Phari- 
sees), Zad. 71 97426, 

Bull, symbolically used, 1En. 
858-9 868 891912; white= 
Messiah, 90%”. 

Bundle of life, Sir. 61672. 

Burial, 1Macc. 27 1325 Tob. 
175g, 435g. 61 12!sg. A. & E. 
48*-? Apoc.Mos. 401-43}. 

Burnt-offering alone to be of- 
fered on Sabbath, Zad. 1377; 
to be sent by the clean only, 


A272, 


14}, 
+Busasejal, 1En. 697. 
Byzantium, Sib. 3497. 


Caeserin, Tob. 11}. 

Cain, Wisd. 103 Jub. 44247931 
A. &E. 21% 225-5 2342 Apoc: 
Mos. 18 2? 31:2 42 404 1En. 227 
853-5 TB. 78:5 4Macc, 1822; 
death, by astone, Jub. § 15 4°4; 
spiritual death of Cain on Abel’s 
murder, Wisd. 10°7.; ven- 
geance on, sevenfold, T.B. 7°». 

Cainan, 1En. 37! 2En. 331°. 

Calamolalus, 1Esd. 572. 

Caleb, 1Macc. 2°° Sir. 467° 
2Bar. 591. 

Calebites, 1Esd. § 5(c)(g). 


Calendar, Jewish, Jub. § 15, 
629-80,82 1 51 yotes, 

Calf, golden, Tob. 15. 

Caligula, 4Macc. § 1. 

Calitas, 1Esd. 94°, 
Colius, 

Callisthenes, 2Macc. 883, 

Camarina, in Greece, Sib. 3786, 

Camarina = Ur, Sib. 378, 

Camels =a class of giants, 1En. 
864. 

Camp, Censor of the, Zad. 1616.8 
1768 18?; children of the, 
Zad, 16°; cut off from (see 
Excommunication), Zad. 94%; 
eat and drink in, on Sabbath, 
13°; enter into the, 15°. 

Campanians, Sib, 3475. 

Camps, dwellers of, Zad. 171; 
settle in, 9! 169%. 

Canaan, 1Macc. 987 Judith 5% 
$10 1Bar. 322 Sus. 56 Jub. 
720-1218 gl 1929 9221 292 469,11 
T.S. 63 T.L. 125 T.Jud. 1026 
118 oe De 7g 5 oe el OS 22 
1318 T.B.  123(8),4(8) ; 
daughter(s) of, Jub. 204 251,45 
27810 417; king of, 46%11; 
land of, Judith 5%! Jub. 10% 
123528 y31 510° 902244 aol 
42418 434 444,84 4515 463,0,7,18 
47° 49% 50% Test. Ads. II 
78; seed of, Sus. 56 Jub. 204 
25° T.S. 6°; son of Ham, 738, 

Canaanite, Judith 5! Jub, 3420 
Mart. Is. 25, 

Canaanite marriages forbidden, 
Jub. 204 251-3,5, 

Canaanites, 1Esd. 8°9 Wisd. 128 
Jub. 14% 18 36% TL, 71 T. Jud. 
31 71% 111. See Amorites. 

Canaanitish war, T.B, 123(). 

Cancer, constellation, Sib. 55%, 

Canon, Hebrew, threefold divi- 
sion implied in Sirach, Sir. 
Prologue In. 

Canon, no fixed idea of, in Si- 
rach, Sir. 2458,, 

Capharsalama, 1Macc. ¥S!, 

Caphira, ie. Chephirah, 1Esd. 
-19 


See also 


15? 


3) . 
Caphtorim = Philistines, Jub. 
2.430, 

Cappadocians, T.S. 6% Sib. 3517, 
Capricorn, Sib, 5207,518,519, 

Captain, chief, T.Jos. 21 162(), 

Captivity of Israel due to for- 
saking God’s ordinances, fes- 
tivals, Sabbaths, holy place, 
Jub. 11% See Israel. 

Carabasion, 1Esd. 934. 

Carchemish, war at, rEsd. 125, 

Cardinal virtues, Wisd. 87. 

Caria, 1Macc. 15%, 

Carians, Sib. 3179,20%,472 490,149 
= 288 

Carmel, Judith, 18. 

Carmi, Jub. 4422. 

Carnaim, 1 Macc. 52548)44 2Macc, 
1 27472,26, 

Carthage, Sib, 3484 4106, 

Casphor, 1Macc. 526,86, 

Caspin, siege of, 2Macc, 1218-16, 

Catena on Pentateuch, an old, 
quoted, Ass. Mos. § 2721. 

Cathua, 1Esd. 530, 

Cattle, duty to, Sir, 722, 

Cebren, Sib, 3343, 

Cedron, valley of, 2Bar. 5° 
211312 See Kedron. 





INDEX 


Celtic mountaineer = Trajan, 
Sibawaasg 

Celts. See Qelt. 

Cendebaeus, 1Macc. 153840 16 
1,4,8, 

Censor, Zad. 101%., see Camp ; 
duties of, 161-12 178-8; of the 
many, 198; to command, 19}; 
to examine, 191°; to instruct 
priest in law of leprosy, 157; 
to receive alms, 182; to re- 
ceive accusations, 1010-18 178, 

Chabrias, Arist. 48. 

Chabris, son of Gothoniel, 
Judith 615 81 ro8, 

Chabu, Arist. 50. 

Chadiasiai, 1Esd. 52 
Chaereas, brother of Timotheus, 
2Macc, 108287, 

Chalcedon, Sib. 3434, 
Chaldaean astrology, Sib. 3227. 
Chaldaeans, 1Esd. 152 44° 619 
Judith 5%” 1Bar. 12 Ep. Jer. 40 
Azar. 25. 

Chaldees, Jub. 9% 11%,7,9,21 
Sib. 378; army of, 2Bar. 84; 
race of, Sib, 5440, 

Chalkydri, 2En. 124, 15}, 
Chalphi. See Judas, son of. 
Chambers in heaven, Sir. 481272.; 
of souls of righteous, 4Ez, 
4°°72.7°5—in intermediate state, 
not before birth, 4#17., cf, habi- 
tations of spirits (or ‘ winds’) 
5°".; of sun and moon, 1En. 
41°; of winds, hail, mist, and 
clouds, 414; of winds, 6012; 
cf. ‘places of rest}? of thun- 
der, 6014, 

Chanukka, feast of, 2Macc. § 1 
§ 4 Judith § 82, 16° 4Macc. 
§ 8. See Dedication. 

Chanuneus, 1Esd. 848, 

Chaos, 1En. 1812 208 211:2 1083, 

Chaphenatha, 1Mace. 1287, 

Charaathalan, 1Esd. 596, 

Characters, new = new Hebrew 
script, square or ‘ Assyrian 
characters’, 4Ez. 14427. 

Charax, 2Macc. 1217, 
Tubieni. 

Charea, 1Esd. 532, 

Chariot of God, Sir. 4987. 

Charity. See Alms. 

Charme, 1Esd, 52°, 

Charmis, son of Melchiel, Ju- 
dith 64 811 108, 

Chaseba, 1Esd. 531, 

Chasid policy,—passive resis- 
tance, Ass. Mos. g#.; alliance 
with Maccabees temporary, gv. 

Chasidim, 1Macc. 2422, Sir, 
§ 3ili 1En. § 1 Test. §§ 1, 16 
Ass. Mos. 9! Zad. 17%.; a 
company of, support Matta- 
thias, Macc. 29948 42, . 
warlike, 34344 2Macc. Ter 
peaceful, 1Macc, 7#214; = 
saints, 7177.; welcome Alcimus, 
7°; existed as a party before 
the Maccabaean rising, 1En. 
go®"7.; symbolized by ‘lambs’ 
in go®*, See Hasidaeans. 

Chasm of the abyss of the 
valley, 1En. 56%4, 

Chasms of the earth levelled 
up, IEn, 897, See Abyss, 
Ravine, Valley. 

Chastening for sin, Ps. Sol. 101-3 
13°* 164; endurance of, Ps. 


See 





Sol. 10? 141 161915; of Israel, 
2Bar. 15, as son, Ps.Sol. 184; 
of Jewish nation, through 
martyrs, 2Macc. 733-38, 

Chastisement, great, 1En. 9157; 
day of, 102°; visions of, 138. 

Chastity, T.Jos. 42? 67 92:3 10%8; 
an aid to prayer, 4Ez. 6°72, 

Chedorlaomer, king of Elam, 
ubrr322. 

Chelod, son of, Judith 1°, 

Chellians, Judith 228, 

Chellus, Judith 1°. 

Chermion, 2En. 572. 

Cherubim, Sir. 498. Azar. 32 
Apoc. Mos. 19% 22% 322 388 
1En. 144418 207 6110 717) Sib. 


31 2En. 12!72. 19% j20) 218 
22% 293(B). See Angels, 
Chalkydri. ‘ 


Chian, Sib. 3422, 

Childbirth, Tob. 44. 

Children of the camp, Zad. 168; 
of the covenant = Jews, Ps. 
Sol. 1717; of destitute, 1En. 
99°; of earth = men, 124 15% 
80° 1051; =sinners, 100° 1023 ; 
of fornication, 109; of heaven 
= watchers, 6714; = right- 
eous, L0147.; of men, 6142 19721 
121 15412 2285 361 4o9 422 
64? 69°14 Sir. 173° Judith 82 
Zad. 9° ; of people (= Israel), 
107; of the pit (= uncircum- 
cised), 812 167; of righteous- 
ness, 1En. 91° 93”; unlawfully 
begotten, Wisd. 4°; of up- 
rightness, rn. 1052; of 
Watchers, 10°12 126 cf. 146 
Zad. 3°; of the world, g®!. Sze 
Sons. 

Children, curse of sinful. Sir. 
161-8 228-6; duty to, 728-%; 
elect and holy = watchers, 
1En.39}; training of,Sir, 301-48, 
See Daughters. 

Children, Israel will be God’s, 
Jub. 174. See Father. 

Children, the Three, 1Macc. 2° 
3Macc. 6° Azar. 28, 66, 4Macc. 
13° 1621, 

Chislev, month, 1 Mace, 154 452,59, 
month, 2Macc, 1918 109, 

Chittim =the islands and coast- 
lands of Greece, 1Mace. 11, 
8°, See Kittim. 

Chiun your images ( = the 
books oft he Prophets), Zad. 
ov 

Choba, Judita 44, 

Chobai, Judith 154,95, 

Choice of guardian angels and 
intercessors given to nations, 
Test. App. I g!8, 

Choice, moral, 2Bar. 1912, 

Choir, martyrs as a, 4Macc. 84 
ge Lave 

Chola, Judith 154, 

Chorbe, 1Esd. 512, 

(Christ, A. & E. 4225,] 

Christ, or Anointed One, title 
of Messiah, 1En. § 11 4810 5 24, 
See Anointed. 

Christian additions to Martyr- 
dom of Isaiah, Mart. Is. I’; to 
Testaments, Test. § 13; doc- 
trine of Return of Christ to 
judge the world, denied in, 
4Ez. 5°°-68%, cf. 738-44. in. 
fluence in Syriac version of 


842 





Sirach, Sir. § 5i; interpola- 
tions, Au! Hi 29279 42755 
interpolation concerning vine, 
3Bar. 49-15 134 154; redactor 
of 3Baruch, 3Bar. § 8. 

Chronicles. See Book. 

Chronicles of the Kings, 1Esd. 
eae 

Chronology, Jub. 46°-® T.G. 8° 
Ass. Mos. 12°. See Seleucid 
era. 

Chrysostom, Sir. § 8, 4Macc.§8. 

Chusi, Judith 718, 

Cibyra, Sib. 5917, 

Cilicia, 1Macc. 111* 2Macc. 4% 
Judith 17-12 271;25 4Macc. 42. 

Circe, Sib. 3814, 

Circumcision, Jub. § 15, 1524:26,2" 
1614 ; by force, 1Macc. 246 ; 
enjoined on Abraham’s sons, 
Jub. 20°; forbidden, 1Mace. 
148; punished, 1Macc. 1°° 
2Mace. 61011 4Macc, 475; se- 
verer and later rules concern- 
ing, Jub. 15147.; token of an 
eternal covenant, 159-41, Sve 
Uncircumcision. 

Cisterns at Jerusalem, Arist. 89. 

Citadel at Jerusalem, Arist. 
1007. IOO-I04. 

Cities of the plain, Wisd. 1o°. 

Citizenship, offered to Jews, 
3Macc. 2°? 371, See Alexandria, 
Antioch, Athens. 

City = Jerusalem, 4Ez, 324,251 046 
= New Jerusalem, 8°? 102742 
44,64 Holy = Jerusalem, Sir. 
2411 3611 498 Azar. 5 Ps.Sol. 84 
Zad. 9*°; of the sanctuary, 14!. 

Clean, see Heart; and un- 
clean, Zad. 814 151; meats, see 
Forbidden, 

Cleanse Israel, God will, Jub. 
ee 

Cleansed, from sin, by con- 
fession, Ps. Sol. 912; by God’s 
chastening, 10! 18° ; in water, 
Zad. 121; through repentance, 
LO.0s 

Clement of Alexandria, Sir. § 8. 

Cleopatra, married to Alexander 
Balas, 1Mace, 105758 ; given to 
Demetrius II, 1112, 

Cleopatra, Add. Esth. F4yz, 

Cloud, pillar of, Wisd. 197; 
with black and white waters, 
vision of, 2Bar. 53. 

Clouds, angel or spirit of. See 
Angels. 

Cnidus, 1Macc. 1523, 

Cock, heavenly, 3Bar. 61°, 

Cocytus, 1En. 17%. 

Coelesyria, 1Esd. 21%7224,27 448 
6? 71 867 1Macc.10°%, 2Mace. 
3°8 44 88 roll 3Mace. 315. See 
also Phoenicia. 

Cohabitation, instrument of, 
Lob. 73s. 

Cohortatio ad Graecos, rela- 
tion of to Aristeas’s Letter, 
Arist. § 9. 

Cold and heat, angel or spirit 
of. See Angel, 

Colius, called Calitas, 1Esd. 

23 


Colophon, Sib, 3343, 
Commandment, Sir. 151572, 
Commandments, the two great, 
Test. § 16. . 
Community, of Israel, Zad. res 


four orders of Zadokite, 17)-°. 
See Congregation. 

Companions of Messiah. See 
Messiah. 

Competitors in games, martyrs 
like, 4Macc. 1170 1579 17!sg. 
Confess before God, Zad. 9°°®); 

to priest, 108. 

Confessio Esdrae, two texts of, 
4Ez, 820-407, 

Confession, brings cleansing 
from —sin,, Ps.Sol. -g#@z.; of 
exiles in ‘Babylon’, 1Bar. 
145_318; of Israel’s sins, Azar. 
1=15 Add. Esth. C1”; of sin, 
Jub. 1% P.Man. 8-13; and 
forgiveness, for sick, Sir. 7 °°7.; 
= tuming from sins, Sir. 4767. 
See Repentance. 

Conflict of Adam and Eve. 
See Adam and Eve. 

Congregation ( = Israel or syna- 
gosue, BoA. 227,);-the, PA. 
225 47 Zad. 181%, 47 9%? 
112-3 16°; come into the, 14°; 
enter the, 99° 177; his (cen- 
sor’s), 164; judges of, 111; 
of the elect and holy, 1En. 
62°; of the righteous, 381; 
of the Righteous and Elect 
One, 53°; of men of perfection 
of holiness, Zad. 9°°; of treach- 
erous men, Zad. 18; prince of 
all the, 9°; trumpets of, 14°; 
the, smitten by the fiery angel, 
4Macc. 74. See Community. 

Conscience, T.R. 497. T.Jud. 
20°; = the higher self, Wisd. 
17M. 

Consciousness, man’s, of his per- 
ishing nature, contrasted with 
brutes’ ignorance, 4Ez. 7°-® ; 
man’s, of law, condemns him, 
772; of right and wrong in all 
men, 2Bar. 484. 

Consummation, 1En, 10! 161, 
see Day and cf. 19} Zad. 65.7; 
= final judgement, 2Bar. 30°7. 
76%, see End; = time of 
kingdom, Ass. Mos. 118 2Bar. 
271° 298; of the age, 2Bar. 694 
837; of all things, 8377; of 
God’s judgement, 827; of the 
times, T.R. 687. 

Contentment, advantage of, Sir. 
2021-23, 

@orintia, Sibseg "400" 6225, 

Corruption, the present world 
the sphere of, 2Bar. 211°7. 40%. 

Cos, 1Macc. 1575. 

Council of nation, later deve- 
loped into Sanhedrin, 1Macc. 
12°v.; of the pious, Ps. Sol. 4. 
See Synagogues. 

Counsellor, God needs no, Sir. 
4271 2En, 30%. 

Counsellors, true and false, 
Sayles 

Counterparts, all things have, 
Met bo2"s 

Covenant, Ps. Sol. 91°; children 
of = Jews, Ps. Sol. 1717; eter- 
nal, Ps. Sol. 10°; the holy, 

‘repudiated, 1Macc.1¥°; in 
Zad.—141215 21 49 68 712 93,21 ; 
and mercy, 821(B) ; of the fore- 
fathers, 14 9%, cf. 6°; of God, 

10 712 821941 167.12, cf, God 
established with the fore- 
fathers, 6°; God remembered, 








INDEX 


88; of Israel,- 51, cf. that 
Moses established with Israel, 
t9®18; of repentance, 91° (B) ; 
curses of, 112 1914; oath of, 
198; ordinances of, 117, see 
Ordinances ; members of, for 
ever, 4°; rules for, § 10 iv. ; 
statutes of, 712 9°!; vengeance 
of, 132 o!4; enter into, 2! 4° 
811 g12,15(B) 928:49 102 167 19°; 
reject, 9°"; stand fast, 8?! 1612; 
transeréss, 14° 20°3 new, 
drawn up in the land of Da- 
mascus, §§ 1, 8,10, 81% g%8:57; 
those who were faithless to, 
to be destroyed by Messiah, 
91-20; to be judged, 92627; 
excommunicated, 97°-%*. See 
Faithful. 
Craftiness, how different from 
wisdom, Sir. 192°-%°, 
Craftsman, indispensable but 
not fit for highest office, Sir. 


3851-84, See Artisan. 
Crates, viceroy of Cyprus, 
2Macc. 479. 


Created, definite number of the, 
2Bar. 234 57. 

Creation, P.A. 5161? Zad. 7? 16}; 
all corrupted, Jub. 57-3; apo- 
calyptists begin survey with, 
4Ez.347.; ex nihilo, 2Bar.21472.; 
fashioned anew at Exodus, 
Wisd.19°; God and Wisdom 
in, Wisd. § 9 ; hymn in praise 
of, Sir. 3912-%5; new (when 
heavens and earth renewed), 
Jub. 129 1En. 45452. 5145 721 
g12816 2Bar. 32°. 44 57? 
4Ez. 54° 77; out of (pre-exist- 
ing) matter, Wisd.111"; teach- 
ing of 2Enoch on, 2En. § 6; 
transformed, 2Bar. 32° 51 52, 
see Transformation ; twenty- 
two acts of, Jub. 241°; wisdom 
as seen in, Sir. 167%4-%°, cf. 

215_4325 ; works of, 42z. 
638-59, See Nature, Seven 
Days, World. 

Creatures in heavens, spirits of. 
See Angels. 

Cretan, Sib. 314° 

Crete, 1Macc. 1087 Sib. 3°% 549°. 

Crobuzi, Sib. 3474. 

Cronos, Sib. 3320)121,127,129,181, 148, 
150,152,157, 200,201,383, 

Croton, Sib. 48%. 

Grown, B-Ala 45 6°50 of 
righteousness, Arist. 280 T.L. 
8. 

Crowns of glory, T.B. 4}. 

Cud, chewing the, symbolizes 
memory, Arist. 153. 

Cup of Inspiration. 
ration. 

Curse, power of a, Sir. 4°7. 

Curses of God’s covenant, Zad. 
122 ght, 

Cush, Jub. 735 91 10°, 

Cutha, 1Esd, 5°. 

Cyagra, Sib. 3°. 

Cyamon, Judith 7°. 

Cycle, metonic, 2En, 16°87., cf. 
tEn. 743%. 

Cymaeans, Sib. 5°14. 

Cyme, Sib. 59°. 

Cyprus, 1Macc. 15% 2Macc. 429 
{ol3 122 Sib, 3497 4129148 5 450,454, 

Cyrene, 1Macc. 1578 Sib. 5**. 

Cymos, Sib. 347. 


See Inspi- 











Cyrrhus, Sib, 4142. 

Cyrus, 1Esd. 24231911 444,57 
95,7173 617,18,22,24 4 Bel x 
1En. 895°. Sib. 3786; decree 
of, permitting Temple to be 
rebuilt, 1Esd. § 1, § 6(@) 21-7. 

Cyzicus, Sib. 343°442 499, 


Dacians, Sib. 3°18, 

Dacubi, 1Esd. 57°. 

Daisan, 1Esd. 5°. 

Dakis, Arist. 47. 

Dalan, 1Esd. 597. 

Damascus, Judith 1712 227 155 
Zad. §§ 1, 8, 10, see Cove- 
nant, Migration, North, Peni- 
tents; not permanent head- 
quarters of Zadokites, § roiii; 
beyond, Zad. 9°; land of, 8°16 
98:87; the Star came to, 9°. 

Dammasek, Jub. 147. 

Dan, Tob. 1° Jub. 2818 3372 3.420 
38° HED “WAR OM AU fica 
72(g),6 252 T.Z. 21a) ge AeG) tS 
DDR eA oe bests App: 
II 3; and Antichrist, T.D. 
5°27. 

Dan, city, Jub. 137%. 

Dan, land of, 1En. 13"; waters 
Ofer 

Danaba, Jub. 381°. 

Danel, Jub. 4”°. 

Danel, 1En, 67. 

Daniel, 1Macc. 2°° 3Macc. 67 
Susan § Dy0$ 25 455.40) bly 52s 
55> 59, 61, 64 Bel 2, 4, 5, 7, 
Q-12, 14, 16, 17-19, 21, 22, 
24-27, 29, 39, 32, 34, 37-42 
4Ez. 1214 4Macc. 16%?1 1815; 
semi-angelic figure still in 
time of Alexander Jannaeus, 
Sus. § 6 Bel. §§ 1, 2; son of 
Abal, a priest, Bel 2 (LXX). 

Daniel, Arist. 49. 

Daniel, Additions to. See 
Azariah, Prayer of; Bel and 
the Dragon; Susanna. 

Danjal, 1En. 697. 

Daphne,sanctuary near Antioch, 
2Macc. 4%°. 

Dardanus, sons of, Sib. 35°. 

Darius. King, 1Esd, 23° 31:3:979 
487 5%8. 61:6,7,8,23,94 7149, See 
Temple, Zerubbabel, Sources 
of 1Esdras. 

Darius, Codomannus, king of 
the Persians and Medes, 
tMace. 11. 

Darkening the mind, T.R. 38 
eens Dro Gr Ot:-9Sce 
Light. 

Darkness, curse of sinners, as 
light the blessing of righteous. 
1En.4 187, 10451157 418 46° 58° 
6019 6219 63611 743 773 8948 
925 949 1027 1038 1048 108114, 

Darkness, plague of, Wisd. 17°. 

Date in Prologue of Sirach, Sir. 
§ 6i1(4). 

Dathaeus, Arist. 50. 

Dathan and Abiram, Sir. 4578 
4Mace. 217, 

Dathema, a stronghold, 1Macc. 
5°. 

Daughters, care of, Sir. 42°, 
cf, 724-25 2610-12, 

David, 1Esd. 195,15 55,60 §29,49 

Tob. 14 Sir. 4525 471722 481 

49* 512¥lli 2Bar. 61) 4Ez. 2% 

7108 (1946) 1232 Ps. Sol. 17588 


843 








4Macc. 3§sg. 18! P.A. 5)° 68; 
=a lamb, raised to being a 
ram, 1En. 894-46; books of, 
2Macc. 218; city of, made into 
a citadel (by Apollonius), 
nice us) 2°45? miss edeeds 
of,tMacc.2°7 4°°; clorified,Zad. 
77; Psalmist, 4Macc. 1815 ; 
read not in the sealed Book of 
the Law, Zad. 7°; son of = 
Messiah, Ps.Sol. 17%; thirst 
of, 4Mace. 36715, 

Davidic line, animus against, 
Zad. § 12, cf. Judah; Messiah, 
expected in Ps.Sol. § 7, 1772. 
Sir. § 3iii, 512%. Contrast Sir. 
36, 44-48. 

Day of affliction, 1En. 48°19 50? ; 
of consummation, IEn.10!? 161; 
of cursing and chastisement, 
102°; of darkness, 94°; of 
death of giants, 164; of de- 
cision = of judgement, Wisd. 
318; of destruction, 1En. 161 
98" ; of judgement, 22419 97? 
1004, great, 54°; of judgement 
and consummation, 10/7; of 
the great judgement, 10° 19} 
94° 982" gg!® 104°; of great 
shame, 981°; of judgement, the 
great, 2211844, sce Judgement; 
of judgement, 4Ez, 758,59,102,104, 
106,118) 284 no” prayer Or 
atonement on, 4Ez. 710410, 
souls of righteous guarded in 
chambers till, see Intermediate 
state; of slaughter, 1En. 161 
94°; of unceasing bloodshed, 
gy®; of suffering and tribula- 
tion, 452 638; of tribulation, 11 
967; and pain, 55°; unrigh- 
teousness, 971; of wrath, Sir. 

8 

De montibus Sina et Sion, cited 
under 2En. 3018. 

Dead, the, Tob. 52°, see Sacri- 
fice, Sheol; burial of, Tob. 
§ 6 § Sii § 10B(4); duty 
to, Sir.38; Fable of the 
Grateful, Tob. § 8ii; guarded, 
2Bar. 23472. 4Hz. 79121, see 
Chambers; mourning for, Sir. 
3816-28; pollution by, Zad. 
1416; prayers for, 2Macc. 124; 
respect for, Sir. 87; sacrifices 
for, 2Macc. 124%49; sacrifices 
of the, P.A. 3°.; sacrifices 
to, Jub. 221? Tob. 41%. ; sin 
offerings for, 2Macc. 124°. 

Death, Tob. 41° 12° sg. (see 
Sheol) 1En. 9423 g8!® 102° 
4Ez. 8° ; abolished, for right- 
eous, 2En. 651° 4Ez. 855, see 
Hades; came through Eve, 
2En. 30187. ; certain, Sir. 1477; 
day "of, PyA 22:2 aha 
due to the devil, Wisd. 274; to 
sin, 2En. 30%%.; to sin or 
rather to sinful unrighteous 
knowledge,1 En.6914; =eternal 
rest, Sir. 30!7%.; =long sleep 
(for the righteous), 1En. 100° ; 
physical and spiritual, Wisd. 
§ 9; pronounce no man happy 
before, Sir. 1178; traced to 
Adam, 2Bar. 234, see Adam; 
views on, two, Sir. §1, 4114. 
See End. 

Deborah, Tob. 18. 

Deborah, Jub. 315° 32°°. 


Deceit, 1En. 918 93* 94° 104°. 
See Spirits. 

Dedication, Feast of, 1Macc. 
4°°s9,2. 2Macc. 1°2,.;  insti- 
tuted, 2Macc. 10!-8. 

Deep, the, = subterranean 
waters, Sirsi8: 768s Yor 
abyss, God’s look dries up, 
4Ez. 8; mouth of, 1En. 178, 
see Abyss, Depth; shut up and 
sealed by Name of God, P. 
Man. 4. 

Deification of kings, 2Macc. 
1123 Wisd. 1417, 

Deliberation, clear, 4Macc. 117. 

Delos, 1Mace. 1578 Sib, 35° 49, 

Deluge, Jub. 519-82 1En. 10? 
54710 Gel Bo8-5 915 10615 
2Bar, 5615 4Macc. 15%1; fore- 
told to Noah, 1En. 65!; held 
in check, 1En. 667. 

Demeter, Sib. 312. 

Demetrius I, Soter, son of Seleu- 
cus, 1Macc, 71:4 831 g1 102:3,15, 
22,25,48-50,02 9 Mace, 14!i4s5,11,26 
Sib, 3388-40077; —- accession, 
tMacc. 71-29; death, 105%. ; 
privileges alleged to be grant- 
ed to Jews by, 1Mace. § 7ii 
(6) 10%545—Jerusalem to be 
holy and free; feast days to 
be observed; immunity and 
release for Jews during feasts ; 
Jews to have own laws; taxa- 
tion largely remitted; Temple 
to receive large gifts. 

Demetrius II, Nicator, 1Mace. 
1057)2,69 1 9,12,30,32,38—42,52,55,68 
1224,34 1522 
2Macc. 17; king, 1 Macc. 1119, 

Demetrius of Phalerum, Arist, 
§ I 92., 11, 28, 29, 301, 308, 
309, 312, 317. 

Democritus, Greek proverbial 
philosopher, Ah. § 2;  refer- 
ences by, to Ahikar, Ah. § 3a. 

Demon, Tob, 317 68.14 83, 

Demonology of 1Enoch, rEn. 
§ 11 (d); fallen watchers, 6 6923 
86 1061814; demons proper, 
15%%11 16 19 6912 go7; of 
Jubilees reappears largely in 
N.T., Jub. § 15; demons 
attack men and rule oyer 
them, Jub. § 15, 1038; cor- 
tupt and lead astray and 
destroy the wicked, 108; sub- 
ject to prince Mastema orSatan, 
Io* ; sacrificed to, as gods, 
2217; their activities cease on 
the judgement of Mastema, 108, 
or setting up of Messianic 
Kingdom, when Satan is no 
longer able to hurt mankind, 
23°%. 

Demons, see Demonology, 
Spirits ; children sacrificed to, 
Jub. 1%; destroy without in- 
curring judgement until con- 
summation, 161; =eyvil spirits, 
see Angels of punishment, 
Satans; impure spirits, 997 ; 
lead astray Noah’s sons, Jub. 
1042; men sacrifice to, as 
gods, 1En. 19! 997; restrained 
on Noah’s prayer, Jub. 10°13 ; 
sacrificing to, 1Bar.47; = spirits 
of the giants, 1En. 1589.1 :63, 
to punish men, 3Bar. 163, 

Demophon, 2Macc. 122, 


138435 41-8,38 





INDEX 


Deny. See Name. 

Depth, 1En. 60!; uttermost, 
17°; depths made fast, 691°. 
See Abyss, Deep. 

Desert, demons of, 4Macc. 1887. 

Desire. See Will. 

Desolation. See Abomination, 

Destiny, Wisd. 194; of right- 
eous, § 9. 

Destroyer = Demetrius I, Sib. 
3°°°; = destroying angel, Wisd. 
Toes 

Destruction, Sir. 2025 Ps.Sol. 99 
16°; (or pit), eternal, Ps.Sol. 
225; for ever, 31% ;* Sheol, 
darkness and, 14°; mark of, 
see Mark. 

Deuteronomy, Ass. Mos. 15. 

Devil, Wisd. 224; A. & E. 
1o? 114.2 y21 131 172 332 S.A. 
& E. 333 34% 351 38! 39} 
Apoc. Mos. £53 161:2:5 174 218; 
envy of, for Adam, Wisd. 224 
2En. 31° 3Bar. 48, see Death; 
fall of, A. & E. 121-173, 

Devils, 4Macc. 1887. 

Devote, Zad. 2012, See Ban. 

Diadem of priesthood, T.L. 81°. 

Diaspora, Add. Esth. § 1; ad- 
dressed in 1 Bar. 3°44, 1Bar.§ 4, 
§ 7; duty of, to Law and Tem- 
ple, Tob. § 7, see Dispersion ; 
gathering of, rBar. 55. 

Didache, cites Sirach, Sir. § 8; 
relation of, to Sirach, Sir. § 7 
(a). 

Didactic sections in Tobit, Tob. 
§ 9. 

Didascalia, Sir. § 8; contains 
P.Man., §§ 3 4) 5, 6, 7: 

Dinah, Jub. 2828 30%)3,4,12,24 9 292 
34716 4418; ravishing and 
avenging of, Judith 9? T.L. 
225,102. 

Dinah, daughter of Barakiel, 
Jub. 42. 

Dione, Sib. 3328, 

Dionysia, festival of, 2Macc. 67, 

Dionysus, 2Macc. 67, 148%; and 
Hades, Wisd. 11%7.; feast of, 
3Macc.§ 6; worship of, 3Macc. 
Fh. 

Dioscurus, month, 2Mace. 112472, 

Dis, Arist. 15. 

Discernment attained by expe- 
rience, Sir. 3618—20(23-25), 

Discretion, Tob. 414, 

Dispensation from heaven to 
assist Jacob’s deceit, Jub, 268, 

Dispersed of Israel, gathering 
together of, Ps.Sol. 884 113 
171°7.8,50; by ‘Messiah, 1728, 
See Ten Tribes. 

Dispersion, the return from, 
2Bar. 77° 78%.; restoration 
of, Sir. 481°. Sze Diaspora. 

Disputes with evil men, danger 
of, Sir, 81419. Sze Quarrels. 

Divinations, vanity of, Sir. 34 
(31)P*. 

Divinities, heathen. See Gods. 

Division of earth among Noah’s 
sons, Jub. 82%11 Sib, 3147, 

Divorce forbidden in Zad. §§ 2, 
9*° 13. See yl, 

Djemchid, king, and the Devas, 
Persian story of, Mart.Is. § 8. 

Dodona, Sib. 314, 

Dog, Tob. § 9, 6? 115. 

Dog-star, the, Sib. 5526, 








Dogs = Philistines, 1En.894?~*°. 


Dok, a stronghold, 1Macc. 
1672, 
Dominion. See Power. 


Domitian, 4Ez, 117472. 

Dor, 1Macc. 1514:18;25, 

Dorotheus, Arist. 182, 183, 186. 

Dorylaeum, Sib. 347. 

Dosa ben Harchinas, P.A. 32°, 

Dositheans. See  Zadokite 
Party. 

Dositheus, Maccabaean leader, 
2Macc. 121924, 

Dositheus, man of Tubieni, 
2Mace, 12°5, 

Dositheus, priest, Add, Esth, 
Bes 

Dositheus, son of Drimylus, 
3Macc. § 5, 1°. 

Dositheus, an elder, Arist. 50. 

Dosthai ben Jannai, P.A. 34. 

Dotaea = Dothan, Judith 3°. 
See Dothaim. 

Dothaim = Dothan, Judith 46 
73:18 88. See Dotaea. 

Dothan, Jub. 29!4 341° T.S, 29. 

Double-faced men, T.A. 3? 41-4, 
guilty of double sin, T.A. 
67; — heart, Sir.1281En. 914; 
— tongued, Sir. 514 61. 

Doxologies, Enochic, 1En. 2214 
257 275 364 399-18 4810 813 gait 
84 90%, 

Doxology, Tob. 1338 Sir. 5130; 
(Thine is the glory), P. Man. 
157%. 

Drachma, Tob, 515, 

Dragon, Bel. § 2, 23 sgq. 

Dragon, the, constellation, Sib. 
5022, 

Dragon, the = Pompey, 
Sol, 2292, 

Dragons, 2Bar, 108%. ; = Kings 
of the Gentiles, Zad. 91920; 
vision of, Add. Esth. A.5—1, 

Dream of Mordecai. See Mor- 
decai. 

Dream-Visions, of Enoch, 1En. 
83-90 ; first, 832; second, 85}; 
of Ezra, 4Ez. 10°, 

Dreams and divinations, vanity 
of, Sir. 34 (31)!-8, 

Dress, importance of, Sir. 1147, 
19°, 

Drimylus, 3Mace. 13. 

Drunkards, sin and doom of, 
3Bar. 41617, 

Drunkenness, Tob. 415; evils 
of, T. Jud. 16; warningsagainst, 
T.Jud. 14. 

Dudael, 1En. 104, 

Dues remitted by Demetrius I, 
1Macc. 1072-80, 

Duidain, 1En. 608. 

Dumb, brutes struck, when 
Adam was driven from Eden, 
Jub. 3787. 

Duty, filial, Sir. 31-16; of re- 
proving a friend, 1918-17, of 
wealthy, 145-19; to cattle, 722; 
to children, 775% ; to dead, 733; 
to friend, 718 2219-26 so, 
Friend; to God and His minis- 
ters, 77°51; to mourners, 734; 
to parents, 7748; to poor, 

32,33; to servant and slave, 
720-21; to sick, 735, see Visit- 
ing; to wife, 719,26, 

Dwell on the earth, those that, 

1En. 37°7.; in good sense, 


Ps, 


844 


377 40%7 48° (in genuine pas- 
sages); in interpolations of 
parables, 37-7 1—in bad sense, 
549 551 60° 6512 661 678; 
merely geographical, 43% 467 
53) 54° 552 677 6917 yol. See 
Inhabitants. 

Dwelling-place, of the Elect 
One, 1En. 397; of God (= 
temple), 1rEsd. 159; of the 
holy, 1En. 3947.78 7116, See 
Abodes, Chambers, Mansions. 

Dystrus, Tob. 21%. 


Eagle, 4Ez. 11 14!7; = fourth 
kingdom which appeared to 
Daniel, 4Ez. 10° 1235y,; = 
Rome, Israel to overcome, 
Ass. Mos. 10%; -vision, 4Ez. 
101285; interpretation of, 
Abzatasas. 

Eagles = Greeks or Macedo- 
nians, I En. go?—16, 

Eagles’ Dale, Ah. 39:14:15 (Syr.). 
See Nisrin, plain of. 

Earth, ends of, see Ends; 
middle of = Jerusalem, 1En. 
261; midst of, abyss in = 
Gehenna, 1tEn. 90%; pillars 
of, 1En. 572; cleansed, 1En. 
1070.22 ; healed, 1En. 107; shall 
rejoice, IEn. 51°; renewed, Jub. 
1%, see Creation, Heavens; 
elect shall inherit, 1En. 57, 
walk thereon, 515; righteous 
shall dwell upon, 51°; trans- 
formed by God, 45°. 

Earth-born, Test. 4/9. I 11 4Ez. 

6 

East, help from, i.e. Jews of 
Babylon, rBar. 426 55, 

Eating and drinking, see Table; 
herbs, 4Ez. 9?3-257, 

Eber, Jub. 87 Test. App. I 8°. 

Ebionism, half-way between 
Christianity and Judaism, 
3Bar. § 8. 

Ebla, 1En. 782. 

Eblaen, T.L. 6°. 

Ecbatana, 1Esd. 68 2Macc. 9? 
eb: 37 5° 620 73 141259, Judith 
TOE 

Ecclesiastes, relation of Wisdom 
to, Wisd. § 8. 

Ecclesiasticus. See Sirach. 

Eddinus, a singer, 1Esd. 115, 

Eden, garden of, Jub, 39:12,15,26, 
29,82,80 428,25 16,19,25 T Tu, 252 
T.D. 5%? 2En. 311 PLA, 522,24; 
land of, Jub. 4%4 818, is holy of 
holies, 81°. See Garden, Para- 
dise. j 

Eden of blessing, Sir, 4027, 

Eder, T.R. 313, 

Edna, Tob. 72:38 012, 

ee daughter of Azrial, Jub. 
4 


Edna, wife of Enoch, 1En. 853, 
cf. 83%. See Edni. 

Edna, Terah’s wife, Jub. 1114, 

Edni, wife of Enoch, daughter 
of Danel, Jub. 42° See Edna. 

Edom = Esau, Jub. 24° 38814, 

Edom, land, Jub. 3619 aie 
3815:16,24- to sin a complete 
sin unto death and be rooted 
One Jub, 26%; subdued, T. Jud. 

Edomites, 1Esd. 445 869; — semi- 
Edomite population among the 


Jews of the Return, 1Esd. § 5 
(¢); breach with Edomites, § 5 
(J); =wild boars in 1En, 897. 
42-72 go187,; 2 = kites, gol. 

Edos, rEsd. 9°%°. 

Effulgence, Wisd. 77°72. 

Egla, Jub. 247° 

Ego, the, Wisd. 8?%z. 

Egypt, 1 Esd, 12,26,38,37,38) Macc. 
288 382 151,57 111518,59 2Macc. 
11310 421 £1,8,12 929 Macc, 2% 
312 71 Judith 19112 6° Sir. Pro- 
logue 15, 1Bar. 119.20 Add.Esth. 
C3 FE Jub. 1! of 1088 1311216 
1738 248: 3228 34911 3818 39%14 

61:8;4,6,8;9)12 4 92,4,9,18,14,20 4 919 

429516;8)10,18,20,24,29,81,38 456,8,9, 
12-14 461,8,5-11,12,14,16 yn? 481.2, 
4,6,7,12,14,19 492,556,283 Arist. 4, 6, 
fee boe 20,022,,.99. 95 DR. 7? 
Suet oe) hak. Tro 12° 
baja os Tate. -3% 62 3t 

iD U5e Wosa ui) 17 20>,0) 
MeBei2! 10h 1 24(6)35(8)3* “Vest. 
App. 1 1° II 72-73, 80 Sib. 
46,161,193, 208,249,255, 314, 848, 608, 614 
72 -8,57,60,73, 112,179,279, 458,460,488, 
489,501,505,507 Ass,Mos. 3! 4Ez. 
9? 14°29 Ps.Sol. 289 4Mace. 47 
Zad. 4°; conversion of, Sib. 
484-608- exodus from, 1En. 
8921-27 ; Jewish garrisons in, 
see Jewish; Jews in, Arist. 12, 
310; King of, see Pharaoh; 
plagues of, tEn. 897° Wisd. 
16-19; river of, Judith 1° Jub. 
10%? 1418; subdued by Antio- 
chus Epiphanes, 1Macc. 11°? 
temple to God built in(Onias’), 
Sib. 5591-508, destroyed, 5507; 
Tobit written in, Tob. § 7; 
upper parts of, Tob. 8°. 

Egyptian, Jub. 17? 34% 39%") 
Sib. 3259 5388 T. Jos. 45(8) 51(8) 
72(8) 81(s) ; maid, Jub. 147% ; 
priests, Arist. 140; sea, Jub. 
84; woman, T.R. 4° T.Jos. 3° 
43(B) 81(8).5 16°. 

Egyptians, 1Esd. 889 Judith 51 
Jub. 121 42918 4510 4628 471011 
499:9512,1316-18 Arist. 11, 36, 
138 1S. 82-4 Sib. 35° Ass: 
Mos. 6°; and Canaanites, war 
between, Jub. 46° °z.; chas- 
tened lightly first for reforma- 
tion, then severely for punish- 
ment, Wisd. 121z.; punishment 
of fits sin, Jub. § 15, 4814; 
= wolves in 1En. 8919-2755, 

Fhi, Jub. 44%. 

Ekrebel, Judith 7%. 

Ekron, 1Macc. 10%. 

El El wa Abirer, Jub. 4077. 

Ela, 1Esd. 9°". 

Ela, mountains of, Jub. 9?. 

Elam, Jub. 738 8121 9? 10% 1372 
Ah. 37 (Syr.). See Persia. 

Elam, a returning exile, 1Esd. 

12 933, 

Elamites, T.N. 5°). 

Elasa, a place, 1Macc. 9°. 

Elda, land of, Jub. 3°. 

Elder, Sir. 6%4 8%1° 254 32%. See 
Aged. 

Elders, the, P.A. 11; the rulers 
of the stars, 2En. 44; who 
served Ashtaroth, Zad. 7°. 

Eleazar, son of Levi, 1Esd. 87; 
and Joshua, Zad. 7°. 

Eleazar, 1Esd. 84°. 





INDEX 


Eleazar, 1Esd. 8°. 

Eleazar, 1Esd. 9°. 

Eleazar, 1Esd. 9%°, 

Eleazar, a scribe, 2Macc. 63 
(martyred, 618%!) 3Macc. 61 
4Mace. 18 5414 61:572,14,16 71,5,12 
g' 10178; =Taxo, Ass.Mos. 

o'z.; Eleazar, not Judas, the 
true hero in Ass.Mos. § 1. 

Eleazar, an elder, Arist. 50. 

Eleazar, 1Macc. 81”. 

Eleazar, the High Priest of the 
Jews, Arist. 1, 33, 35, 41, 59, 
83, 96, 112, 123, 125,172,173, 
320. 

Eleazar, oldest of Jewish priests, 
present, Arist, 184. 

Eleazar Avaran, a Maccabee, 
1Macc. 25 643; death, 6% ; play 
onname ‘God’s Help’, 2Macc. 
So. 

Eleazar ben Arach, P.A. 210-1518, 

Eleazar ben Azariah, P.A. 371:22. 

Eleazar ben Judah, P.A. 3°. 

Eleazar ben Shammua, P.A. 41°. 

Eleazar ha-Kappar, P.A. 42%?9, 

Eleazar Hisma, P.A. 3°. 

Eleazar the Modiite, P.A. 31°. 

Eleazar. See Jeshua, son of 
Eleazar; Phinehas, son of Ele- 
azare 

Elect, blessings of covenant 
for, 1En. 60°; dwell in gar- 
den of life, 611%, with elect, 
614; God will protect, 18; in 
light of eternal life, 58°; in- 
herit the earth, 1En. 57; light, 
grace, and peace shall be to, 
5’@; live and never again sin, 
58; mansions of, 412; Son of 
Man revealed to, 627; stand 
before Son of Man, 62°; tree 
of life, fruit for, 25°, wisdom 
bestowed on, 58; walk on re- 
newed earth, 1En. 515; of Is- 
rael, Zad.62, share in Messianic 
Kingdom, Jub. 12°; titles and 
attributes of: Elect, 1En. 1°° 
57 258 40° 412 481 51° 568 581-3 
614:126 27.8 932; Elect ones, His, 
1En. 5666211512; Mine, 45° 48°; 
The Elect One (title of Messiah 
peculiar to part of parables, 
40°.) 1En. 40°. 49%4 51% 
5269 538 615,810 621 ; of right- 
eousness and faith, 39°; Mine 
Elect One, 45°34 554; and holy, 
628; and righteous, 1+ 60%; 
of the world, 93!; who hang 
upon the Lord of Spirits, 
40°, see Holy, Righteous; see 
too Messiah; (of children of 
Watchers) and beloved ones, 
56%4; (of Watchers) and holy 
children, 39! ; works, (of right- 
eous), 38%. 

Election, the Divine, Zad. 2°. 
See Foreknowledge, Predes- 
tination. 

Elements, four primal, 4Ez. 
4m, 88x.; interchanged (meta- 
bolism), Wisd. § 9, 1918; wor- 
shipped, 137. 

Elephants=a class of giants, 
1En, 864; in war, 1Macc. 347. 
62472, 2Macc. 114 1377. 157° 
3Macc. 51 &c. 

Eleutherus, river, 1Macc. 117. 
LAY, 

Elew, city, Jub. 3477. 






Eliab, Judith 81. 

Eliadas, 1Esd. 9%, 

Eliali, 1Esd. 934. 

Eliaonias, 1Esd. 8°. 

Eliasib, 1Esd. 9}. 

Kliasibus, 1Esd. 9%. 

Eliasimus, 1 Esd. 98. 

Eliasis, 1Esd. 984. 

Eliezer, Jub. 14%. 

Eliezer ben Hyrcanus, P.A. 
10-14. 

Eliezer ben Jacob, P.A. 4}. 

Elihu, Judith 8}. 

Blijah, 1Macc. 2°58 Sir. 481-1? 
Mart. Is. 21* 1En. 89527. 93% 
Bare 77 * Abia]. 

Elijah, greatness of, in Jewish 
legend, Sir. 484. ; to turn fa- 
thers’ heart to children and to 
restore the tribes of Israel, 48° 

Elim, Jub. 501. 

Elionas, 1Esd. 922. 

Elionas, 1Esd. 9°?. 

Eliphalat, 1Esd. 8%. 

Eliphalat, 1Esd. 9°%. 

Elisha, Sir. 4812-16 Zad. 9?8(A). 

Elisha, an elder, Arist. 47. 

Elisha, an elder, Arist. 48. 

Elisha, an elder, Arist. 50. 

Elisha ben Abuiah, P.A. 4”. 

Eljo, Jub. 772. 

Elkiah, Judith 81. 

Elnathan, 1Esd. 8*. 

Elomeel, 1En. 8214. 

Elon, Jub. 447". 

Elul, month, 1Mace. 14°". 

Elymaeans. See Arioch. 

Elymais, 1Mace. 647. 2Macc. 

115:16.Tob, 21°, 

Emadabun, 1Esd. 5°°. 

Ematheis, 1Esd. 9”. 

Emmaus, 1Macc. 3457 4% 9°. 

Emmer, 1Esd.9”*. _ 

Emmeruth, 1Esd. 5%. 

Emzara, Jub. 4°°. 

Enaim, T.Jud. 121. 

Enasibus, 1Esd. 9**. 

Enchantments, 1En. 71 8°, cf. 

6 

et 4Ez. 68715 733,112 1 282,34, 

see Consummation; of all 

generations, IEn, 10; de- 
scription of, 4Ez. 619—20,28-24 ; 
= destruction of world, 1En. 

102 656, first, 93%; ‘eged, Sir. 

16%; latter, of men manifests 

their character, T.A.64~7 Sir. 

325; man known by latter 

end, 1128; remember last end, 

736; of the age, 4Ez. 12°47. ; 

of the days, 4Ez. 13°? Zad. 

§ 10. iv, 62 81° (see Times); 

sons of Zadok hold office in, 

6", Teacher of Righteousness 

to arise in, 8°; of heaven 

and. earth, 1En. 184, see 

Ends; of heavens, 1En. 39%; 

of man = death, is evil, Sir. 

1812; of the righteous, 1En. 

1029; of time, 2En. 334; of 

ungodly contrasted with 

honoured name of righteous, 

Sir. 415-18; signs of the, Sib. 

3796-808 4 Fz, 451-518 611-28 §03_ 

912; to come through God 

alone, 6. ; visions of, vouch- 

safed to Abraham, 4Ez. 3. 

Endemias, Arist. 49. 

Ends, of all, En. 19%; of earth, 
tEn.15 185 231 3342 341 351 


845 





361 65? 761 1068; of heaven, 
362 549 572 Golls20 714 9312; 
of the seasons, 4Ez. 14°. 

Endurance, Sir. 224, 
Chastening. 

Eneneus, 1Esd. 5°. 

Ennatan, 1Esd. 844. 

Enoch, Sir. 441° 491416 Wisd. 
429 Jub. 41622 738,89 ro17 192427 
2110 rEn, 11:2 121.8 131 1474 152 
19% 2159 261 341 39? Gol 65%8:9 
66% 674 681 6979 801 811 85? 
913.921 93428 106718 1078 1084 
T.S. 54 T.L, 105. 141(8) 1618) 
T.Jud.181@ T.Z. 34) T.D. 
Feud Ne 4 Dabo: mos. 

Enoch, 1 Book of, account, 
short, § 1; bibliography, § 12; 
canonicity, § 3; different ele- 
ments in, and their dates, §§ 6, 
7; influence on (@) Jewish, 
(0) N.T., (©) Patristic litera- 
ture, § 10, on N.T. doctrine, 
§ 11; MSS., Ethiopic, § 4; 
original language’ of 6-36 
Aramaic, of 1-5, 37-104 
Hebrew, § 9; poetical element 
in, § 8; title, § 2; Versions, 
Ancient—Greek, Latin, Ethio- 
pic, §5; Sections—I, 1-36; II, 
37-713 IL, 72-82; IV, 83-90; 
V, 9i-104; additional frag- 
ments, 105-8; appendix, 108. 

Enoch, Hebrew Book of, 2En. 
§§ I, 4. 

Enoch, 2 Book of, account, short, 
§ 1; authorship, § 5; biblio- 
graphy, § 8; date, § 5; lan- 
guage, § 3; place of writing, 
§ 3; relation to Jewish and 
Christian literature, § 4; value 
for religious thought, § 7 ; 
Versions, two Slavonic, § 2; 
views on creation, anthropo- 
logy, and ethics, §6; 2 Book 
of .cites Sirach, Sir. § 7 (4); 
relation of 3Baruch to, 3Bar. 


See 


Enoch, admonition of, to his 
children, 2En. 391-515 54-63 
651-668; ascent of,into heavens, 
2En. 3!-218 681; conducted to 
Garden of Eden, Jub. 4°; early 
removal from the world,a bless- 
ing, Wisd. 41°; figure of, in apo- 
calyptic, Sir. 4416. ; foretold 
the future, Jub. 41°; functions 
of, transferred to Moses, 2Bar. 
1337. 59° “.; heavenly scribe, 
Jub. 42°; knows wisdom, Jub. 
417; led by Michael before 
the Lord’s face, 2En. 221; lives 
on earth thirty days to give 
instruction, 2En. 3642; miracle 
of knowledge (ov an example 
of repentance) to all genera- 
tions, Sir. 44'%.; recounted 
weeks of jubilees and Sabbaths 
of years, Jub. 418; the scribe, 
1En. 12%, of God’s works, 
2En, 23)~* 68%, of men’s deeds, 
2En. 4017. 537 64°; scribe of 
righteousness, 1En. 12* 15); 
testified to sons of men, Jub. 
418, to Watchers, Jub. 4°; 
translation of, in a vision, 1En. 
14%, in sleep, 1En. 1371 147, 
in reality, 1En. 39° 521 (cf. 
‘hidden’ 121), final(‘name raised 
aloft’), 70! 2En. 67? 68%, in 


spirit, 1En, 71455; was with 
angels of God six jubilees of 
years, Jub. 474; words of, Jub. 
211° rEn. § 2; writes signs of 
heaven, Jub. 417. 

Enoch, Cain’s son, Jub. 4°. 
Enoch, Reuben’s son, Jub. 388 

12 

Enos, Jub. 44518 1974 1En, 341 
2En. 331°. 

Envy, warning against, T.S. 3} 
G2 Gabe curesof lS. 
34° 47 T.G. 53; evils of, T.S. 
37-5 48; not to, another’s 
prosperity, T.G. 71-?. See Eye. 

Ephesus, Sib. 3248:459 5 293,296, 

Ephraim, Judith 6? Sir. 4721.28 
Zad. 9°; departed from Judah, 
9°[94] 161, 

Ephrath = Bethlehem, Jub. 3234 
TRANS oes 

Ephron, city, taken by Judas 
M., 1Macc. 546; siege of, 
2Mace, 1277 sg. 

Ephron the Hittite, Jub. 362. 


Epicurean, P.A. 218; tenets, 
Wisd. 247, 

Epicureanism, Sir. § 1. 
Epiphanius, relation of his 


account of LXX Translation 
to Aristeas’s Letter, Arist. 
§ 9(B). 

Epiphany of God, 3Macc. 5851, 
See Theophanies, 

Epiphi(s), month, 3Macc. 638, 

Epistle to Two and a Half 
Tribes. See Tribes. 

Epitaph suggested for martyrs, 
4Macc. 17°. 

Er, Jub. 4143 4454 T. Jud. 1ch?, 

Erae, 1En. 782, 

Erasmus, 4Macc. § 8. 

Eretria, Arist. 201. 

Eri, Jub. 442 

Eridanus, Sib. 5316, 

Ermis. See Hermes. 

Ermon, 2En. 184. See Hermon. 

Ermon = Heroonpolis, Jub. 46°. 

‘Erub, Pharisaic principle of, 
Zad. § 94°. 

Erythraean Sea, 1En. 322. 

Erythraean Sibyl, Sib. § 6, 
397-204, 

Esarhaddon, Tob, 121;22 21, See 
Sarhadum, Asbasareth. 

Esau, Jub, 1529 1912-16,19,31 2 43, 
4,6,7 261 261,3-5,8,11,16,18,19,25,27, 
29,31-$3,85 941,2,8 2013,17,18 41 
35%18,)17,18,25-27 361,14,18,19 341, 
ESPG1S 282 ud Oke aGe Ge 
T.B. 1019 4Kz. 316 689, see 
Edom; and Jacob to love one 
another, Jub. 3520-24 263-4. 
wars between, 371-38%4; = 
black wild boar, 1:En. Sous: 
children of, 1Macc. 53:6 Judith 
7°18; slain by Jacob, Jub. 38? 
T. Jud. 93; sons of, their sins 
foreseen by Isaac, Jub. 3518-16; 
symbolizes present corrupt 
age, 4Ez, 67-10,, 

Esau (one of Nethinim), 1Esd. 


Face pictures, Sib. 

Eschatology of Tobit, Tob. 
§ 10A (3), of Wisd. § 1, 1-68, 
of Zad. 92°, 

Eschlemias, Arist. 47. 

Eschol, Jub. 1379, 











INDEX 


Esdrae, Confessio. See Con- 
fessio. 

Esdraelon, plain of, Judith 19 
3° 48 7%. 

Esdras, i.e. Ezra, 1Esd. 8123578; 
9,19,28,25,91,92,96 ¢1,7,16,39,40,42,45, 
46,49 ; priest and reader of the 
law of the Lord, 1Esd. 88:9:19, 

Esdras, 1 Book of—sources, 
1Ksd. § 6: (a) Sheshbazzar— 
Cyrus Tradition, (6) Zerub- 
babel—Darius Tradition, (c) 
(a) and (4) combined, (@) Ezra 
story; title, rEsd. § 2: (1) 
1 Esdras, (2) 2 Esdras, (3) 
3 Esdras,(4)3 Paraleipomenon, 
(5) Tertius Neemiae ; an inde- 
pendent version older than 
LXX of Canonical books of 
Ezra and Nehemiah, § 2; value 
of, 1Esd, § 7: (1) light on con- 
temporary thought, (2) help to 
criticism of canonical books. 

Esdris, 2Macc. 123%, 

Eserebias, 1Esd. 854. 

Eshfagni, Abikar’s wife, Ah, 
4%8 63:5 (Syr.). See Abestan. 

Essenes, 1En. 1087. Ass.Mos 
§ 8. See Zadokite Party. 

Essenism, Sib. 427 4Ez. 1439. 

Esther, Add. Esth. C12 D® E18 
F*; additions to: author, § 5, 
F11; bibliography, § 8; cha- 
racter of, § 1; date of, § 4, F"; 
influence on later literature, 
§ 6; MSS., § 2; theology, §7; 
versions, § 3; appearance be- 
fore king, Add. Esth, D115; 
Canonical, discrepancies be- 
tween Add. Esth. and, Add. 
Esth. § 1; deliverance of Jews 
in time of, 2Bar. 6823; Fast 
of, 1Macc. 74°7,; mourning 
and fasting of, Add.Esth, C13; 
prayer of, C12-30, 

Esyelus, ruler of the temple, 
1Ksd, 18, 

Eternal, destruction, 1En. 845; 
goodness and grace, 928; 
hope, Jub. 31°2; house= tomb, 
36°; judgement, 1En. 9135, cf, 
91°; King, see God; land = 
Palestine, Sib. 541; law, 1En. 
99%; life, 1019 1548 374 4o9 
Bor Cle Sty. see lifes sin 
light of the Lord, Ps. Sol. 
375; according to God, 4Macec. 
15°; for martyrs, 597 1718 
18%, see Patriarchs sy light, 
1En. 924; place (= heaven), 
12*; plant, 93!, see Plant; 
punishment, 2En. 10° 4Mace. 
99:82 1oM515 7128 7 912 7315 755,22 
(fire and worms, Judith 1617) ; 
rest = Geath, Sir. 3017; sanc- 
tuary, not at Bethel, Jub. 
3272; seed, 1En. 84°; sleep, 
Jab, 3618; uprightness, 1En. 
92 


Eternity, life of, Zad. 5° [years 
ot, 22) 

Ethical teaching of 2Enoch ) 
2En. § 6. 

Ethiopia, Judith 11° Add. Esth. 
B! Et Sib, 3320, 

Ethiopian, Sib, 52%, 

Ethiopians, Arist. 13 Sib. 3160, 
208,518 5206,213,505 ; — hyenas in 
1En, 89°, 

Etna, Sib, 481, 





Euergetes II, Physcon, Sir. § 6 
ii (6). , 
Euergetes, king of Egypt, Sir., 

Prologue 15. 

Euhemerism, Arist. § 6. 

Eumenes II of Pergamos, 
1Macc. 8°. 

Kuna, T.N. 111, 

Eunuch, Wisd. 314. 

Eupator. See Antiochus V. 

Euphrates, 1Esd. 17527 ;Macc. 
3°87 Judith 16 274 Sir. 2426; 
=the River, Sir, 3972 4421 
Tub. 94:5 rEn. 775. Sib. 461, 
120,189" =115,487, 2 Bar, 7922 781, 

Eupolemus, son of John, son 
of Accos, 1Macc. 817; envoy 
to Romans, 2Macc. 41. 

Enrope, Sib. 324,368,382,450 41, 

Europus, river, Sib. 314, 

Eusebius, Sir. § 8. 

Eve, Tob. 8° Jub. 335 419 A. & 
E, 22 328 42/51 6! 71 ol 10h 
111 181 201-5 2142 221,8,4 241 
35278 361 37% 38h? 438 445 46 
491. 50° S.A. & E. 28? 3512 
38? 40! Apoc. Mos, 11-3 21 
3° 4h? 928 10h? 111 131 1412 
151 172 311 3254 321 341 
36? 42%4 431 2En. 3018 4Macc. 
1878; created and brought to 
Adam, Jub. 34-4, see Adam; 
history of, 1En. 853-7; led 
astray by a Satan, 1En. 60°; 
originated sin and death, Sir. 
2574; seduced by Satan, 2En. 
31°, see Adam; sins, Jub. 37-29, 

Eve, Gospel of, A. & E. § 5%. 

Eves of Sabbaths, observed, 
Judith 8°, 

Evil, 1En. 10! 1589 163 6929 
94° 99" 101! 103° 1082; germ, 
4Ez. 3%; heart of Adam, 4Ez. 
371; of descendants, 3202.26; 
in heaven, 2En. 10!~7,; prin- 
ciple, P.A. 215 41,29; seed, 
grain of, 4Ez. 459; thought 
innate in man, 7%, see Inclina- 
tion, Yetzer; spirits and idols, 
Jub. 221%%.; spirits flee from 
good men, T.Iss. 77 T.D. 5! 
T.B. 5?, see Beliar; to be over- 
come with good, T.Jos. 18? 
T.B.4° ; to perish, Sir. 4010-17 , 
worst forms of, Sir. 2513-15. of 
wicked woman, 2516-26, 

Evils of men, P.Man, 47. 

Exalted, abased, Sir. 11°, 

Example of the martyrs, effect 
of, 4Mace. 11 172359, 

Excommunication, Zad. 928-38 ; 
= ‘exclude from the Purity’, 
108; = ‘be watched seven 
years’, 14°, 

Exile’s prayer, Tob, 131-18, 

Existent created from non- 
existent, 2En. 24? 251, 

Exodus, Jub. 11 Ass. Mos. 14, 
See Egypt. 

Explanation, of the Zadokite 
settlement, Zad. 188; of the 
judgements, Zad. 187, See 
Interpretation, Meaning, Mid- 
rash, 

External soul. See Soul. 

Eye, cause of sin, Sir. 31147. ; 
envious, Sir. 148-10, good, 
Sir. 141°; lustful glance of, 
T.R. 53 T.Iss. 72 T.B, (2 
singleness of, T.Iss. 34, 


846 








Ezbon, Jub. 44”. 

Ezekiah, Arist. 47. 

Ezekiah, Arist. 47. 

Ezekias, 1Esd. 51°. 

Ezekias, son of Thocanus, rEsd. 
4 


Ezekias, 1Esd. 9*°. 

Ezekiel, Sir. 49% 4Macc. 1817 
Zad. 5° 9/18). Sve Faithful. 

Ezekiel, an elder, Arist. 50. 

Ezeqeel, 1En. 67 8%. 

Ezora, 1Esd. 9%4, 

Ezra, 1En. 89727. 4Ez. [31] 61° 
77,25 82 1 42,88,49 see Esdras; 
omitted from Sirach’s list of 
worthies in Sir. 44-48, Sir. § 4. 

— in 1 Esdras, companions of, 
878-40; reading of Law by, 
§1 g°"-%, see 1 Esdras, sources 
of; return of, §§ 1, 4, 6, 81; 
work of, 81-948, 

— in 4Ezra, assumption of, to 
be with God’s Son, till times 
be ended, 4Ez. 1472. 149; five 
companions of, 4Ez, 1424; = 
scribe of the knowledge of the 
Most High for ever, 4Ez. 
14°°%. ; translation of, to 
Messiah ,4Ez.147.; writings of, 
twenty-four published books, 
= O.T. 4Ez. 144. ; seventy 
secret = Apocrypha, 4Ez. 
14*% 7. 147. 

Ezra, 4 Book of, abbreviations 
employed, § 12; account, 
short, § 1; bibliography, § 12 ; 
composite nature of text, §6; 
date, § 8, 1448. ; Eschatology, 
§ 10; Greek text of, lost, § 4; 
Hebrew original, § 5; relation 
of to 1Enoch, 1En. § 10(a) ; 
to 2Baruch—each the work of 
a rival school, using similar 
sources, 4Ez. § 9 2Bar. § ©; to 
N.T.—no direct dependence, 
but resemblances in thought 
and diction, § 11; sources, 
SY Tipe, Che Salathiel- A poca- 
lypse; Eagle Vision; Son of 
Man Vision; Ezra Legend; 
Ezra Apocalypse (signs) ; text, 
Hebrew original, § 5, com- 
posite character of, §6; theo- 
logy of, §10; title, §2; ver- 
sions, Arabic (two), Armenian, 
Ethiopic, Syriac, Latin, § 3 
Greek lost, § 4. 

Ezra-Apocalypse. 
4 Book of. 

Ezril, 1Esd. 934. 


See Ezra, . 


Face, of Elect One, rEn. 619 
627; of God, 14?! 529 532 63? 
84° 872,276,380 ro34 of Appear- 
ance 89°; Presence, 845 go*, 

Faces of Angels, 1En. Eley 

Factions. See Jewish. 

Faith, 1En. 39%, 434 58° 614,11 
aBar. 54217. Zad. 981 47,58 
religious faith, 4Macc. 1 ec: 
177; and works combined ‘as 
complementary, 4Ez, 97:8 1323; 
= faithfulness to law, 5! 65:28 
747,; Elect One of, "305: 
heritage of, 585: measures 
given to, 614; spirit of, 611, 
See Messiah, Works. 

Faithful, 1En. 468; confess sins, 
are forgiven and blessed, Zad. 
9°°- 54; God confirms covenant 


with, through fresh revelations, 
Zad. 51-3; through Ezekiel, 5°". 

Faithfulness to God, Sir. 2!-°. 

Faithless, delivered to thesword, 
Zad. 9*1® woes against, Sir. 
gl2—14" 

Fall, teaching concerning, 3Bar. 
§10, 3. 

Fara, Jub. 8%". 

Fast, the, Zad. 815, 

Fasting, Tob. § 10B T.R. 11° 
elSiege ke Judean saeto7s) Lass: 
7° T.Jos. 34, see Prayer; and 
adultery, T.A. 2° 4; and chas- 
tity, T.Jos. 9?; and prayer 
and obedience bring answers 
to petitions, Ah. 24° (Arm.); 
atonement by, see Atonement ; 

- forbidden on Sabbath, Zad. 
one 
Fasts, 2Bar. 577. 9?7.; of seven 
days, 4Ez. 31 Jutro. n. 53°; 
four fasts followed by revela- 
font 4 Biz. 5201685 -g 26.27 oP. 
Fates, the three, Sib. 5215:280,245, 

Father, God will he, of israel, 
Jub. 1%, see Children (cf. 
P.A. 319 Wisd, 18°; of right- 
eous individual, Sir. 231, cf. 
Wisd. 216); in heaven, P.A. 
5°. See God, titles of. 
Fatherhood of God, Sir. § gi. 
Fathers of old, praise of, Sir. 

41-18; of Enoch and Noah, 
4416-18; Abraham, Isazc, and 
Jacob, 441-98; Moses, 447% 
Wel Aaron, 45°22 >) Phine- 
has, 4578-6 ; Joshua and Caleb, 
A620 judges; the, 461112 ; 
Samuel, 4615-*°; David, 471-1; 
Solomon. 24707027: “lijah;, 

gi-2; Elisha, 4812-16; Heze- 
kiah and Isaiah, 4817~*; Josiah, 
4g!-* ; Jeremiah, 497; Ezekiel, 
Job, and Twelve Prophets, Sir. 
8-10; Zerubbabel, Joshua 
son of Josedech, and Nehemiah, 

49-18; Enoch, Joseph, Shem, 
Seth, Enoch, and Adam,494"1°. 

Fear, defined, Wisd.1712; of God, 
Arist. 159, 189 T.B. 3°4, see 
Love to God, Wisdom; of the 
Lord, greatest good of all, 
SicsAo rec": is lifes 507°5* is 
true wisdom, 111-®° 2111; the 
Lord, those who, are blessed, 
27-11, characteristics of, 21-18, 
none greater than, 10%; of sin, 
[See age oe 
Feast, a, ordained by Simon the 
Maccabee, 1Macc. 135%, see 
Tabernacles; of Tabernacles, 
Jub. § 15, 16°; of Weeks, Jub. 
§ 15; 61". 

Feasts, Zad. 81°; profane the, 
148; and covenant, despising 
of, P.A. 318, see Minim; and 
eves kept by Judith, see 
Pharisaic teaching; the four 
great, Jub. 6754. 

Fence for Torah, P.A. 13; 
for words, 6°; for separation, 
wisdom, 3}8. 

Festivals, and Sabbaths recog- 
nized by Demetrius I, 1Macc. 
10%; to be kept, 2Bar. 84°; 
commemorative, of Jews, Add. 
Esth. 1,22 ; of God’s covenant, 
Jub. 33414; God’s glorious, 
Zad. 52; Maccabaean, bond of 





INDEX 


union between Jews of Pa- 
lestine and Egypt, 2Macc. § 3; 
institution of, 3Macc. 6°° 719, 
cf. 2Macc. § 3 and see Feast; 
true order of, Jub. 6°4. 

Fewness of saved, 4Ez. 745-74 
§8 gi8-22, 

Fig-tree, unfruitful, parable of. 
parallel idea to, in Ah. &% 
(Syr.). 

Filial duty and its reward, Sir. 
31-16, 

Hine; BE roo Ate tld, 2ae 12 
217 397 541 712-6 724 go%M,26 
91° 10c° 108%; Angel or Spirit 
of, see Angel; abyss of, 1En. 
tcl8 &c., see Abyss, Ge- 
henna; columns of, 1En. 184 
217 go**; flames of, 711.727 
103° 10845; furnace of, 98°; 
mountain range of, 241; pillar 
of, Wisd. 18%; river of, 1En. 
175; streams of, 14!° 175 677 
71%; eternal, for drunkards, 
3Bar. 41°; ever-burning, 1En. 
6718 ; grievous, 1021; of West, 
17* 23”; and worms for ever, 
Judith 1617; and the worm, 
Sir. 71%. ; Beliar cast into, 
T.Jud. 25°; the final abode of 
the wicked, 2Bar. 441572. 489.48 
592z.; of the altar, hidden till 
Nehemiah came, 2Macc. 11536; 
Jeremiah, prophet, bids the 
captivity take some of fire, 27; 
snow and ice, T.L.3” ; ungodly 
punished in, Sib. 4# 2En, 
101-6 4Macc. 9° 1232. 
Firmament, 1En. 18?)!?. 
Firstborn, death of, Wisd. 181°. 

First-fruits, feast of,celebrated by 
Abraham, Jub. 1512; by Abra- 
ham, Isaac, Ishmael,and Jacob, 
Jub. 221: by Jacob before 
going to Egypt, Jub. 44*; and 
tithes, Judith 114. 

Five possessions of God, P.A. 
Gu. 

Flavian Emperors, 4Ez. 11 
PRT Te 
Hleshs lng 7 Ore) sn oer 6) 
17° 6112 846 10617 108" Zad. 38, 
see Inclination; and blood, 
Sir. 14287. 1781 1En. 154; of 
man, 84%°; of righteousness, 
84°. 

Flint, use of, 2Macc. 10%. 

Flood, the, 3Macc. 24 Sir. 4417 
Wisd. 104 Jub. 519% 23° 4Ez. 

1s 

Fool = guileless, is 
sins, Sir. 197%. 

Foolish, wisdom harsh to, Sir. 
620-22; warming against asso- 
ciating with, 5*; how differs 
from wise, 2112-17188; futi- 
lity of, 2014-17 227-38 23 (36%; 
speech of, 200 2711-18. 
Forbidden meats, 4Macc. 1°° 
53,1459. 132, See Clean. 
Forced service, P.A. 31%. 
Forehead. See Mark. 
Foreknowledge of God, 4Ez. 
7182 Zad. 2°, See Election. 

Foresight, need of, in men, Sir. 
1819-26, 

Forethought, need of, Sir. 32 
(38)! 33(36)!. 

Forgetfulness, P.A. 341. 

Forgive, Zad. 55. See Pardon. 


1, 


without 














Forgiveness, P.Man. 7 1En. 5° 
12° 13*%; count not upon, Sir. 
5°, see Atonement, Confession; 
duty of, Sir. 2789-287; of God, 
L637 22) 18 ste 2Or tors the 
repentant, Zad. 2°, see Pardon; 
of God, a reason for forgive- 
ness of man, Ah, &4 (Syr.) 
§*4 (Arm.); of thy neighbour, 
Sir. 28%72,; essential, includes 
restoration to communion, in 
Mest; and IN-T, West Sarr, 
Sera le GraiGea ss Godicymor 
man, T.G, 75. 

Fornication. Zad. 3? 61! 71 915, 
iG eye IR (GEN IDS Je 
danger of, Sir. 9° 197; evils of, 
ADI 7 Wet ADS TS ADSI fi foley wit 
151-2 187%; in taking two 
wives, Zad. 71, see Polygamy; 
punishment of fire for, Jub. 
ote warnings against, T.R. 5° 

Forty days of instruction, 2Bar. 
76%, cf. 4Ez. 1479. 

Foundations of the Covenant. 
See Ordinances. 

Fountain, figurative, of life, 
1En. 96°; of the righteous 
and holy, 65/2; of righteous- 
ness, 481; of wisdom, 481. 

— literal, beneath the earth, 
1En. 54”; opened, 89°; pro- 
duces lead and tin, 65°. See 
Spring. 

Four types of men, P.A. 51948. 

Foxes = Ammonites in 1 En. 
8.942,55, 

Free-will, Sir: 154-20 2021-28 
Bar salO nen oOres | boAG 

19; and fate, 2Bar. 541519; 
co-ordinated with foreknow- 
ledge of God, P.A. 31%; 
doctrine of, in Sirach, Sir. 
§giv; in 2 Bar. § 10 1872. 
54257.; implied, Zad. §§ 91°13, 
1 42,10, see Will; man’s, 
2En. 3017. Ps. Sol. 9’. 

Freedom offered to informers, 
3Macc. 378. 

Friend, chaber, Sir.617.; (court 
title), 1Macc. 218 1016,19,20,60,65 
112657 243 1336 1498 1528 
aMacc. 772 8? 10! 142! “Add. 
Esth. Ez. Arist. 4572.; bosom 
friend, 9%%; chief friends, 
1Macc. 10% 1127; duty to, Sir. 
718 910 2219-26; of God, used of 
Abraham, Jub. 19°. See Abra- 
ham, Isaac. 

Friends of God, Wisd. 7277. 

Friendship, true and false, Sir. 
65-17 128; rules as to making, 
gi0-16 7129-34 129-131; how 
dissolved, 2219-8; good and 
bad, 373°. 

Fruit, laws about, Jub. 7°%97, 

[Furnace, the man who is melted 
in the, Zad. 9°.] 

Future life, Wisd. 31; belief in 
a blessed, Zad. §§ 9° 13, 5°7.; 
conception of, developing in 
Sirach, Sir. 71%%.; idea of, 
absent in, 11787. 172%8; life 
continues in name, 39? 414.3%, 
see Spirit; no reference to in 
Add.Esth. § 7; of righteous, 
inconsistent views of in Wis- 
dom, Wisd. § 9. See Life. 

Future punishment, Sir. 5° 777 7. 


847 











1176 281; eternal, Judith 1627 : 
for ungodly, decay, Sir. 717 
(later ‘fire and worm’, 4177.). 
See Eternal punishment. 


Gaas or Gaash, Jub. 3447 T. 
Jud. 73. 

Gabadaeans, Arabians, 1Macc. 
L2ee 

GabaeleWob: 112443200 5 esc? 
10%, 

Gabatha, eunuch, Add. Esth. 
Ae 

Gabbe, 1Esd. 57°. 

Gabri, Tob, 114 47°. 

Gabriel, Apoc. Mos. 40! 1En. g! 
109 207 40° 54%, see Angels, 
Archangels ; sent to Enoch, 
2En. 2155; seated on left of 
God, 2En. 241. 

Gad, Jub. 2820 3322 365 4419,20 
ANOING Ges Walsh, Foes GAH ol pa 
Aissa5ol. Zo) sere Gere 
TAN 7° 3 exploits, of. l-Gane. 

Gaddis. See John. 

Gadir, Jub. 879.6 go}, 

Gadreel, a Satan, 1En. 69°. 

Gaia, Sib, 311,122, 

Gaidad, 2En. 12. 572. 

Gains, unrighteous, Sir. 5°, cf. 
1En. 631°. 

Gait shows the man, Sir. 19°9. 

Galatians, 1Macc.8? Sib. 34% 
509,599 5340 - battle of, in Baby- 
lonia, 2Macc. 87°. 

Galilee, 1Macc. 524)15;17,20,21,28,55 
10689 1168 724749 Tob. 15 Judith 
19 15°; of Gentiles, 1Macc. 
515; upper, Tob. 17. 

Gall, Tob. 6°; the, T.N. 28. 

Gamael, 1Esd. 8°. 

Gamaliel I, P.A. 11°. 

Gamaliel III, P.A. 2”. 

Garden (i.e. Eden), Jub. 8” 
1En. 6112; of Eden. 2En. 8°. 
3148, see Eden; of Right- 
eousness, 1En. 32° 77°; of the 
Righteous, tEr. 607%; where 
the elect and righteous dwell, 
TEn. 60% 6112, cf. 65? 70 89°. 
See also Paradise. 

Garment of truth, T.L. 8?. 

Garments, Tob. 41°; cleansing 
of, Zad.131?; law of, Jub. 390-31; 
of God’s glory, 2En. 225, cf. 
1En. 621°; of life, 621° cf. 
108!2; white, 711. 

Gas, name, 1Esd. 5%. 

Gathering of Israel, 4Ez. 13127. 
40-48, See Dispersed. 

Gauls, Sib. 52%. 

Gaza, 1Macc. 11°1:62 Sib, 3345 
Arist. 115, 117. 

Gazara, near Azotus, 1Macc. 
745 52 1 343,53 7 4734 7528,85 161, 
19,21; a stronghold ( = Gezer or 
Jazer ?), 2Macc. 10%%z, 

Gazera, 1Esd. 5°! 1Mace. 4). 
See Gazara. 

Geba, Judith 3°. 

Gebal, T.L. 61. 

Gedaliah, 2Bar. 5°7. 441. 

Geddur, 1Esd. 5°°. 

Gehazi, Zad. 9”. 

Gehenna, Ass. Mos. 10!9 2Bar. 
591° P.A. 15 57224; furnace of, 
4Ez. 7°°; in view of righteous 
in heaven, Ass.Mos. 101. ; 
inherit, P.A.15; (1) place. of 


corporal and spiritual punish- 
ment in the presence of the 
righteous (a) for ever, 1En. 
27738 go%,27,(5) for a time only, 
1En. 48° 623238, i.e. in 37-70 
(Parables); (2)place of spiritual 
punishment only, 1En, 98%, cf. 
1038, i.e. in 91-104 (Section 
V). See also Abyss, Fire, 
Punishment, Sheol, Valley. 

Gel, 3Bar. Pro. 2. 

Gemarias of Mount Joel, Mart. 
lig > 

Genizah fragments of Sirach, 
Sir. § 3(@). 

Gennaeus. See Apollonius. 

Gennesar, waters of, 1Macc. 
Tye l 72: 

Gentile nations, seventy, Jub. 
4454 Test. App. 1 8°. 

Gentiles, 1Esd. 8° 1Macc. 113 
14,15 240,44,48,68 910,45,$8,52,58 47, 
11,14,26,45,54,58,60 (-1,9,10,19, 21, 22,38, 
48,57,08 618,53 723 7138 1 253 136 
1486 Tob. 138 2Macc. 143,38 
Judith 822 Jub. 1913,15,19 431 635 
1594 1617 279,24 9498 go11,13,14 
gitea44s4 TS. 72) TL. gt git 
9! rot 141:8a),46 p51 165 189 
TD. Jud. 227 2325 24° T. Iss, 62 
eZ, 9%8edg) T.D. 558 679 
AGING BE 7 es iN 
T.Jos. 191! T.B. 38 924 105:9,10 
Ass. Mos. 49 8% 10? 4Macc. 
411 18°; boasting of, 2Bar. 5} 
71 677°". 803; bread of, 
Tob. 17%11; conversion of, 
1En. 507 > go*%, 9114; customs 
of, 1Macc. 1%; destiny of, 
2Bar. 72* x, ; feasts of, Jub. 
6°; hope for, no, in final 
judgement, Jub. § 15; inter- 
marriage forbidden, = fornica- 
tion or giving to Moloch, Jub. 
30'z.; Israel will walk after, 
Jub. 1°, be scattered amongst, 
138, will turn to God from 
amongst, 11°, God will gather 
from, 1%; kings of, Zad. 9?9; 
no clean animal or bird to be 
sold to, Zad. 14°; no Israelite 
to be sold to, 1414; no man to 
rest near, on Sabbath, 13%; 
ordinances of, Zad. 101; to be 
saved, T.L. 4* (8!42) 189 T. 
Jud. 22? 248 T.Z. 984) T.D. 
ODEN. 85a) ei Aes [balios: 
191 T.B. 38] 9? [94] 10520 
[1128]; shedding blood of, 
Zad. 14"; the Son of Man, the 
light of, 1En.48*, spirits placed 
inauthority over,to lead astray, 
Jub. 15% (contrast Israel); = 
wild beasts, 1 En. 85-goz. 

Geometry, P.A, 32%. 

Gera, Jub. 44%, 

Gerar, 2Macc. 13°47. Jub. 162° 
2.48312,17,19 

Gericus, 3Bar. 47. 

Gerizim, 2Macc. 58 62, 

Gersam, T.L. 112 121, 

Gershon, Jub. 4414 Test. 4f/.1I 
63,74. See Gersam. 

Gerson, 1Esd. 879, 

Giants, 3Macc. 24%. 36 S9q. 
Judith 167 Sir. 16%. Wisd. 14° 
1Bar. 376, Jub. 51722, see Eljo; 
1 En. 7%4 99 158,11 161, cf, 864 
88? ; judgement of the, Jub. 20°, 

Gidaijal, 1En. 829, 








INDEX 


Gideon, Judith 8}. 

Gifts blind the eyes of wise, 
Sir. 2079, 

Gihon, Sir. 2427 (?= Nile 2427.) 
Jub. §15,22,23, 

Gilead, 1Macc.  59:17,20,26,27,36, 
40,05 1322 Judith 18 155 Jub. 
2945.79.12, see Witness, heap 
of; Mart. Is. 214. 

Gilgal, 1Macc. 92x. 

Gilgamesh epic, quoted, Sir. § 1. 

Girdle, T.L. 87 T.Jud. 124 153. 

Girgashites, Judith 516 Jub. 1418. 

Giving, right spirit in, Sir. 
1815-18 ; to evil, to be avoided, 
125% See Almsgiving. 

Glaphyra, Zad. § 6 ii.(c)z. 

Glory, garments of. See Gar- 
ments; of God, Tob. 31° Zad. 
8% 94; of the Great One, 
1En. 1041; of the Lord, Tob. 
121215; of man, Zad. 4°; the 
Great, 1En. 14”, 1028 T.L. 34. 
See God, titles of. 

Gnostic literature, influence of 
1 Enoch on, 1En. § 10(c). 

Gnostos, father of Sibyl, Sib. 384. 
God, acknowledged by heathen, 
Wisd, 1277; all things in hand 
of, Sir. 1114-88; alone brings 
in End, 4Ez. 5°%6° x., judges, 
793,87,88 ; and His ministers, 
duty to, Sir. 729-81; author of 
beauty, Wisd. 133; cause of 
sin, Sir. 15%7.; covenant of, 
Zad. 4° 712 821 941 16732 + doc- 
trine of, Sir. §gi—one,Creator, 
eternal, holy, God of Israel, 
of world, Father; Father of 
Israel, loves them, Jub. 12425; 
scatters them among Gentiles, 
Jub. 118; gathers from amongst, 
145; will descend and dwell 
with them for ever, 117,26, 
will appear to eyes of. all, 
18; Father of all children 
of Jacob, Jub. 1% ; first coming 
of, to earth, 2En. 581, second, 
3212.; friends of, Zad. 43, 
see Friend; giver of souls, 
4Macc. 1318 18%8; glory of, 
Zad. 94°, see Glory of God; 
greatness of, Sir. 1617-28 181-14, 
help of, see Eleazar; Himself 
as Judge, Sib. § 8; holy spirit 
of, Wisd. 917; knowledge of, is 
immortality, 153; love of, 1124 
Zad. 9%, to His creatures 
transcends man’s, 4Ez. 5537, 
847; mercy of, Sir, 181-14, 
name of, not mentioned in 
I Mace., see § 5; rules the 
world, Sir. 10%, the individual, 
10°; search for, Wisd. 13°; 
praise of, as Nature’s Lord, 
Sir, 4215-4333, His might, 
432-8. transcendence of, in 
Tobit, § 10; will dwell with 
men, 1En, 25° 7741En.g1-104; 
wrath of, Ass. Mos. 10% Zad, 
117 47 9?2,40-4 114, see Wrath; 
of peace, T.D. 5; of the right- 
eous, P.Man. 8. 

Gop, names and titles of: 
Adversary, the, P.A. 429; All 
might and all power, who has, 
3Macc. 6"; All-King, Sir. 
50%; All-seeing God, 2Macc. 
9°; and Saviour, Add. Esth. 
D*; All-surveying God, E%, 


848 





see Beholds; —All-power- 
ful Lord, 2Macc. 32%:30; and 
merciful God, A. & E.271; 
All-wise God, the, 4Macc. 12; 
Almighty, 1Esd. 94 2Macc. 

520 88 Qi1,24 158,92 >Macc, 2%8 
68 Sib. Frag. 18 3Bar. 13; 
Almighty God, 2Macc. 7° 818 
3Macc. 6? Arist. 18, 19, 45, 
139, 168, 184 Sib. 3%; living 
God of heaven, 3Macc. 6% ; 
Lord, 57 Judith 151° 16°; 
Alone exists from age to 
age, Sib. Frag. 11°; Arrays 
Himself against a_ king, 
2Macc. 144; Artificer, the, 
Wisd. 131; Author of all good 
things, Arist. 205. 

Beauty, first Author of, Wisd. 
133 ; Beginnings of the ages 
serve, whose word, 2Bar. 548; 
Beholds allthings,who, 2Macc. 
1272 2Macc, 271, see All-see- 
ing ; Beholds the depths, Azar. 
32; Benefactor of the whole 
world, Arist. 210, cf. 281; 
Blessed for ever, He who is, 
1En. 771; Blessed Heavenly 
One, Sib. 31; Bountiful, 4 z. 
7136; Breathed into man a 
vital spirit, that, Wisd. 1511; 
Brought you (Israel) up, that, 
1Bar. 48; Brought us (Israel) 
up out of Egypt, who, 2Bar. 
75%; Brought these plagues 
upon you (Israel), that, 1Bar. 
478,27,29 ; Buildeth His city and 
His sanctuary, Sir. 5112vii, 

Called thee (Jerusalem) by 
name, that, 1 Bar. 48°; Called 
from the beginning of the 
world that which did not yet 
exist, that has, 2Bar. 214; 
Careth for all, Wisd. 1218; 
Causes the rain and dew to 
descend, who, Jub. 124; Causes 
the drops of rain to rain by 
number on the earth, who, 
2Bar. 218; Chambers are in 
the air, whose, 4Ez.82°; Cham- 
pion (of Jews), 2Macce. 8%, see 
Fighteth ; Cherubim, that sits 
upon, Azar. 32, who has, as 
throne, Sib. 31; Chief of 
all, 57%499 ; Chose sons of 
Zadok for the priesthood, 
that, Sir. 5112* ; Chose Zion, 
that, 5142x111; Commanded 
the air by Thy nod, that has, 
2Bar. 215; Commandment is 
strong and enactment terrible, 
whose, AD, 88 ; Compassion- 
ate, 782; Created, who, 2Bar. 
1ol9; all things, 3Macc. 
2°; everything by His word, 
Jub.12*; heaven and earth, 
the God who, Bels; and all 
things, who, Jub. 736 367 2En, 
66 Preface; me, 2Bar. 549; us 
(Israel) 78; the world out of 
formless matter, Wisd, rr7; 
the world was, who said 
and, Test. Aff. 1 9° ; Creator, 
Sir. 31 Jub. 720 108 1626 36 
IEn. 81° 94! Test. App. I 86 
107:8;9 Sib. 3794 Ass. Mos. 1010 
2En. 108 51* 2Bar. 1436 444 
48“ 4Ez. 544 PLA, 429; Creator 
of all things, 2Macc. 124 Sir. 
24% Jub, 23482 yy17 yyS 254,27 


455 2En. 514(B) 4Macc. 115; 
of all created things, Ah, 1° 
(Arab.) ; of great Temple, 

Sib. 58 ; of heavens and 
earth, 378° Ah. 1° (Arab.)s) of 
waters, Judith 9!; of world, 
2Macc. 7? 1314 4Macc, 525 ; 
who has planted His sweet 
Spirit in us all, Sib. Frag. 15, 

Deep, who hast shut up, and 
sealed it, P,Man, 4; Deliverer 
of Asrael,3Macc. 725 sous 
Ps.Sol. 178, see Saviour of 
Israel ; Delivered them (Is- 
rael, Lord who, Wisd. 19° ; 
Delivereth them that trust in 
Him, Sir. 518; Delivereth out 
of every evil, that, Wisd. 168 ; 
Depths come as the heights, 
to whom the, 2Bar. 54°; Dis- 
cerner, the, P.A. 42°; Divine, 
the (II, page 781, c. xxvi. 1) ; 
Does everything upon the 
earth, who, Jub. 124; Does 
everything easily by a nod, 
2Bar.547; Dread, whom all 
things, P.Man., 5. 

Educated us, He who, 2Bar. 
78°; Eternal, the, aMacc. 612 
Sib. Frag. 317 Sib, 315,101,301,328, 
594, 601, 616, 631,672, 676,679, 708,711,721, 
733,768,766 - and supreme God, 
A. & E. 281; Creator, Sib. 310; 
Father of all men, 36 ; God, 
Sir. 3617 Jub. 1229 138 1En. 14 
Sib. 355742 Ass. Mos. 107 2En. 
18; Immortal God, Sib. 55 ; 
King, Apoc. Mos. 294 1En, 
25857 298 Sib, 377; Lord, 
1En, 584 2En. 18(8) ; Ruler, 
64°; Saviour, of Israel, 
3Macc. 73°; who created 
heaven and earth, Sib. 335: 
Ever, God whose Being is 
for, 514: Everlasting, the, 
1Bar, 420;14,20,22,24,95 52 Sip.” 
5860; your Saviour, 1Bar. 422; 
God, Tob. 147 rBar. 48 Sus. 
42; King, Tob. 13%; Lord, 
133; Exalted One, the, 
4Ez, 454; Existence, the One, 
Sib. Frag. 185; Exists from 
age to age, who alone, 
118, See God who is, God 
whose Being is for ever, One 
who is. 

Fashioner, the, of men, 4Ez. 
7°*; Faithfulness standeth 


eternal, whose, 823; Father . 
3Mace. 57 68 Sir. 231 Wisd. PSL 


148 Jub. 17425 TL. 186 Sib, 
5°00:500 ; asa, 3Macc.7°; Holy, 
the, T.Jud. 242; invisible, 
Apoc. Mos. 35%; of all, 352 
37% Sib. 3550 5828; of all the 


children of Jacob, Jub. 122; 


of all holy, among the holy 
ones, 3Macc. 221; of all 
within whom is the breath 
of God, the Great, Sib, 
588 of Might, ‘the, Apoc. 
Mos, 36%; our, Tob. 134 Sib. 
3°; my, Sir. 519; which is 
in heaven, P.A. 523; who 
alone is excellent, Sib. peas 
who is from everlasting, Sib. 
548; Fighteth for our nation, 
He who ever, 2Macc. Les 
seé Champion ; Firmament, 
Thou that hast fixed, by thy 


a 


word, 2Bar. 214; Forgiving, 
4Ez.71°°; Formed him (Moses), 
He who, 2Bar.174; man by 
- » - wisdom, Wisd.9?; man 
in womb, who, Test. 4/p. I 
9°; them (works), Wisd. 134; 
Formeth all, He that, Sir. 
sii2iv, See Creator. 
Gathereth the outcasts of 
Israel, He that, Sir. 5122 v'; 
Glorious, greatly, 3Macc. 
618; Glorious One, 638: 
Glory, great, the, 1En. 142° 
nozs) Le 3%; Glory.is in: 
conceivable, whose, 4Ez. 8?!: 
Glory of God. the, Tob. 316 
ieee Bar qto 72 Tis God 
(my, thy, &c.), Tob, 1138 1347 
Judith 5912181921 63 728" gs 
1 110,11,18,28 y 911,17 162!3Jub. 17 
784 10% 1.21920,21,24 48,16 510 
198 229 2727 331,19. 4325 Arist, 
42 Apoc. Mos. 35° T.S. 28 
aejos. 1° 85) a2kn, 673'(B) 
Ps.Sol. 5° 67 896 916 1515 1731415, 
30,42 788511 (IT, page 779, line 23 
from bottom); my and thy 
God, Jub. 217°; God, a, to 
thee and to thy seed, 
225; -Almighty, 15* 271 
2En. Prol.; and King, Add. 
Esth. C®; Himself, Sib, 41815188 
5°52; our Father, 3726: God 
Most High. 1Esd. 9! Sir. 
2478 39 47538 4879 Jub. 7219 
221! ('T.Jud.24*| P.A. 6" Ab. 
64 (Arab.); of Abraham, 
Add.Esth. C® Jub. 242%,28 3725 
3514 Ass.Mos. 3°; and of 
Isaac, Jub.29* 31°14.4° 45%; and 
Isaac and Jacob, and of their 
righteous seed, P.Man. 1; of 
afflicted. Judith 9!; of ages, 
ube 22° rin. 9*; of all, Sir. 
36! 4528 50% Jub. 221027 3019 
3173:82 Apoc.Mos. 322 428; of 
all power and might, Judith 
git; all rule, Apoc.Mos. 425; 
of, Daniel,” Beli4t> cof... -- 
father, Judith 9!2 Mart.Is. 2? 
T.Jos. 65; of father Isaac, 
Jub. 441; of .. . fathers, 1Esd. 
150 460 825,58 98 3Macc, 716 
Tob. 8° Judith 10? Wisd. 0} 
P.Man. 1 Azar. 3, 29 Jub. 314 
Macmlake4e0 US. 2° ye \iud. 
19? T.D. 1%® T.G. 25 T.Jos. 
14 67 Test. App. I 11° 83 Ass. 
Mos. 9° 4Macc, 1218 P.A. 574; 
of gods, Azar. 68 Jub. 87° 23} 
1En. 94; of glory, 1En. 257; 
of heaven, 3Macc. 7° Tob. 7¥ 
815 Judith 58 111” Jub. 12* 207 
2229 1En. 106° T.R. 1° 6° Sib. 
174,286 4135 576 Acs Mos, 24 
Ah. 616 (Syr.) Ah. 676 (Arab.); 
and earth, T.lIss. 77, see 
Almighty living God of 
heaven; of Hebrews, T. Jos. 
128; of hosts, 1Esd.9*°; of 
inheritance of Israel, Judith 
912; of Isaac, Jub. 277% 294 
Ass.Mos, 3°, see .God of 
Abraham ; of Israel, 1Esd. 148 
248,67 6174,9,15 §8,65,72 939 2Macc. 
9® Tob. 1338 Judith 41? 6? 101 
1410 Bar. 2)! 31 Jub. 1% 
Tijowns? es.col. 4* 091°} of 
Jacob, <Ass.Mos. 3° Ps.Sol. 
151; of Jacob our father, T.D. 


1105.2 








INDEX 


1° (B AS!) ; or justice, Sir. 
Sale mOnemny? lites). 23 "39 (Of 
my salvation, 511; of peace, 
D534; of praises, oir, 5022! 
of requital, 3511; of righteous, 
P.Man. 8; of righteousness, 
Jub. 2574 T.Jud. 22? ; judging 
Israel with chastening, Ps.Sol. 
882; of Sabaoth, 2En. 521; of 
spirits of all flesh, Jub. 10°; 
of the whole world, 1En. 84? ; 
of them that repent, P.Man. 
Daisy Oletrnth, oisdi42° ithe 
Creator, Ah. 1! (Arab.) ; the 
Father, Apoc. Mos. 43° Sib. 
Rocce themm Greate eure: 
3499,616 ; the High and the 
Mighty, Ah. Aeth. Frag. 1 ; 
the just judge, A. & E. 29°; 
the word.) 320132 147an16: 
331; the merciful, 2Macc. 
11°; their King, A. & E. 298; 
who bestows on all kings glory 
&c., Arist. 224; ever is, Sib. 
385; fulfils all your desires, 
Arist. 283 ; gave them (Israel) 
their law, 15; has endowed 
you with these qualities, 
290; is, 4Macc. 5%; made 
us (Adam and Eve), A. 
& E. 48; makes you care 
for these things, Arist. 282 ; 
maintains your kingdom, 15 ; 
overlooks you, Sib. Frag. 
18; who oversees all things, 
3%2; rules. and preserves us, 
Arist. 157; whom they knew, 
Judith 5°; Godhead, the, 
T.L.. 37 (A®); Good, 4Ez. 
7188; Governest all creation, 
who, 3Macc. 62; whole world, 
28; Grace, that showest, upon 
the earth, Ah. 4% (Syr.) ; 


_ Gracious, 4Ez. 7188; Gracious 


One, 8°? ; Great Eternal 
God; eSibag] | 500s (Great 
Father, 37% 549° ; Great God, 
the, 2Macc. 7%%% Arist. 95 
Sib. 3162;297,556,657,702,773,776 4163 
Great Holy One, the, 1En. 
978; Great Lord, the, 81°; 
Great One, the, 14% 1034 
1041; Great Sovereign, the, 
2Macc. 52°; of the world, 
1215; Guards all, who, Sib. 
338, 

Hater of insolence, 3Macc.6°; 
Hateth iniquity, that, Judith 
517; He (Him), 1Macc. 2°; 
He above, Sib. 37°, cf. Lord 
above us; He that hath kept 
me alive, Ah. 84° (Syr.); He 
that is, Wisd..131, see Exists ; 
Head of days, One who had 
a, 1En. 461; Head of days, 
the, 462 473 48? 55! 607 711% 
12,13,14. Heaven, 1Macc. 271:87 

18,19,60 424,55 163 2Macc. 218 
3Macc. 638 (Tob. 9°) Sus. 9, 
35 (0) Jub. 2618 (3012) (T.B. 
38) Ass.Mos. 38 P.A. 19:14 2216 
45:14;15 520; Heaven, abode 
is the, whose, Sib. Frag. 114 ; 
dwelling is in, whose, Sib. 
311,807; dwells in, God who, 
5298 ; Heaven, dwells in, who, 
2Macc. 3°; is in, God which, 
Tob. 517; Heaven, that has 
made firm the height of the, 
by the spirit, 2Bar. 214; 


849 


Heavenly and true God, the, 
Sib. Frag. 119; God, the, Sib. 
Aon 3 Barediie «Wings babe tO! 
(A); One, the, Ass.Mos. 
10%; Sovereign, 2Macc. 1575; 
Heavens, whose are the 
highest, 4Ez. 82°; Helper of 
the oppressed, Judith 9! ; 
Highest, the, A. & E., 15°; 
Holdeth all things together, 
that which, Wisd.17; Holy 
among the holy ones, 3Macc. 
22; and faithful, Jub. 214; 
and Righteous One, A. & E. 
271; God, 3Macc. 6! 71° Sib. 
3477; (and) Great One, rEn. 
WS! GOES GUE PS Zeyh Koy! ONS 
104°; Holy King, 3Mace. 238 ; 
Holy Lord, 2Macc.1 45° [Apoc. 
Mos. 425]; One, Sir. 435 23° 
3985 4310 TBar. 42285 55 Apoc, 
Mos, 33° Sibiig%® sof Israel, 
Sir. 50!%1 En. 123729311 T.D. 
518 Sib. 3709 P.A. 314 429 56 
611,12 5 - One of the holy ones, 
T.L. 3* (A%) ; Honoured One, 
the, 1En. 1031, see Name; 
Hope and refuge. of the poor, 
Ps.Sol. 152; Hope, in whom 
ye (Israel), 2Bar. 777; Hosts 
stand trembling, before whom, 
4Ez. 871, 

Immortal, the, Sib. Frag. 114 
Sib: 5119; and! etemal, 57%"; 
Father of gods and of all 
men, 32%; God, 3276,289,600, 
628,693", 298,360,490,497 - loud. 
thundering God of heaven, 
578; One, 3°82; Incorruptible 
Creator, Sib. Frag.3!7; In- 
corruptible, the, 4Ez. 34; 
Indignation melteth the moun- 
tains, whose, 4Ez, 873 ; Ineffa- 
ble, Sib. 34; Inspired into 
man an active soul, He that, 
Wisd. 1514, see Spirit; In- 
visible God, the, Sib. 5427 
2En. 67%; Invisible yet seeing 
all Himself, Sib. Frag. 1°. 

Jael, Apoc. Mos. 294 335; 
Jealousy, an ear of, Wisd. 11°; 
Judge, the, 2Bar. 5° 48°° P.A. 
4°; holy, Jub. 108%; Judge, 
righteous, 2Macc. 12° Sir. 
3517; a righteous, Ps.Sol. 238; 
the sovereign righteous, Sib. 
374 ; Just and righteous, Ab. 
438 (Syr.); Justice, Wisd. 18 
1120 3481 4Macc. 8°; divine, 
Sib. 3260. 4Macc. 121%; lover 
of, Arist. 209. 

Keepeth Israel, He that, Sir. 
5112 ili ; King, ert 1En,. 84? 
great, 1En.845 911% Ps.Sol. 
236. of ages, 1En. 12°; of all, 
Tob. 101%; of every creature, 
Judith 9%; glory for ever, 
1En. 813; of gods, Add.Esth, 
C% ; of great power, 3Macc. 
62; of heaven, 1Esd. 44° 
Tob. 1371116 T.B. 107(¢ B S}); 
of heavens, 3Macc, 2%; ° of 
kings, 2Macc. 13* 3Macc. 5% 
1En. 94 842, cf. 634; of kings 
of kings, Sir. 5122%iv P.A. 479; 
of world, 2Macc. 7°; on 
Mount Zion for all eternity, 
Jub. 18; on the lofty throne, 
Ass.Mos. 42; our, Add. Esth. 
C4 Sib. Frag. 347 Sib. 5352499; 


Ps.Sol. 524171; that rulest over 
all, Add.Esth. C? ; Knew that 
thou wast wronged, Ah. 514 
(Arab.) ; (?) Know, One whom 
the many do not, 4Ez. 57; 
Knows all, who, Sib. Frag. 14 
1Bar.3%?; all things before they 
come into being, who, Sus, 
35%, 42; the consummation 
of the times before they come, 
who, 2Bar. 218; the secrets, 
Sus. 42; what is hidden, God 
who, Ah. 67° (Arab.). 

Lawgiver, 4Macc. 575; Life, 
all, is from before His face, 
Jub. 124; Life, all things are 
endowed with, through whom, 
Arist. 16; Life and deathless 
endless light, He who is, Sib. . 
Frag. 3%4; Life and Spirit, 
Lord of, 2Macc. 1446; Life 
for them (men), He who pre- 
pared, 4Ez. §®; Life, living, 
the, A. & E. 287; Light, ever- 
lasting, Wisd. 77°; of right- 
eousness, T.Z. 98; of the Uni- 
verse, the, Apoc.Mos. 36%; 
the True, A. & E. 287; Liveth 
for ever, God that, Tob. 13!; 
He that, Sir. 18! 1En. 5! 
106311 (Lat. Frag.); Living 
God, Bel 5, 25, Add.Esth. 
Elé Jub. 125 214 Sib: 3768, see 
Almighty living God; Lord, 
2Macc. 732 154; One, the, Ah. 
11 (Arab.); Lofty One, who 
has no respect of persons, 
2Bar. 13°;  Longsnffering, 
Aliz. 72°4) 

Lord, Almighty, Judith 41% 
818 1617 1Bar. 314 P.Man.1, 
in heaven, P.Man.1; above 
us, 4Ez. 8°; and Creator of 
the Universe, Arist. 15 ; 
Creator, Jub. 1o® S. A. & E. 
302; my Creator, 287; for 
evermore, Jub. 82°; Lord God, 
TEsd: 622) aMaces a12> 77° 
3Macc. 5°5 Tob. 14) Judith 
729 §85 92 1318 Bel 39, 41 
Jub. 21 619 15 1225 1929 2512 
A. & E. 2? 62 9? 141 15? 20? 
22% 281 307 34! 301 40? 46° 
T.S, 23°65 4.L. 81° 9! 2En- 
2248(B) 4214(B) 43'(B) 44° 
(B) 4g%(B) 84°(B) | 641(B) 
3Bar, 155% 418 giz, 84) Ps. 
Sol. 51: God Most High, 
1Esd. 946; of Abraham, Add. 
Esth. C9 Jub. 368, and the 
God of Isaac, 2722; of all 
power, Judith 13*; of... 
father, 92; of ... fathers, Jub. 
49°; of heaven, Judith 61%; 
and earth. T.B. 31; of Israel, 
Judith 129 137 Add.Esth. C!# 
Jub. 45° Ps.Sol. 16°; of Shem, 
Jub. 818; sole and glorious 
over the whole world, Azar. 
22; who forsakes not those 
who love him, Bel 38; Lord 
Himself, the, Ps.Sol. 175851; 
Lord, Lord, Jub. 142; Lord 
, erode, TESde 14 50 Stayt. 2iai? 
Tob. 43921 Judith 42 7192 
g14,16,25 } Bar, 110,18,15,18,19,21,22 
25,6)12,15,19,27,80 26,8 Sus, 35 
Bel 25 Jub. 12819 35 46 618 75 
108722 “7315 7528 192% 2618 
331840 gst 48MIT ~ 07,911 


31 


A. & E. ty) 29° 352 T.S. 6° 
TL. 13) -T.Z..:108- T.Nu ng? 
Test. App. I 88 Ps.Sol. 428 68 
P.A. 32° 5% Ah. 14 (Syr. A); 
Lord Most High, P.Man. 7 
1En. 98" Test. Aff. II 51, 58 
2Bar. 6°; Lord (my, thy, his, 
&c.), IEsd. 25 §46,47;50,52,53 
Tob. 84 134 Judith 521 16212 
Add. Esth. C!# A. & E. 271 
49° 1En. 2214 84°; Lorp my 
Lord, 2Bar. 31%. 14816 161 
231 381 48% 4]iz, 34 528,98 717,58 
127 13°! (of angel? 4Ez. 438 
6") ; Lord of ages, 1En. 9!; of 
all, Ass.Mos, 4?; of all the 
ages, Jub. 311°; of all reputa- 
tion, Arist. 269 ; of... fathers, 
1Esd, 4° Judith 7%; of glory, 
1En, 2214 258 278:5 364 408 632 
5° 838; of heaven, Tob. 71117 
1En, 106 Test. 4f/. II 13 
Sib. Frag. 15° Ass.Mos. 4*; and 
earth, Tob. 101% Judith 92; of 
hosts, Apoc.Mos. 38% [435] 
P.A. 6°"; of Israel, 1Esd. 23:5 
571 615 818,89; of judgement, 
1En. 83"; of kings, 6324; of 
light, 2En. 18° ; of lords, 1En. 
9* Ass.Mos. 9°; of majesty, 
1En, 12°; of mercy, 2Macc. 
8%; of mighty, 1En. 632; of 
rich, 637; of righteousness, 
Tob. 13° Jub. 25! 1En. 2214 
go*? 106%: Lord of sheep, 
816,22,26,29,83, 86, 42, 45, 50, 51, 52, 64, 
8770,71,75,76 gol420,29,83 + | ord 
of Spirits, 37272.4 3824:6 292,78; 
9,12 401245556710 412,6,7 4 a4 
1,2 468:6,7,8 4-1,2,4 492,8,5,7,10 
Her ae eee 538 5.4507 
5534 ‘5y3 =$4,6 Eh? 60518)24,25 
613:5,859,11,18 6 22,10,12,14,16 6 91,2, 
712 65911 662 6789 684 692429 
yo 71%17; of universe, Arist. 
195; of whole creation of the 
world, 1En. 842; of wisdom, 
63°; of world, Jub. 2523 1En. 
817° Ass.Mos. 111; our Saviour, 
Ps.Sol. 8%° ; over all dominion, 
Add.Esth. C2; Ruler of 
Sabaoth, 2En. 211; that dwells 
eternally, 4Ez, 82°; that dwells 
in Jerusalem, 1Esd. 25; that 
brought thee (Abraham) out 
of Ur of Chaldees, Jub. 147, 
cf. 2227; that wrought in thee 
those great and wonderful 
things, Arist. 155; the eternal 
God, Sus. 35%: the God of 
gods, Bel 7; the Great King, 
Tob. 13%; the Most High 
God, Jub. 212°; which made 
heaven and earth, 1Esd. 618; 
who created the heaven and 
the earth, Jub. 3218; who 
hath holy knowledge, 2Macc. 
6°°; whose name has not been 
sent into this world, Mart.Is. 
17; Look drieth up the depths, 
whose, 4Ez. 878; Looks on all, 
who, Sib.Frag. 14; Loved us 
Csrael) from of old and never 
hated us, who, 2Bar. 788 3 
Lover of souls, Wisd. 1126, 
Made, who, 2Bar. ro!®; all 
things, Jub. 31°; all things 
by... word, Wisd. 9!; (all) 
from the beginning, Sib. Frag. 


31°; earth, 2Bar. 214; heaven 








INDEX 


and earth, P.Man. 1? Sib. Frag. 
38-5, ct. 2En. 2?; Israel, 1Bar. 
4" 2Bar. 607; them (men) 4Ez. 
86°; them (stars), rBar. 3°4; 
us, 2Bar. 792; Maker, man’s, 
Sir, 10}? 3218 4618 478 Wisd. 
1674 Apoc.Mos. 314 324 2Bar. 
822 P.A. 479; nature’s first, 
Wisd. 135; Maketh a horn to 
sprout for the house of David, 
He that, Sir. 5112v4li. Master, 
Tob. 314 Azar. 13. Apoc.Mos, 


19? 232 425; Merciful, Sir. 
5019; One, Ah. 4! (Arab.); 


God, 3Macc. 57 Tob, 3! 1Bar. 
31; Lord, 2Macc. 1312; Mercy, 
who keeps, Wisd. 91; who 
shows, Ah. -5!4 (Arab.); 
Mighty, Sib. 3785; God, the, 
91; 97, 194, 246, 274,284,806,489,549,565, 
575, 684, 632, 656,657,665,671,687,740,781, 
784,818 46,25-5186 > Bar, 68 yl 1324; 
Heavenly God, 3%; King, 
00; b60;805 Ones thesmrsin 
950° aBar. 21° 25% ye 34° 
6 4614 gvl 491,38 : 
ie " ae a 623,8008,10 
6454 651 66455 672 vo? m7 I1,26 
814 825 8416710 g52,9 4Ry, 
682 gf ro% 1143 1247 1323; 
in dominion, the, 1En. 103); 
of Israel, T.S. 6°; of Jacob, 
Sir, 517541; works for sal- 
vation of Israel, who has, 
3Macc. 64%; Most exalted 
of all, Sib. Frag. 33, see 
Exalted; Most High, 2Macc. 
3Macc. 6? Tob. 118 41 
Sir. 687 g!5 1726 yol7 216,28 
2428 287 34619 356 31,9 414 

22 2,20 4° * 5 67,14,15,16,17 
Wisd. 5% 68 Add.Esth, E16 
Jub. 1618 2227 1En. 93 1c} 467 
6022 627 771 g48 g72 g8711 
99%" root 101469 T.S, 25 67 
T.L. 31° 442 51,7 815 [168] 187 
T.Iss. 25 T.G. 31 T.A. 28 54 78 
T.Jos. 14 3) 98 108 T.B. 45 9? 
(CBS!) Test. 4p. I 101 Sib. 
Frag. 1* Sib. 349,574,580 Asc, 
Mos. to? 2Bar. 171 242 251 
54227 56! 6458 67%7 692 707 
718 761 Wife 8013 812.4 8 22,6 
831 85812 4Hz, 33 4211,84 -4,22,54 
634,37 19,28,33,37,42,50,70,74,77,78,79, 
81,88,87,88,89,102,122,132  91,48,56,59 
92s416,25,28,44 y 424,38,49,52,54,57,58, 
59 7 138,43,44 1 54,6,23,80,32,36,39,47 
1318,28,26,29,44,47,56,57 y 442,45,50 . 
Most High God, 1Esd. 6% 
819,21 3Macc, 1%16 311 416 525 
7° Judith 1318 Sir. 79 418 465.6 
Jub. 736 116,29 1627 299 2 120,22, 
8,25 2 26;18,19,28,27 98,1121 gn 16 
321 36° 30° Test. App. II 
13, 30 Sib. 3719 Ass.Mos. 6! 
Ah. 145 37 437 515 627,10 19 
(ail Arab.), see God Most 
High ; Most High Lord, rEsd. 
25; Most Mighty, Add.Esth. 
E1*; Moulded (man), that, 
Wisd. 1511, 

Name, the, P.A. 45 Gia 
(?) called upon us (Israel), 4Ez. 
10%; glorious and honoured, 
&c., which created heavens 
and earth and all things, Jub. 
36"; His, 2Bar. 673 P.A: 33; 
holy, the, Jub. 2512; My, 2Bar. 
5”; of Heaven, P.A. 111 22,16 


o> 
8 


931 
£9) 





~ 


5O 


4° 57°; of Him that made 
them, 4Ez. 8°; of his God, 
Ps.Sol. 67; of the Lord, Test. 
App. 1 9* Ps.Sol. 62; Thy, 7°; 
Thy Great, 2Bar. 51; Nourishes 
all, who, Sib.Frag. 15; No- 
thing is too hard, Thou for 
whom, 2Bar. 547. 

One, Sib.Frag. 3° 2Bar. 48%; 
Almighty God, the, Arist. 139; 
God, Arist. 132 Sib. Frag. 17,32 
Sib. 3571 48° 5284; Sovereign 
God, 31; that judgeth alone, 
P.A. 47°; who is and was... 
and shall be, Sib. 31%; Only 
Ruler, 3Macc. 2?. See Sole. 

Possessor of heaven and earth, 
P.A. 611; Power, divine, the, 
Arist. 236, 252 Ah. 1! (Syr. A) 
excellent in, Sib.Frag. 17; In- 
finite, Mighty, A, & E. 28?; 
(supreme), the, Wisd. 13; 
some, 4Macc. 51°; Pours forth 
upon men gladness, who, Sib. 
Frag. 3°5; Praise of all His 
pious ones, Sir. 5112*V; Pre- 
pared the earth, that, 1Bar. 
3° ; Prince of the world, Sib. 
Frag. 115; Promised, on our 
behalf... that He will never 
forget or forsake us, who al- 
ways, 2Bar. 787; Protector of 
all, 3Macc. 6°; of the forlorn, 
Judith 9"; Providence, Wisd. 
14° Arist. 201 Sib. 5227; divine, 
4Macc. 1722; divine and all- 
wise, 131°; eternal, the, Wisd. 
172 3 God's, (Sib, 5825)*) just, 
that watched over our fathers, 
4Macc. 974. 

Reason, Source of, Ah. 11 
(Arab.); Receives not gifts, 
who, Jub. 3318; Redeemer of 
Israel, Sir. 5112v; Redeemed 
them (Israel), the Lord who, 
Ps.Sol. 91; Redeemeth and 
saveth Israel, One who, 1Macc. 
47, see Saviour of Israel ; 
Redeemeth from all evil, Sir. 
518; Reigns for ever, who, 
Sib. 3°°°; Respects not persons, 
who, Jub. 33!8 Ps.Sol. 218, cf. 
P.A. 4°°; Revealest to those 
who fear Thee what is pre- 
pared for them, -2Bar. 544; 
Rich in mercy, 3Macc. 69; 
Righteous beyond all, Jub. 214; 
Righteous Ruler, 3Macc. 3°; 
Rock of Isaac, Sir. 5112 xi, 
Ruler and Lord of the universe, 
Arist. 16; Ruler of all, 3Macc. 
58 659, cf. Sib.Frag. 117, see 
King, Only Ruler, Righteous 
Ruler; of all creation, 3Macc. 
27; of all power, 5751 49; 
Rules for ever, who, 1En. 2214 
(E) ; overall, Add. Esth, E1821, 
over the world, 1En. 2214 (G8); 
the world, Ass.Mos. 42; with 
great thought the hosts which 
stand before Thee, 2Bar. 21%, 

Saved all His people, who, 
2Macc. 217; thee (Ahikar), 
Ah. 51* (Arab.); Saves them 
that hope in Him, who, Sus. 
60 ; Saviour of all, Wisd. 167; 
of Israel, 1Macc. 48° 3Macc, 
6°, eternal, 71°; of them that 
are without hope, Judith 91; 
Sea, who has bound the, by 


the word, P.Man. 3; See, One 
whom none can, from earth, 
Sib. 47°; Seen those things 
which are to be, Thou. that 
hast, 2Bar. 21°; Seeth all, 
who, 2Macc. 735, see All- 
seeing ; Self-sprung, Sib.Frag. 
117 Sib. 312; Sends forth the 
light, that, 1Bar. 38°; rain, 
winds, famines, &c., Sib. Frag. 
192-84; Sent Ate (themword), 
who, 2Bar. 564; me (Baruch), 
who, 84"; Shechinah, P.A. 33, 
seé Shechinah ; Shield of 
Abraham, Sir. 5112*; Sky, 
dwelling in the, Sib.Frag. 317; 
whose dwelling is in the, Sib. 
381; Sole Potentate, 378; 
Souls, God who gave us our, 
4Macc. 13"; Souls, Sustainer 
of, Sib. 5°°°; Sovereign, 2Macc. 
128; Sole, Sib.Frag, 17; 
Sovereign in heaven, 2Macc. 
15%4; Sovereign Lord, 517 614 
152,29 Wisd. 1126 133,9 ; of all, 
Wisd. 67 8%; of all creation, 
3Macc. 22, see Ruler; of 
earth, Sib. Frag. 1°5 ; of spirits, 
2Macc. 3%4; of the world, sole, 
Sib. 578°; Sovereignty over all 
flesh, who has, Bel 5; Spirit 
and soul, who placed in man, 
Test. 4p. I 9°; Strength of 
my life, Sir. 511; Supreme 
God, 2Macc. 336 Arist. 19, 


Teacher, Sir. 5117; Throne is 
beyond imagination, whose, 
4kz, 871; Thunder, delight is 
in the, whose, 5%, cf. 576; 
Sender of, 5433; Thunders from 
on high, He who, Sib, 3! 
5°; True, the, 5499; 
and eternal God, Sib.Frag. 

120; and everlasting God, 

3°; God, the, 3Macc. 618 

Wisd. 1277 Arist. 140, Sib. 54% 

2En. 667; Truth, lover of the, 

Arist. 206, 

Unbegotten, Sib.Frag, 1717; 
Upholder of the weak, Judith 
gy"; Unseen yet seeing all 
Himself alone, Sib. 3!2, see 
Invisible. 

Watcher of all from heaven, 
Sib. 5852; Wisdom, guideth, 
that, Wisd. 715; Who hath 
made... perfect in, Ah. ¥4 
(Arab.); Wise, Sib. 536°, Wise, 
correcteth, One that, Wisd. 
77°; Witness, the, P.A. 429; Wit- 
nesses all, who, Sib.F rag. 14; 
Wonders, doer of, 3Macc. 632 ; 
worker of, 2Macc. 1 521; Word 
is sure and behest constant, 
4Ez. 8%; World-Ruler, the, 
Sib. 322; Worship, whom ye 
(Israel), 2Bar. 777. 

Godless, 1En. 1! 57 161 388 819 
914 941 9815 998,10, 

Godlessness, 1Fn. 1020 104%, 

Godly man is wise, Sir, 211); 
18-28 : receives discipline, and 
is blessed, 32(35)14-17, 

Gods of heathen, dead, Sib. 
Frag. 1° 354s99.; impossi- 
bility of, Frag. 213 Frag, 
31-82; =demons, sce Demono- 
logy; strange, Israel turns to, 
Jub: 13; 


- See Ashtaroth, Bel, Belshim, 
Dis, Zeus. 

Gog, Jub. 8%; and Magog, 
land of = Ethiopia, Sib. 331%: 
51 

Gold, lay up, Tob. 12°; proved 
in fire, Sir. 2° Wisd. 3°. 

‘Golden Rule,’ Tob. 4. 

Goliath, Sir. 47%. 

Gomer, Jub. 71° 9§. 

Gomorrah, Jub. 16° 20° Mart. 
Is. 31°. See Aguaron. 

Good man, the, T.B. 47-® 

Goodness abides for ever, Sir. 
40217, 

Gorgias, tMacc. 3%° 415.18 559 
2Macc. 8° ro! 129?:59.37; Judas’ 
victory over, 1Mace. 4)-*9. 

Gortyna, 1Macc. 1575, 

Goshen, land of, Judith 17°; 
land of, Jub. 44° 451:7:8, 

Gotholias, rEsd. 8%°, 
Government, attitude to, P.A. 
2° 
Grace alone accounts for elec- 
tion and salvation of Israel, 
Ass. Mos. § 9. 

Graeco-Egyptians = ‘ vultures’ 
and ‘kites’ in 1En. go*. Cf. 
gotl,z, 

Grape-gatherer, Ben-Sira claims 
to be only a, Sir. § 1, 332645. 

Grateful dead. See Dead. 
Grave, Tob. 819:18, 

Greece, 1Macc. 8° Sib. 381° 4°. 
See Hellas. 

Greek, 2Macc. 13? Sib. 31%; 
cities compel Jews to hellen- 
ize, 2Macc.6°, cf.11°; fashions, 
4)8; influences in Tobit, 237 5%; 
kingdom, i.e. the Seleucid era, 
1Macc. 11°7.; language, Arist. 
38; speculation condemned, 
Sir. 3%47.; text of Ecclesiasti- 
cus, divergence in order from 
Old Latin version, Sir. § 4, 30- 
36; ways of life, 2Macc. 42° 
6°. See Hellenizing. 

Greeks, 1Macc. 6? 818 2Macc. 
455 11% Arist. 121, 137 Sib. 

171,202,620,536,553,609 5264 «Mace. 
1820; favour Jews, 3 Macc. 3°; 
or Macedonians = ‘eagles’ in 
1En. go?“16, 

Greetings in letters, 3Macc. 
3182, 71, 

Gregory Nazianzen praises 
Maccabaean martyrs, 4Macc. 
§ 8. 

Grigori (i.e. ‘ the Watchers’), 
2En. 1813,7,9, 

_ Grosseteste, Test. § I. 

Guardian angels, A. & E. 331, 
see Virtues ; beliefin, Jub. 357"; 
of Esau, Jub. 3517; of Jacob, 
3517. See Angelic patrons. 

Guardians of the gates of heil, 
2En. 421. 

Guilt, incur, Zad. § 4, 4° 167. 

Guilt-offering, Zad. 10°. 

Guilty, against the soul, P.A. 
38:10;11; held, Zad. 107 19°. 

Guni, Jub. 445°. 

Gymnasium built in Jerusalem, 
IMacc. 14 2Macc. 4°:1%, 


Habakkuk, prophecy of, Bel 
1(G), 33-37, 39; Mart. Is. 2°. 

Habitations of souls, 4Ez. 7° 
85,101,121, 


INDEX 


Hades, 2Macc. 68 Sir, 1727 
2841 Wisd. 1/4 1638 Azar. 66 
Add. Esth. B™ (i.e. Sheol), 
Re 4ST 54t = 1. B.9°) Sib. 
Frag. 12? 389,458 5178 3Bar, 
428 58 4Ez. 47:8 855; abolished 
for righteous, 4Ez. 88, cf. 
2Bar. 21°, see Death ; deities 
in, Sib. Frag. 122; gates of, 
Wisd. 163% ; god of death, Wisd. 
1167,; perish in, Sir. 17277.; 
pit of, Sir. 212°, see Pit, Sheol; 
relation to Dragon, 3Bar. 4°. 

Haemus, mountains, Sib. 3474. 

Hagar, Jub. 142223 172:8,1,17 
Ge 

Haggai. See Ageaeus. 

Haggi, Jub. 442°. 

Hagiographa, Sir. Prologze 172.; 
once quoted in Zad. § 8. 

+Hagu. See Book, References. 

Haiqar, Arabicname of Ahikar, 
passin. 

Halacha, earlier than those in 
the Mishnah, enunciated in 
Jubilees, Jub. § 15; none in 
Pirké Aboth, P.A. § 2, 2, see 
Rule; severer in Zad. than in 
Talmud, Zad. § 6. See 742. 
137572. 

Halachoth of Zadokites based 
on Prophets, Zad. § 9*°. 

Halaphta ben Dosa, P.A. 38. 

Halicarnassus, IMacc. 157%. 

Hallel, the, Wisd. 18°. 

Ham, Jub. 48% 78.18 g10,22,24,80 
9215 167930 52971 TS. 1645" lot 
of, Jub. 82%. See Canaan. 

Hamadathus, Add. Esth. Al’ 
—10,17, 

Haman, Add. Esth. Al’ B3:6 
5,28 F10,17 #4, 

Hamath, 1Macc. 12% Jub. 10% 
137. 

Hamor, Jub. 30? T.L. 2? 5* 63:4. 

Hamselim, father of the king of 
Persia and Elam, Ah, 3" (Syr.). 
See Achish, Akhi. 

Hananel, 1En. 697. 

Hananiah, Azariah and Mishael, 
Mace. 2°°. See Three Chil- 
dren. 

Hananiel, Tob. 11. 

Hanina, deputy of the priests, 
iPeAL 32. 

Hanina ben Dosa, P.A. 37}. 

Hanina ben Hachinai, P.A. 3°. 

Hanina ben Teradion, P.A. 3°. 

Hanukka. See Chanukka. 

Haran, brother of Abraham, 
Jub. 1210:14,30 731; land of, 12%: 

“BB ya) 27919 351012 (441 read 

‘ Hebron) T.L. 23 Tiss. 1°. 

Hares symbolize double livers, 
EAN y22: 

Harvest of evil, 4Ez. 4 
of good will be greater, 4Ez. 

29-31, 
Hasidaeans led by Judas Mac- 


28,29,30 . 


cabaeus, 2Macc.14°. See 
Chasidim. 
Hasmonaean monarchy at- 


tacked, Ps. Sol. § 6, 17%°v. 
Hastening of times, 2Bar. 201 
83}. 
Hateful, three things, Sir. 257. 
Hatred, cure of, T.G.5%*; evils 
of, 37—5* 67. 
Hazor, T.Jud. 3! 43; plain of, 
tMacc. 11®"7, See Aresa. 
8 


2120 | 


Head, and not tail, Israel to be, 
Jub. 116 rEn. 103". 

Head of days. See God. 

Healing, 1En. 95*; of body, 
67°; of earth, 107. 

Health, good, a blessing, Sir. 
3q!4 20. 

Heap. Sve Sea, Witness. 

Heart, rEn. 14? 474 484 68 93° 
94° 951 96* 987 g9*1® 104°; 
MeNea%?> “cleans Jabs: 
double, 1En. 914; perfect, Zad. 
17; place idols upon, 9%; 
stubbornness of, 3% 45:10 91% 
27,34 : uprightness of, 92°; way 
of God’s, 17. 

Heathen, conversion of, Tob. 
§ 10 A(3), 137 18 144*; Con- 
version of, 2Bar. 72*-® 4Ez. 
1338 Ps. Sol. 1757; lost because 
they openly spurn Law, 4Ez. 
74; marriages, Tob. § 9, 
Wisd. 147., detested, Add. 
Esth. C27; none saved, 4Ez. 
13°*z. ; wives put away, I1Esd. 
9° **. See Orgies, Unclean- 





ness. 
Heaven, 1En. 6? 143-11 18° 21758 
33° 45¢ 47° 557 57? 615)? 69° 
5817 791 8ol:2 833-11 $61,8 9312.14 
TOTD®=* 10422) TO8510 TR. 
RE Yl DRS Sal be Bras 
Sea Se ly Jude aoe 
age aR iss. (7% ST Joss-¥2* 
19°) T.B.32)8 9° 107; children 
of =angels,6? 143; =righteous, 
ro1?; end of, 181+, see Ends; 
first, 917°, contrast New; five 
men from, appear to help 
Judas in battle, 2Macc. 1079.99, 
cri — Gods PAG 
cf. name of, 27:16 4° 579; high, 
124 391; high, holy, and 
eternal, 15° ; host of, 104°, see 
Host; new, 1En. g1!®, see 
Creation; of heavens, 1* 601 
715; old Semitic conception of, 
2En. I0!z.; second, contains 
fallen Watchers 26., builders of 
Babel, 3Bar. 3° °; sins pre- 
vent looking up to, P.Man. 
g; third, Paradise in, Apoc. 


Mos. 40%. See Angels, God, 
Prophecy, Sacrifices, Sea, 
Temple. 


Heavenly archetypes of things 
on earth, Wisd. 9%7.; bodies, 
observe their order, Sir.1677-*8, 
cf. 1En. 21, Ep. Jer. 60 Ps. 
Sol. 1812-14; dispensation, to 
assist Jacob’s deceit, Jub. 26+*; 
hosts, ten orders of, 2En. 20°7.; 
Jerusalem, vision of, 4Ez. 97°- 
10°9, ? = great mountain (or 
tock), 13%%%5, belongs to 
eternal order, available for 
righteous after Final Judge- 
ment, 892, see Sion, revealed 
as a builded city, 107%**; 
ordinance to slay Shechemites, 
Jub. 30°: pattern of Holy City, 
4Ez. 10%. See Luminaries, 
Tablets, Vision. 

Heavens, 1En. 1? 181° 39% 411 
42! 472 6120 7118 84 918 g8°; 
and earth renewed, Jub. 17°, 
see Creation; host of, 1En. 
6110; opened, T.L. 18° 
T.Jad. 242; plurality of, 
implied, 4Ez. 3%7.; powers 


- 


51 


of, 1En. 91%, see Angels; 
seven, belief in, in Test. XIT 
Patr., 2 Enoch, Ascension of 
Isaiah, 3 Baruch, Chagigah 12, 
3Bar. § 10; seven, 2En. 3-21; 
first, 3-6; second, 7; third, 
8-10; fourth, 11-17; fifth, 
18; sixth, 19; seventh, 20, 
21; (eighth to tenth, 211-22};) 
seven, T.L.27—35 (BA8); three, 
27-38 (aAc), 

Hebrew, Abraham learns, Jub. 
1276,27 ; characters, Arist. 30, 
see Jewish; language, holy, 
Test. App. I 8§ ; Testament 
of Naphtali, see Naphtali; 
Text of Zadokite Frag., Zad. 
§ 4; tongue, Arist.38 4Macc. 
12716) Jub. 43°; the tongue 
of the creation, learnt by 
Abraham, see Abraham, Books 
of the fathers; translation 
from, difficulties of, Sir. Pro- 
logue i1n. See Introds. to 
Books. 

Hebrew(s), 2Macc. 791 1138 1537 
Judith 10}? 12! 1418 Jub. 391° 
47 Fos 612" 823") Sibsa 
5181,258 “yMacc, 411 5% 8? of18 
Ee 

Hebron, 1Macc. 5° Jub. 137°: 
12,21 4410 7610 191:25 223 241 
2919 3620 3715 4x14 4610 (sce 
Haran)’ TR. 9? 4-5: 8278-2: 
9°) 165) Wijad. 2°4s7-ae 
Telss. 078" VEZ. 10" yh Nees 
MGs1® 85 TA] 8h2eT jos: 
208) T.B. 121(8).3 2Bar. 471; 
as a seat of prophetic inspira- 
tion, 2Bar. 471 4Ez. 97° 8x. 

Hebron, son of Kohath, T.L. 
12? Test. App. II 74. 

Hecataeus of Abdera, relation 
of Aristeas’s Letter to, Arist. 
§ 5, 312. 

Hector, Sib. 3427. 

Heel, 1En. 822°. 

Hegemonides, 2 Mace. 13**. 

He-He, ben, P.A. 57627, 

Helemmelek, 1En. $2916 

Helen and Paris, Sib. 34°72. 

Heliodorus. 2Macc. 37:8:18,22,25, 
28,31-33,35,87,40 41 518, 

Heliopolis, priest of, Jub. 401° 
44% T. Jos. 18%. 

Helkias, i.e. Hilkiah, a ruler of 
the temple, 1Esd. 1°. 

Helkias, 1Esd. 81. 

Helkias, ancestor of Baruch, 
1Bar. 11. 

Helkias, father of high priest 
Joakim, 1Bar. 17. 

Helkias, Sus. 2, 7, 29, 63. 

Hell, rEn. 5147. Sib. 44°; and 
destruction, Ah. 8°§ (Arab.) ; 
or Hades, 2En. 4017. 411 421; 
the very lowest, 40%. See 
Abyss, Gehenna, Sheol. 

Hellas, Sib. 3510,587,545,564,598,639, 
782,810 470,83 5187, See Greece. 

Hellenic tracts in Sirach, Sir. 
RiE 

Hellenism, pioneer of evils to 
mankind, Sib. 3°°°. 

Hellenization of Jews enforced, 
2Macc. 61-31 2Macc. 2787. Ass. 
Mos. 83-5, cf. 1tMacc. 119%; 
41-33. viven up, 2Macc. 1135-8; 
under Jason, 4Macc. 415% 

Hellenizing, details of in 1 Macc. 


312 


—gymnasium built, 114; uncir- 
cumcision, 115; circumcision 
forbidden, 19%; covenant 
repudiated, 115; sacrificing to 
idols, 14°; sacrificing swine, 
&c., 147; unclean things eaten ; 
profaning Sabbaths and feasts, 
145,45; Law—books bumed, 
156, practices forbidden, 149,57; 
abomination of desolation set 
up, 1°; influences, Zad. 9!0-2; 
priesthood attacked, §§ 93°roi. 

Hellespont, Sib, 47° 5336, 

Hera, Sib. 318° 5140, 

Heracles, Sib. 587; festival of 
at Tyre (high priest Jason 
sends money for sacrifice to), 
2Macc. 4}, 

Heraclitus’ views, Wisd.116z, 2272, 

Hereditary taint of character, 
Wisd. 312 48-672, 

Heredity, 4Macc. 1547, 

Hermes, Sib. 587.296; the planet, 
2En. 3082, 

Hermon, man, 3Macc. 5! &c. 

Hermon, mountain, Jub. 291° 
1En. 6°, 137; where the 
angels who fell descended, 
2En. 18* (Ermon), cf. 1En. 
67°, See Aspis. 

Herod, 1En. 678%”. Ass. Mos. 
§ 7; = an insolent king, Ass. 
Mos, 6? ; =? Man of lies, Zad. 
§ 61i(4) ; sons of, § 6, see 
Alexander ; successors of, Ass. 
Mos. 67%.; suppresses priest- 
hood and Sadducees, Ass.Mos. 
6772. 

Heshbon, Judith 515, 

Hestia, Sib. 3123, 

Heth, children of, Jub. 1945 278. 
See Hittite. 

Hexaemeron, fragment of an, 
2Bar. 2947. 

Hexapla. See Origen. 

Hezaqa, Jub. 342, 

Hezekiah, king of Judah, 
2Macc. 15% Sir. 481722 404 
2Bar. 631:3:5 Mart. Is, 11,7,10,12,18 
245 354:5(In 212 read Zede- 
kiah) 4Ez. 79 ; Testament of, 
Mart. Is. §§ 1, 5. 

Hezron, Jub. 4412, 

Hierapolis, Sib. 3345 5318, 

Hiereel, 1Esd. 91. 

Hieremoth, 1Esd. 927, 

Hieremoth, 1Esd. 92°. 

Hiermas, 1Esd. 97, 

Hieronymus, 2Macc. 12?, 

High, the Most. See 
titles of. 

High places, Jub. 122. 
High priest, Sir. 49!°-50%4 1 Bar. 
1s alee Gat, Bey, aye 
12; political power of, Sir. 
45°42.; succession, hereditary 
45°°n. 

High-priesthood, _ hereditary, 
conferred on Simon Macca- 
baeus, 1Macc. 1441; confirmed 
by Demetrius II, 1438. 

High priests, Maccabaean, adopt 
title of Melchizedek, ‘ priest of 
the Most High God’, Jub.32172, 
T.L. 8! Ass. Mos. 61, 

Hilkiah. See Helkias. 

Hillel, line of, P.A. § 1. 

Hilujaseph, 1En. 8217, 

Hinnom, valley of, 1En, 2645, 
See Gehenna. 


God, 





INDEX 


Hippodrome at Alexandria, 
3Mace. 41! &c. 

Hippodrome, the, T.Jos. 205(8), 

Histories. Sve Book. 

History, earlier and later. 
Moses. 

Hittite, Jub. 362. Sze Heth. 

Hittites, rEsd. 8 T.S, 68. 

Hivite, Jub. 302. 

Hivites, Jub. 148, 

Holiness, counsel of, Zad, 9*° ; 
perfection of, see Perfection. 
Hollow places (= Sheol), 1En. 

27223855. 

Holofernes, Judith § 6 24:14 25 41 
51,2224 61,1017 +1,6,16,26  o17,18, 
20,21 4 41,20,22 1 93,5,6,7,10,18,15,16, 
17,20 132,6,9,15  48,6,11,18,19 7 p11 
16"; slain by Judith, 13°. 

Holy, rEn. 19 93 122 385 a914:5 
412 434 451 47% 4819 sol 512 
572 58% Got 6181012 628 6512 
1037106; and common, Zad. 
151; and profane, 814; Holy 
City = Jerusalem, — Sir, 2412 
368 Ps. Sol. 84, see City; 
Land protects those who 
dwell in it, 2Bar. 292z., sancti- 
fied by God—the scene of 
Messianic salvation, 4Ez. 97. 
ra 13% 2Bar. 29? 407; 
One, Sir. 41472, 23° 4310 478 4820 
1Bar, 4 55—blessed be He, 
BA Ao 5 On)? escem Gods 
titles of; one = Jacob, Azar. 
12; ones of God = angels, 
Sir. 4216 T.L, 38 Ps. Sol. 1749; 
=angels of sanctification, Jub. 
3174; of the Lord = Israel, 
Jub. 33" T.S.6?; Place (= 
Jerusalem or Temple ?), Jub. 
110 Sib. 38, see Sanctuary ; 
Spirit, Mart. Is. 514; of God 
bestowed on man, to be re- 
turned as pure as whenreceived, 
Test. AZp. I 109, see Spirit; 
things (=tithes), Zad. 816, see 
Anointed One, City, Name, 
Sabbath,Spirit; 21 Z7.: used of 
angels, sce Angels; Watchers, 
1En.15*°; of God: Holy, holy, 
holy, 1En. 3912, Lord, 917, 
name (of God), 94 10812, One, 
see God; of heaven: heaven, 
1En. 15%, eternal place, 1En. 
12*; of men: and elect, 1En. 
501, righteous and elect, 1En. 
38*; of Temple: holy place, 
1En. 25°. (Contrast ‘ holy 
eternal place’ = ‘ heaven ’.) 

Homer, borrowed from Sibyl, 
Sib, 342%z,419-481, 

Honour, iEn, 50! 1038 1081112; 
to whom due, Sir. 1019-25. 
paid to wisdom, not wealth, 
1080_y 71, 

Hoof, divided, symbol of dis- 
crimination, Arist. 150. 

Horeb, Sir. 487. 

Horites, Jub. 3719 388, 

Horn, the great = Judas Mac- 
cabaeus, 1En. 90%, 

Host (array) of heaven, P.Man. 
2n.; = angels, P.Man. 157. ; 
of the heavens, 1En, 611° 1048, 
cf. 19601 See Angels. 

Hosts of Azazel punished, 1En. 
54°55*; of God = angels, Sir, 
24°? 4216; of heaven, 1722, 

Houday, one of the king’s sons 


See 








who question Ahikar, Ah. 21°! 
(Arm.). See Baliayn. 

Hours, 1En,.8977., cf. ‘ periods’, 
1En. go!; ‘times’, go® See 
Times. 

House, build a sure, in Israel, 
Zad. 5°; of God = universe, 
Bar. 37475; of instruction, 
Sir. 5157z.; of Israel, the two 
houses of, Zad. 94; of the 
Law = school or college, Zad. 
§ 10 ii. 9°38; = Temple? of 
the Eternal, Sib. 3378; of the 
Great God, 377,778 see 
Temple; for the Great King, 
1En, 9115, Lord of the Sheep, 
1En. 89%%:49; of dominion, 
1En. 93°; glory and dominion, 
93"; of the sheep, 1En, 8959-56 
go*®; a new, IEn. 90%; of 
worship = Temple or syna- 
gogue, Zad. § 4, 14”. 

Hrotitz, Armenian month, Ah, 
3°14 (Arm.). See Ab, Nisan. 

Human flesh eaten, Wisd. 125. 

Humble, Ps. Sol. 514, 

Humility, P.A. 45)412 522; need 
of, Sir, 317% ; exhortation to, 
47, 

Huppim, Jub. 442. 

Hushim, Jub. 4478)29, 

Hydaspes, Judith 18, 

Hyenas = Ethiopians or (?) 
Syrians, 1En. 89°%7, 

Hymn in praise of Creation, 
Sir. 3912-85, 

Hypocrite, Sir. 12° 32(35)157, 
See Double-heart. 

Hyrcanus, John, 1En. 38°. 
10314157, ; king, establisher of 
new priesthood, and prophet, 
TLR. 61272. T.L. 814-15 nores ; 
new priesthood of, T.L.182sg9., 
seé Bath-qol, Messianic; re- 

garded as Messiah in T.Lev. 

Wop" AYZA DAR OAL, Be» 

Hyrcanus II, Zad. § 6ii(c). 

Hyrcanus,son of Tobias,2Macc. 
3117, 


Tadinus, 1Esd. 948. 

Iapetus, Sib, 319, 

Tassus, Sib. 3342, 

Iberians, Sib. 5116, 

Ibn Samik, executioner, Ah. 4! 
(Arab). See Abu Samik, 
Nabusemakh, &c. 

Idleness, Tob. 418. 

Idoil. See Adoil. 

Idol, command to offer to, Ah, 
279 (Syr. ); Bel, Ah. 616 (Arab.). 

Idol temple, Bel rovz. 

Idolatry, 3Macc. 416 611 Wisd, 
13-15; attacked, Arist. § 6, 
134-73 commanded b 
Antiochus, 1Macc. 143; de- 
nounced, Wisd. § 1 Bel 5 Sib. 
Frags. 1, 3; by Abraham, Jub. 
12 21S es) 22. by ica: 
36°; of Babylon, denounced 
in Ep. Jer. §1; of Israel, Jub, 
111; punished eternally, 2En. 
10°; rise of, Jub. 114-7; vanity 
of, Ep. Jer. 4-73. 

Idols, Zad. 934. 

Iduel, 1Esd. 848, 

Idumaea, 1Macc. 415,51 53 681, 

Idumaeans, Arist. 107 2Macc. 
1015,17, 

Teddias, 1Esd. 9°. 


852 


Ignorance, 4Macc. 157.3; and 
sin, 2En.' 3018; an evil in 
itself, 3017, 

Tjaka, Jub. 4478, 

Tjasaka, Benjamin’s wife, Jub. 
34°. 

Tjaska, Jub, 119%. 

Tjona, Jub. 34°. 

Tjusasael, 1En. 8214, 

Tliadun, rEsd. 558, 

Tlium, Sib. 34283482, 


Images, 1En. 65° 9097, se 
_Chiun; molten, Zad. 948, See 
Idolatry. 


Imagination, evil, Zad. 32. See 
Inclination, Yetzer. 

Imalkue the Arabian, 1Macc. 
ii 72, 

{Immanuel. See Jesus Christ.] 

Immortality, Wisd. 34 41 153; 
denial of, 27; of animals, 2En. 
58°2.; of soul, Alexandrian — 
Jews’ doctrine of, 4Macc. § 9— 
righteous enter bliss at death, 
101513177618 1 74,18 1823. wicked 
enter on eternal torture, 993? 
ToHs15 219 7315 185,22; subjec- 
tive, Wisd. 3157. See Eternal, 
FutureLife, Intermediate State, 
Treasures, 

Imnah, Jub. 4471. 

Impurity, wickedness of, Sir. 
2316-27, 

Imputed Righteousness. 
Merits, Righteousness. 

Incense, Tob. 617 82 Sir, 24152, 

Incest, Zad. 791! 917; laws con- 
cerning, Jub. 3310-20; punished 
by burning, 4125,26,28, 

Inclination, the, T.Jud. 18 
T.N. 2° T.G. 55 T.A. 3? T.Jos. 
26 T.B. 6454; of flesh and blood, 
Sir. 1751, see Tendency, Yet- 
zer; the evil, to be shunned, 
Zad. 3:2; Watchers, all flesh, 
and Noah’s sons fell through 
it, 3°41; Abraham, Isaac, 
and Jacob walked not after, 


4°-%; but sons of Jacob did, 
4-10 


See 


Inclinations, the two, good and 
evil, T. A. 137, 15-9, See Yetzer. 

Independence, advantage of, 
Sir. 2974-28; not to be surren- 
dered, 3319-28 (3028-32), 

India, 1Macc. 88 Add. Esth. Bt 
E} Jub. 821 92:3, 

Indian, 1Macc. 638. 

Indians, Sib. 5 195,206, 

Individual responsibility. See 
Soul. 

Indocolpitae, T. Jos, 112. 

Indus, 1En. 477. 

Infanticide, Wisd. 12°; con- 
demned, Sib. 376, 

Informers, reward of, 3Macc. 


Inhabitants of the earth, Zad. 
114 2Bar. 251”, See Dwell. 
Inscription relating to sun and 
stars, discovered by Kainam, 

Jub. 88. 

Insincerity hateful, Sir. 2422-24, 

Inspiratio = disembodied soul. 
See Souls, 

Inspiration, cup of, 4Ez. 1429; 
intensifies natural faculties, 
Tyee 

Intercession by departed, Onias 
and Jeremiah, 2Macc. 1512-16; 


by departed saints for the 
living denied, 2En. 5317.; by 
Moses, for Israel, Ass. Mos. 
12°7.; no, on Day of Judge- 
ment, 4Ez. 7192-15 ; of fathers, 
prophets, or righteous, 2Bar. 
85%. See Angels, Archangels, 
Prayer. 

Intercourse, danger of, with evil 
TEAST a Res & Les ee 
with strangers, 1154, see Asso- 
ciating; unnatural, Sib. 3385596 
45% 5156, Israel guilty of, 
Ps. Sol. 23° 810, 

Iniermediate agencies, not em- 
ployed in bringing in the End, 
4Ez. 5°°-6°. ; not allowed 
between departing soul and 
God, 710?-11572. See Mediation, 
Transcendence. 

Intermediate place, of happi- 
ness, 2Bar. 2177. 591°.; of 
torment, 30° 364 52h22. See 
Chambers, Immortality, Para- 
dise. 

Intermediate state, of righteous, 
souls in peace and joy, guarded 
in chambers, 4Ez. 788° 8597. ; 
of wicked, souls in torment 
await Judgement, 4Ez. 751-8’. 

Interpretation, Zad. 21° 6° 81°, 
See Law, Meaning, Messiah, 
Midrash. 

Involuntary birth and death, 
2Bar. 142° 4815 4Ez. 8°. 

Toanit stations of light, 2En. 
2017.(A). See Ostanim. 

Tonians, Sib. 575°. 

Tram, T.Jud. 81. 

Isaac, 2Macc. 1? Tob. 4? Judith 
826 Sir. 4422 51l2*t Azar. 12 

ub. 17 619 1519.21 163,18,16,17 
17}456:18 1$2,3,5,6,8 y g10,12,15,19,31 
20811 271 221,2:3,5 
2.41s14;15,19,20,25,27,28 
16—18,21,25,27—29,31—33 
18,22 2825 99 4,15,17,18 
22,25-27,31,32 4 22,23,31 
348 35°13 3611518 372 gol? 445 
45°; death of, 40%; T.R. 3% 
Mag! Th~ 199 O° 1 Jud. 
175@4) 251 T.D. 7? T.N. 5? 
AS ge PBs? 10%" Best: 
App. I 10? II 11, 12, Ass. 
Mos. 3° 4Ez. 31° 4Macc. 73419 
1322:17 760,25 1841; and Jacob, 
recorded as friends of God, 
members of the coyenant for 
ever, Zad. 45; sacrifice of, 
Wisd. 10° 4Macc. 137 167° 184; 
=‘a white bull’, rEn. 89". 

Isaac, an elder, Arist. 48. 

Isaac, an elder, Arist. 49. 

Isaelus, Arist. 50. 

Isaiah, Sir. 4822? Mart. Is. 
72,6,7,11,18 27,10 aa 55 Bominee 
31,14 4Macc. 188 Zad. § 8, 6° 
889? A. Contrast 9°(B), which 
quotes Zechariah. 

Isaiah, Martyrdom of: account, 
short, § 1; authorship, § 7; 
bibliography, § 9; date, § 6; 
extent, § 5; in Jewish and 
Christian literature, § 8; 
oriental influences in, § 8; 
original language, Hebrew, 
§ 7; title, § 2; versions, § 3: 
their relations, § 4. 

Tsaiah, Vision of, Mart. Is. §§ 1,5. 

Isdael, 1 Esd. 5°°. 


2.345537 
261,3:5514, 
278,9,12,14, 
{3-5,8,9, 

1,21—-23 





INDEX 


Ishbak, Jub. r91?. 

Ishmael, Jub. 1474 1518,20,28,30 
T7247 gobtl,12 221,34 26,7 
2918; children of, Judith 27°; 
= wild ass in 1En. 891. 

Ishmael ben Elisha, P.A. 317. 

Ishmael ben Johanan ben 
Berokah, P.A. 48. 

Ishmael ben Jose, P.A. 4°1°. 

Ishmaelites, Jub. 201% 341! T.S. 
2° T.Z. 28 43) T.G. 25 T.Jos. 
40° 21 E94" pee sos LB. 2°. 

Ishvah, Jub. 447). 

Ishvi, Jub. 4471. 

Isis, Sib. 55:84, 

Islands, the Seven Great, 1En. 


77°. 
Isles = Gentiles, Sib. 37°. 
Ismael, 1Esd. 97% 
Ismaerus, 1Esd. 9%. 
= ancestor of Judith, Judith 


Israel =Jacob, tEsd. 847 Jub. 
3217 3.436 415,17 4 41,8,9)12 41,3,6, 
15,14 T.L.14? Test. App. 1 101°. 

Israel = people, 1Esd. 120,252 
32,33,48 53 -37,41,46,48,60,61,71 61,14, 
15 74,8,9,15 §8,7,18,59,65,69,72,89, 92,96, 
7:37:39 tMacc. 111,20,25,80,36,48, 

62,64 215,42,46,55,70 31,8,10,85 411, 

25,26,30,81 -3,45,09,63 618,21 75,22, 

26,27 IS (20,21,23,27,51,78 7 o46,61 
1123.41 7252 y341,42,51 7 411,26 162 
2Mace, 129228 428 9° Tob. 14% 

55 14457 Judith 421112,15 62,17, 

21 Q1,84 912,14 p28 yo7,11,14 7 44,5, 

10 y54,9,10,12,18 761,824 Sir, Pro- 

logue 2, 1717 248 3612 4423 451) 

4G! 47221128 4810 go18 5 12lli,v 

Bar, 21:11,26,35 91,4,9,10,24,87 44,5 
57% Add. Esth. C2611,14,16 [6,10 

Jub. 129 314 1527,80,82 1 629,30 7 g19 
23% 309-10,18,14,16-18 315,19 33 

1418 “4717 (453) 485,7,818,14 498 

Bol a Mart-Is; 25101337 TER: 
EAD GSES SUS (See oad Nal De EM 

52557 68(8) 78 gis 10%3 143,68) 
Eo 1S 725 he udath2> 172 20> 
23s Zeb Up ss hey Lele 44- 

g® T.D. 19 54:18 624-778 T.N. 58 
718-3 TG: 258! 1A. 7° T.Jos. 
7222(8-44) 784 1911 2058) TB, 
1081011 7 12(g) 129(6) Test. App. 

Il. 67, 72 Ass. Mos. 3° 10% 
Ez. 329 423 517,95 711,107 316 930 
12% 7423 Ps, Sol. 2% 41 5% 78 

932,34,40 91,2,16,19 yo8 112,7,8,9 
148 163 175528,47,50,51 1815456 

4Macc. 172? (cf.15) Zad.191° 

51,5,7 61-10 gi-6 4,7,8,23-29,40—49 
TI? 148 1515 172 185 201. See 

Jacob. : 

stael, a holy people and a 

blameless seed, Wisd. 10197. ; 

assemblies of, Ps.Sol. 10° ; 
chastened as firstborn, only- 

begotten son, Ps.Sol. 18*; 

children of, 1Esd. 1519 547 7° 

10,18 85 1Macc. 3!%41 1Bar. 278 

Judith 448 528 610 71,4,6,10,17,19 

Io® 159302738 1675 Sir. Arpoals 

22,28 51128¥i Jub, 11 26,27,29,83 

HIT —1118,19,20,22,82,34 7 29,34 

287 301121 3413 3418 3815 4126 

84 461;2,5,9)12,18 4 71,10,11 414-16, 

18,19 

of, Zad. 151; congregation of, 

Jub. 4918; covenant with whole 

of, Zad. 19°; daughter(s) of, Sus. 

48, 57 Jub. 30°; dispersed of 


lol 


g210)18-15, 18,22 5075; cities 





Ps, Sol. 8°4 9?; elect of, Jub. 
1*°; glorious history of, Wisd. 
112-18; God forgave, Zad. 54°; 
God the sole ruler of, Jub. 15°?: 
contrast Gentiles ; God’s First- 
born, Sir. 367 Jub. 2° 4Kz. 
6° Ps.Sol. 184, own people, 
Ass.Mos. 11%, portion, there- 
fore under His direct rule, Sir. 
172"%., servant, Ps. Sol. 127 ; 
history of, in Test. xii Patr.: 
to be redeemed, T.D. 6°; re- 
stored to own land, T.Z. 9§ 
T.A. 77; cast away a second 
tame, (C15 T.juds222 0.2. 
9° T.N. 4° T.G. 82, and again 
restored, T.L. 16° T.Jud. 23° 
ANNs yee baa Gate SAL site 
Palestine under John Hyr- 
canus, T.R. 68%.; captivity 
among Gentiles, T.L. 15} 
A jud= 23° 0.2. .9° E.Da5°: 
dispersed among Gentiles, T.L. 
10% 16° D.iss.- 67, TAY 77:6 
T.Jos. 19?; go after abomi- 
nations of Gentiles, T.D. 5° 
T.N. 41 T.G. 8?; scorn of Gen- 
tiles, T.L. 10* 141; rebellion 
of, foreseen, Jub. 1’, does not 
frustrate God’s love, or nul- 
lify His covenant, 1°; turn to 
strange gods, 18; walk after 
the Gentiles, and their un- 
cleanness, 1°, see Captivity; 
house of, Ps. Sol. g!® 108; 
Jerusalem and Moses predes- 
tined for, Ass. Mos. 1141718; 
parties within, i. the righteous, 
poor, humble, god-fearing, &c., 
Ps.Sol. § 5; ii. the men- 
pleasers, profane,sinners, trans- 
gressors, unrighteous, § 5 7z0¢es; 
fayer, f0f,- Sir 90a Sas 
6160-22) ; righteous compared 
with heathen, Ps.Sol. 1? 297~4°; 
sceptre shall rise out of, Zad. 
98; seed of, Jub. 30° Ps.Sol. 78; 
solidarity of, in merit before 
God, Sir. 47!27.; sons of, Sus. 
48; titles: a nation of righteous 
men, Add. Esth. A°; an evilly 
disposed people, B*; children 
of God, Sib. 52°; chosen peo- 
ple, Add. Esth. E*#4; God's 
firstborn, only-begotten, be- 
loved, Sir. 3612 Jub. 27° 4Ez. 
658 Ps.Sol. 184; people whom 
God made, Sib. 5°°2; sons of 
the Great God, Sib. 3? ; sons 
of the Most High, Add. 
Esth, El@; unique,—elect of 
God! 4B z. § 10, 572-2" 65° 816; 
have covenant with God, 3; 
Law given to, 3!° 9%!; Law 
accepted by, alone, 7792472 ; 
love of God for, 5°1-#°; world 
created for sake of, 4Ez. 6°°77.°° 
741 Ass.Mos. 172 2Bar. 141% 157 
ater 
Israel and Aaron. 
Messiah. 
Israelites, 1Macc. 15° Sus. 7, 28 
4Macc. 181 Zad. 201, 
Issachar, Jub. 2872 332? 3420 387 
4418 T.Jud. 25%? T.Iss, 17:1 ; 
single - hearted husbandman, 
T.Iss. 3-67. 
Issachar,son of Kohath,T.L.12?. 
Issues, the two, of action, T.A. 
a 2e. 


See Aaron, 


853 





Istalcurus, 1Esd. 82°, 

Isthmus, Sib. 572°. 

Italian, Sib. 32°? 4193.41, 

Italians, Sib. 3994. 

Italy, 3404470 4104,126,119,130 5138, 
160,842,448. Sze Latin, Rome. 

Ithamar, 1Esd. 87°. 

Iv, Jub. 44°51, 

Izhar, Test. Afg. II 74. 


Jabbok, Jub. 29%. 

Jabish, 2Bar. 5°. 

Jachin, Jub. 44%. 

Jacob, 2Macc. 12 Tob. 4? 
Judith 8% Sir. 231? 24823 3614 
45° 461014 4722 4gol0 5112811 
Wisds 10s tBare 2934 
Sus O2 nbs bese 
1 q12-16,17,19,21,23,26,27,81 294,5,10, 
11,16,19,20,23,26,28 531-4 9 43-8 951, 
4,12,14 6 5,7,10—13,15,17,18,25,30,35 
271,4,6-9,12,13,18,19,22,25-27 982-6, 
8,9, 11,13—-16,17,19, 20,22,28,25, 26,2830 
29%4-7,12,18,18,20  391,3,6,12,17,24 
311,2:4~6,8,15,19,23,26,27,80,81 3 92,3, 
9,16,17,20,21,25,81,34 3 21,7-9,13,21-28 
3418)412,18 3 51,2,7-10,12,18,19-17, 
20,22,23,25,27 261,14,18,20,28 94,2, 
126,24 981,2,9,12,14 391,2,5 494,10 

2,5,18,19,28,27,33 4 =2,3,5,19 461,2 
TE Re teu IES. neat 2a ler Teno 
&c. Test. App. 11 27 37:18 42,49; 
7,9,13 62 19? II 1-9 Ass.Mos. 3” 
4Ez. 38:19,82 585 689 §18 930 
1246 Ps. Sol. 79 151 4Macc. 219 
719 1317 1625 Zad. 42+ 610 of, 
see Isaac, Israel; a star out of, 
Zad. 98; =‘a white sheep’ in 
1En. 89!?; death of, Jub. 451°; 
descendants, number of, Jub. 
4412-3377,; house of, 1Macc. 178; 
i.e. people of Israel,1 Macc.3%*° 
52; seed of, 2Bar. 174 319; sons 
of, Jub. 30%12,28,26 319%10,10,18, 
21,22" 3 22,93 5 419,20 389,10,13 4 24 
44118 46°; symbolizes future 

re i i Ez. 
a incorruption, 4Ez 

Jacob, an elder, Arist. 48. 

Jacob, an elder, Arist. 49. 

Jacob, Rabbi, P.A. 31° 472:72. 

Jacubus, 1Esd. 9%. 

Jaddus, rEsd. 5°. 

Jableel, Jub. 4437. 

Jahziel, Jub. 44°°. 

Jairus, 1Esd. 5°. 

Jairus, Add. Esth. At. 

Jambri. See Ambri. 

James, Epistle of Saint, relation 
of to Sirach, Sir. § 7(@). 

Jamin, Jub. 44%. 

Jamnia, 1Macc. 4° 5°° ro® 15*° 
2Macc. 12°:32,49; idols of, 12*9; 
sea of, T.N. 61. See Jemnaan. 

Jannaeus. Sze Alexander. 

Jannai, P.A. 4}%. 

*‘Jannes and Jambres,’ quoted, 
Zad. § 8. See Jochanneh. 

Japheth, Jub. 435 791215 85:10, 
12,25,29 97 1089; lot of, 8%. 

Japheth, borders of, Judith 27°. 

Jared, Jub. 4216 1En. 6° 37? 
10618 2En. 3379. 

Jarimoth, 1Esd. 9”. 

Jasaelus, 1Esd. 9°°. 

Jashar, Book of, quoted, T.Jud. 
3-9 motes. 

Jason, son of Eleazar, 1Macc. 
Se 

Jason, 2Macc.1748:10:19,18,22-24,26 


5%°; brother of Onias, sup- 
plants him in priesthood, 4%vz. ; 
attacks Jerusalem, 17 55:6; 
high priest, 4Macc. 41617,18 ; 
builds gymnasium, 43%, 

Jason of Cyrene, Maccabaean 
history of in five books, 2Macc. 
an abridgement of, 2Macc. §1 
a 

Jason, an elder, Arist. 49. 

Jason, an elder, Arist. 49. 

Jason. See Antipater. 

Jasub, Jub. 441°. 

Jasubus, 1Esd. 9%°. 

Javan, Jub. 71° 91° Test. 4f/. I 
9*; kings of = asps, Zad. 92°, 

Jaxartes, 1En. 7777. 

Jazer, 1Macc. 58, 

Jebusite, Judith 51°. 

Jebusites, 1Esd. 8° Jub. 1438, 

Jechonias, king, Add. Esth. A® 
tBar. 1°, See Jeconiah. 

Jechonias, son of Jeelus, rEsd. 
802. 

Jeconiah, king, 2Bar. 112, 
Jechonias. 

Jeconias, captain over a thou- 
sand, 1Esd. 19. 

Jeddu, 1Esd. 524, 

Jedeus, 1Esd. 92% 

Jeeli, 1Esd. 533, 

Jeelus, 1Esd. 8°. 

Jehoahaz (Joachaz), king of 
Judah, 1Esd. 154, 

Jehoiachin, king of Judah, 1Esd. 
1* (Joakim). 

Jehoiakim (Joakim), king of 
Judah, 1Esd, 137,38,39, 

Jehoshaphat, valley of, 1En. 
26° 5317. See Valley. 

Jemnaan = Jamnia, Judith 228, 
See Jamnia. 

Jemuel, Jub. 441%, 

Jephunneh. Seé' Caleb. 

Jeqon, 1En. 695. 

Jerahmeel,Chronicles of, Bel § 4; 
quoted, T.Jud. 3-9 zo¢es. 

Jerechu, 1Esd. 523, 

Jeremiah, Sir, 497 2Bar. 22 55 9! 
10%* 331 Zad. 98; accompanies 
captivity to Babylon in B?, 
1077. 33%; does not accom- 
pany captivity in B!, 10%. 
77'*#.; good works and prayers 
of, support Jerusalem, 2 Bar.2?; 
hides ark, tabernacle, and altar 
of incense, 2Mace. 2!-!2; lover 
of brethren, prayeth fervently 
for people and holy city, 
15“sqg. See Jeremy. 

Jeremiah, an elder, Arist. 50. 

Jeremias, son of Baani, 1Esd. 
9%. 

Jeremiel, i.e. Remiel, arch- 
angel, 4Ez. 4367, 

Jeremy, i.e. Jeremiah, 1Esd. 12%) 
SMI OLE) Soy ISieh a. 

Jeremy, Epistle of, account, § 1; 
date, § 2; original language, 
Hebrew, § 3. 

Jericho, Macc. 9°? 161114 
2Macc. 12) Judith 44 Sir. 2414. 

Jeroboam, Tob. 15 2Bar. 621 
P.A. 5%; curse on, Sir. 497; 

Jerome, Sir. § 8; condemns 
apocryphal books of Esdras, 
1Esd, § 2. 

Jerusalem, 1Esd, 121:31,35,87,39,44, 
46,49,55 24,5,7,8,10,15,16,18,27 43,47, 
48,53,B7,52,83 ¢8,44,46,50,57 61,2,8,18, 


See 








INDEX 


19,20,21,24,26,30,83 
15,17,25,61,81, 91 
114,20,85,44 51,6,18,81 384,85,45 67,12, 
26,48 17,19,27,89,47 - 920 98,50,58 
107)10,81,32,39,48,45,66,74,87. 77,20, 
84,41,51,62,74 924,85 7 92,10,89,49 
1418,36,87 1528,32 1620" 2Mace, 
1110 36,9,87 "419,22,25 52,25 62 g3l 
gf 1015 1158 129,29,43 7428 530 
Tob. 158% 51* ra8syitesg. 
14%5:7 (see New) Judith 19 
4258 519 yo8 7118,14,19 194 755, 
8,9,18 Sir, 24it 3018 4778 1Bar. 
127,915 92,28 48,30 51,5 Add, 
Esth, A® F11 Jub. 12829 Arist. 
32, 35,52 (cf. ‘city’), 105 Mart. 
Is, 19 24,7 31,3,4,6,10 68 TT, 1985 
T.Z..9® T.D.51!8 T.N, 51 
3Bar. Prol. 2, 13 4Ez. 1029.48 
Ps.Sol. 23:18,14,20 94,17,19,21,23,26 
1128;8,9 1716,17,24,83 4 Macc, 43:22 
18°; attacked by Antiochus, 
tMacc. 17°; by Apollonius, 
179; centre of earth, Jub. 819 
1En. 261 Sib. 575°; citadel of, 
1Mace. 1348 15°8; description 
of, Arist. 83-107; destruction 
of, a problem to the pious, 
2Bar. and 4Ezra passim; 
earthly, removed for a time, 
2Bar.1472. 6° 3214Kz.9%8—107472,, 
to be restored in B!, 2Bar. 1472. 
78"., not to be restored in B?, 
1472., symbolized by son of Dis- 
consolate Woman, 4Ez. 1029- 
°%7.; Fall of, in A.D. 7o, pro- 
blem in 4Ezra, § 10(3), due to 
sins of both Judah and Israel, 
2Bar. 771°. ; heavenly, 2Bar. 
4-7, called ‘mother’, 32z., 
= pattern of Zion, 594, shown 
to Abraham and Moses, 45, 
see New; holy, to be, Jub. 128; 
invaded, 4Macc. 45-23 ; lament 
over desecration of, 1Mace. 
26-14; New, Tob. 137-18 145 
T.D. 517; =a new house, 
1En. 90”; to be the Heavenly 
City, 4Ez. § 10, 726 10%5sgq. ; is 
builded for the righteous, 852; 
offerings at, after destruction of 
Temple, 1Bar. §§ 4, 8; Philo- 
pator’s visit to, 3Macc. 1%sg. 
31%sg. 54%; predestined as the 
place of worship to God, Ass. 
Mos. 11718; sanctity of, 3Macc. 
2° 6°; sanctity of, recognized 
by Demetrius I, 1Macc. 101; 
sons of, Ps.Sol. 23; titles of = 
the city of my righteous, 1En. 
567; the holy city, Ps.Sol. 84; 
= the holy place, 1En. 2557. ; 
= the house (of the sheep), 
89°%°155 9975; the uppermost, 
? = the heavenly, Enoch’s 
eternal inheritance, 2En, 552. 
See City, David, Solyma. 

Jerusalemite, 2Macc. 1487, 

Jerusalemites, 2Macc. 4° 836, 

Jeshua Ben-Sira, the author of 
Sirach, Sir. §6; ascribe and 
teacher of wisdom, had tra- 
velled, § 61. 

Jeshua, son of Eleazar, son of 
Sira, Sir. 507., cf. 519 See 
also Simeon, son of Jeshua. 

Jeshua (Jesus), son of Josedek, 
Sir. 49!. 

Jeshurun, i.e. 
gab 77, 


§5,6,10,12,13,14, 
1 Macc. 


9595,87 


Israel, Sir. 








Jesias, 1Esd. 8°, 

Jesias, Arist. 49. 

Jesse, Sir. 45°. 

Jesus, grandson of Sira, Sir. 
Prologue. See Jeshua. 

Jesus = Jeshua, son of Josedek, 
TEsd. 55148,58,58,68,70 62°19, 

Jesus, 1Esd. 58. 

Jesus, 1Esd. 51. 

Jesus, 1Esd. 524, 

Jesus, 1Esd. 57° 

Jesus, a priest, 1Esd. 8%, 

Jesus, 1Esd. 948, 

Jesus, father of Habakkuk, 
Bel r. 

Jesus, an elder, Arist. 48. 

Jesus, an elder, Arist. 49. 

[Jesus Christ . . . Immanuel, 
3Bar. 41.] 

Jetrel, 1En. 69°. 

Jew, 1Macce. 27° 2Macc. 6° 9g!6 
Bel 28 Add. Esth. A?, 

Jewish additions to Testaments, 
Test. §12; books, Arist. 28; 
captives, 4, 22, 33; characters, 
3, 30, see Hebrew; com- 
munity, 310; envoys, guests, 
182,183; factions, 4Macc. 41; 
garrisons in Egypt, 3Macc. 
3°17.; high priest, Arist. 11; 
literature, 121, post-Biblical 
and pre-Christian, Zad.§4; mar- 
riages, Tob. 41%; nation, 2Macc. 
to® ; people, 2Macc. 522; popu- 
lation of Alexandria, Arist. 
308 ; priests, 184; race, 6, 15; 
religion, 4 Macc. 5°; residents, 
123; slaves, 2Macc, 8! ; 
soldiers, 1Macc. 1147; subjects, 
2Macc. 1174, 

Jewry, i.e. Judaea, 1Esd. 152 449 
57,8,57,61 B81 93 Bel 33. 

Jews, 1Esd, 121 218,28" 449,50 61,5, 
8,27 72 810 yMacc, 4) §20,28,24,27, 
29,81 1 928,25,83,84,36 y 1 30,83,47,49, 
50,51 1 28,021 7986 y 420,38,34,36,87, 
40,4147 751,17 >Mace, ylsT10 921 

30,82 411,85,36 524,25 61,8 g10,35,36 
4:7:15 7.912,14,15,24,30 7 1 2,15,16,17, 
30,84 y 21,4,8,17,28,80,84 y 39,18,21,28,95 
1450614,15,37,89 152,12 Tob, 1118 
Sus. 4 Add.Esth. E519 #5 
Arist. 1, 3, 11, 12, 22-24, 30, 
35, 38, 53, 83, 182, 305 Sib. 
4/6 58; Antiochus promises 
to make equal to citizens of 
Athens, 2Macc, 91%18:19 ; apo- 
state, 3Macc. 231 323 410, 
charges against, 3°sg.; Egyp- 
tian, persecution of, 228 &c.; 
deliverance of, 616sg.; embassy 
of, to Philopator, 18; fidelity 
of, to Ptolemies, 3322! 581 6*sg. 
7sq.; numbers of, in Egypt, 
417; of Joppa, massacred, 
2Macc. 1244; of Jamnia, 128, 
seé Tubieni, 121’; political 
subjection of, Zad. § 6ii; 
prevent Philopator entering 
the Temple, 3Macc. 15g, 

Jezebel, 2Bar. 623, 

Jezelus, 1Esd. $82, 

Jezer, Jub. 442°, 

Jezrielus, 1Esd. 9%. 

Joab, 1Esd. 51). 

Joab, 1Esd. 8%5, 

Joachaz, i.e. Jehoahaz, son of 
Josiah, 1Esd. 194, See Jehoa- 
haz. 

Joadanus, 1Esd. g}*. 


854 





Joakim, ice. Jehoiachin, 1Esd. 
1 rBare ies 

Joakim, i.e. Jehoiakim, king, 
1Esd. 138,89, 


Joakim, son of Zorobabel, 
1Esd. 5°. 

Joakim, Sus. 1, 4, 7, 8, 28, 
29, 63. 


Joakim, high priest, 1Bar, 17. 

Joakim the high priest, Judith 
§ 6, 45914 158, 

Joannes, 1Esd, 8°83, 

Joarib, sons of, 1Macc. 2! 14%. 

Job, Sir. 49%. 

Jobab, son of Zara, Jub. 3817:18, 

tJobel, T.Jud. 61. 

Jochanan, Sir. 5017. 

Jochanan ben Zaccai, 1Bar. §7. 
See Johanan. 

Jochanneh and his brother, 
raised by Belial (to oppose 
Moses), Zad. 71%. See Jannes. 

Jochebed, Jub. 478 T.L. 118 124 
Test. 4p2. Il 725 ves 

Joda, 1Esd. 558. 

Joel, archangel, S. A. & E. 
311 3242 Apoc. Mos. 43°. 

tJoel, mount, Mart. Is. 2157. 

Joel, prophet, Mart. Is. 2°. 

Johanan ben Berokah, P.A. 4°. 

Johinan ben Zaccai, P.A, 29-18, 
See Jochanan. 

Johanan the sandal-maker, P.A. 

14 

John, surnamed Gaddis, a Mac- 
cabee, 1Macc, 2? 93638, 

John, father of Eupolemus, 
2Macc. 41. 

John Hyrcanus I, son of Simon, 
1Mace. § 4, 135% 161:2,9,19,21,28 « 
breach with Pharisees, Test. 
§§ I, 10; escapes massacre, 
Macc. 1622; a History of, 
mentioned by Sixtus Senensis, 
1647. ; Messianic hymns to, 


Test. § 1. See Hyrcanus. 
John, the Maccabee. See 
Joseph. 


John, envoy, 2Macc. 1117, 

John, an elder, Arist. 47. 

John, an elder, Arist. 49. 

John, an elder, Arist. 50. 

John of Anathoth, Mart. Is. 25, 

Jokshan, Jub. 1911. 

Jomjael, 1En. 67. 

Jonah, 3Macc. 68, 

Jonas, 1Esd. 9}. 

Jonas, 1Esd. 923, 

Jonathan, 1Esd. 822, 

Jonathan, son of Azael,1Esd.g14. 

Jonathan, son of Saul,1 Macc. 420 
Leola, Geek 

Jonathan, son of Absalom, 
1Macc. 13}, 

Jonathan Maccabaeus, called 
Aphphus, 1Macc, 25 517;24,55 
19,28,31,38,87,48,58,60,6%,65,70,78 1 68, 
7,9, 10,15,18, 21,29, 46, 59, 62,66,69,74,76, 
79,80,84,86,87,88 y 15,6,7,20-23,28-30, 
87,41,42,44,53,57,60,62,68,67,69,71,74 9 
1,8,5;0,24,27,28,80,96,40,44,49,52 y 914, 
15,28,25 y 416,18,30 (killed, 1328) 
2Macc. 871 En. 908; succeeds 
Judas as leader, 1Macc. 925-31; 
struggle of, with Bacchides, 
9°? 8; has centre of govern- 
ment at Michmash, 977. ; 
victory of, over Apollonius of 
Coelesyria, 1087-89, secures 
favour of Demetrius II, 112¢-27; 


assists him against Tryphon, 
1158-58; makes friends with 
Antiochus VI, 11547 ; renews 
alliance with Rome, allies 
himself with Sparta, defeats 
Demetrius’s men, 1Macc. 
12!-88 ; captured by treachery, 
1259-83. buried at Modin, 
1 325-80, 

Jonata, a high-priest, 2Macc. 
ese 

Jonathan, an elder, Arist. 48. 

Jonathan, an elder, Arist. 49. 

Jonathan, P.A. 44. 

Jonathes, Arist. 50. 

Joppa, 1Esd. 555 1Macc. 10776 
118 234 zl 1458t 528,85 
2Macc. 49? 12947 Arist. 115 
Sib. 5752. 

Joram, captain over a thousand, 
1Esd. 1°. 
ordan,; tMacc. 57452 934:42.48, 
Soe adit et? 5a Sirs 247° 
Jub. 10% 16° 2914 50% Arist. 
wi6, A. & EH, .6? 72/8! [42°] 
S. A. & E. 36% 391 Ass. Mos. 
14; = ‘a stream of water’, 1En. 
86°77. 

Joribus, 1Esd. 8*. 

Joribus, 1Esd. 9). 

Josab, son of Isaiah, Mart. Is. 
2,6 29. 

Josabdus, 1Esd. 8°. 

Josaphias, 1Esd. §°°. 

Jose ben Halaphta, P.A. 4°. 

Jose ben Joezer, P.A. 14. 

Jose ben Johanan, P.A. 1%”. 

Jose ben Judah, P.A. 4°°. 

Jose ben Kisma, P.A. 61. 

Jose the Priest, P.A. 21051251818, 

Josedek. See Jesus, Jeshua. 

Joseph, patriarch, 1Macc. 2°°. 


Sir. 49!° Wisd. rol? Jub. 2874 
291 332% 349510)12,18,15,17,18,20 392- 


5,718 492,5,8-13 4 122 4 25,10,18, 
21,25 1,2,8-10,14,23,24 , .3,6,9,23, 
24,38 2,8,6-9,12,14 6152:3,89 


(death of, 46°) 1En. 89%. T.R. 
12 48 67 T.S. 11 25:15)14 4245 51 
Soe hallseraeng ead. a2 
221:2,5(@) A Ne fos 11,5,6 21,5,6,8 
1,2(8)5,6 Beek Sr 84 aC: y 47,8 
Ns 18%57 68 7254 Gyr 6s8,8,? 
3% 511 62 T.Jos. 122 208°) 
T.B. 14 21 31:36 55 rol Test. 
App. 1180 27 31-457,9,11-13 413-15 
52-5 64:8 74 II 82, go 4Macc. 
22 1811; bias against, in Late 
Hebrew Test. of Naphtali, 
Test. Appa lr? 4 5°68? 7% ; 
cause of bondage in Egypt, 
Test. App. I 11%; death of, 
ieee 0, S. itt ae 127 5 
example, held upas, or praised, 
Gers DS. 425. 6) 3° 
782-1. Ds, 17-TNAs% TB. 
316-7 55; rides on bull, and 
demands ten staves (= tribes) 
from Judah, Test. Aff. 13*8; 
shuns shaming his breth- 
pense 1. Jos. 10% 112 15° 17"; 
sons of, cause Israel to sin, 
Test. App. 1119; steers ship 
of Jacob and wrecks it, Test. 
App. 15%; suppresses truth 
to save eunuch, T.Jos. 16°; 
three days and three nights in 
the pit, T.Z. 4*(6AS) ; virtue 
of, 4Macc. 27:18". 
Joseph, son of Zacharias, a 








INDEX 


Maccabaean leader, 1Macc. 
5 18,58,60, 
Joseph, i.e. John the Maccabee, 
2Macc. 87277, rol. 
Joseph, son of Oziel, Judith 8! 
Joseph, an elder, Arist. 47. 
Joseph, an elder, Arist. 47. 
Joseph, an elder, Arist. 49. 
Joseph, an elder, Arist. 50. 
dteer hus, son of Ezora, 1Esd. 


Josephus, 1Macc. § 7iii(c); 
relation of 3Macc. to, 3Macc. 
§ 5; 4Maccabees attributed to, 
4Mace. § 7. 

Josephus, ‘the Hebrew’, 4Macc. 
§ 8. 

Joshua, Moses’ successor, Macc. 
255 2Macc. 12/5 Sir. 461 Ass. 
Mos. 1% rott15 ae rast 
Oia Qn edi 7.0 De Nal: 
Zad. 7°; and the Judges, the 
time of, En. 89%°7z. 

Josie, the high priest, 1En. 
89772. 

Joshua ben WHananiah, P.A. 
10,12,13,15, 

Joshua ben Levi, P.A. 67. 

Joshua ben Perahiah, P.A. 1°. 

Josiah, king of Judah, 1Esd. 
11,7,18,21,22,¢3,24,25,98,32,38,34 Gir 
491-%.4 1Bar. 19 2Bar. 661 4Ez. 
1340; Passover of, 1Esd. 11-22, 

Josias. See Josiah. 

Joy, = 1016 47* 51° 697° 103° 
1044. 

Jozabdus, 1Esd. 9”. 

Jozabdus, 1Esd. 9?°. 

Josabdus, 1Esd. y*. 

Jubilees, Book of, 1En. 777. 
1647. 987. ‘Testaments, 
Appendix II notes Zad. §§ 6, 
8, 12, 20!z. ; abbreviations and 
symbols in, Jub.§ 18 ; account, 
2 ts eae and ah ee 

26 ibliography 16; 
date, § 9; influence on NGA. 
§ 15; MSS., § 3; relation of 
to 1Enoch, TEn. § 10(@); re- 
lation of to Massoretic text of 
Genesis, § 8 ; textual affinities, 
§ 7; theology, § 16; title 
§ 2 x versions, 5 4, Eth. and 
Latin from Greek, § 5; Greek 
from Hebrew, § 6. 

Jubilees, Jub. Prologue, 1\* and 
passim, 

ee laws regarding, Jub. 
Bones. 

Judaea (see also Jewry), 1Esd. 
1 26,38,87,39,46 94,5,16 ,45 572 68,27,28 
812 1Macc. 334 42:85 58)18,28,59 
618,53 524,46 60360568 1028545 1 120, 
28,84 7235 7393 433 1 590,89,40 
1619 2Macc. 12:10 511 §9 10% 
11° 134518 141214 Tob. 11% Ju- 
dith 122 39 41:37 821 1119 Add. 
Sao nen fe F 83, pect 
31 art. Is, 12 SID. beer 

Judah, land of, BE sda dee 
Judith 147 Sir. 481° 49*; Zad. 
617 88 9% [of] 9%; animus 
against in Zad. Frag. § 12, cf. 
es e lege: awe from, 
g® 161; house of, no more 
join, 67: land of, go forth 
ou oe 61 oi sipnces ee Das 

a ter of, Sus. 22 5 
TBar. 13,8,9,15 21,28,26 Mart a 
12 267 330,710,112 58; 1Mace. 





129 25,18 38,39 545,58,68 65,12 
710,22,49 g1,97,72 1 980,88,87 y 24,46,52 
13114 ; son of Jacob, T.R. 14 
HE BRIS PLE 1) Del Nes 
PGi Ose Lajud aise mhstel 7. 
182 2646) T.JIss. 57 T.Z. 4? 
ARTIS Wey ITCIN GS ee (Goes 
DG aso SEP aiosakoe 
DB Tio sMesteagan lute 25 
34-9 4812 28-5 624 IT 3 Jub. 
281517 3 1559)12,18,81 9522" 343,20 
38125 41 1-4,6-9,18,14,16,19,28,27,28 
4219 4311 449.15,34 ; blessing of, 
Jub.311*°; exploits of, T.Jud. 
2-7; forgiven for sin of ig- 
norance, Jub. 4125; sins with 
Tamar, T.Jud. 12; to be king, 
ANS GAM iets re 1s 

Judah, tribe of, 1Esd. 28 5°%6 
9° Sir. 4275; Levi and, see 
Levi. 

Judah ben Illai, P.A. 47°. 

Judah ben Tabbai, P.A. 1°. Zad. 
Ree 


$9” - 

Judah ben Tema, P.A. 57954. 

Judah the Holy. See Rabbi. 

Judaism, 2Macc. 81 149%; and 
apocalyptic, En. § 1. 

Judas, 1Esd. 9°. 

Judas, 2Mace. 12°. 

Judas, an elder, Arist. 47. 

Judas, an elder, Arist. 40. 

Judas, an elder, Arist. 50. 

Judas ben Tabbai. See Judah. 

Judas, son of Chalphi, 1Macc. 
Exo: 
udas Maccabaeus, 1 Macc. 24°° 
1,10,12—14,16-18,45,26,42,55,58 43,5, 
6,8,11,16,19,21,23,29,35,36,41,59 -3,10, 
16,17,19,24,27,31,88,40,42,44,45,48,49,53, 
55,62,68,65,68 619,32,42 ~6,10,23,25,28, 
29,30,81,35,40 91,17 ()5,7;10,12,14,16,18, 
19,22,28,26,28,29,81 y 39 y 418 »Macc, 
219 527 g1,12 y25,11,1%,14,15,21-28, 
26,86,88,89,42 y 21,10,12,20,23  41,6,10, 
11,18,14,17,18,24-26,80,83 51,615, 
17,26 yEn. go%z.10-12; Macca- 
baeus, 1Macc. 82° 2Mace. 8°16 
1O1516,18,21,25,29,83 7 16,7,15 y 219,20 
1324 142730 15721; campaigns 
of, 109-38 1 21-45; collects books, 
ait; death of, 1Macc. 9%, 
result of, 92%; regarded as 
Messiah in 1En. 83-90; revolt 
and early successes of, 2Macc. 
81-36; ‘song in praise of, 
1Macc. 3!°; victories over 
Apollonius and Seron, 31°, 
Gorgias, 41-5, Lysias, 47°-*°, 
Edomitesand Ammonites, 51°, 
in Gilead, 5°. 

Judas, son of Simon the Macca- 
bee, 1Macc. 167%14, 

Jude, Saint, Epistle of, Ass. 
Mos. §§ 2, 10 1En. § 10(4), 1°. 

Judge, judgement, P.A. 115838338 
320 49,10,29, 

Judge, no, Zad. 94°; the, 201. 

Judgement, according to works, 
Sir. 1614; at end of Messianic 
kingdom, before spiritual bliss 
of righteous, Jub. 23°%7.; by 
sword at beginning of Messi- 
anic age, Wisd. 41%. ; concep- 
tions of 2 1Hno0ch: (1) First 
World Judgement :— over men 
= Deluge, 1En. 54719; ‘a 
great chastisement’, 91°; ‘the 
first end’, 93*; earth and 
dwellers thereon destroyed, 


855 








102 1061 ;—over fallen angels 
and giants, 10451215; (2) 
Judgement of the sword at 
the degznnzng of the Messianic 
kingdom when righteous de- 
stroy the wicked, 50? go! g1¥? 
957 961 9812; (3) Final World 
Judgement at the beginning 
of the Messianic kingdom ;— 
over Azazel and his hosts, 
54° 55*;—over their elect and 
beloved children, 56° ;—over 
the fallen stars, the seventy 
shepherds, and the blinded 
sheep, 90-27 ; ‘the great 
dayi,w22) 254° -eotheereat 
judgement’, 10° 161 19! 224; 
‘the judgement that is for 
ever and ever’, 10¥; (4) 
Final World Judgement at 
the close of the Messianic 
kingdom:—‘great judgement’, 
94° 981° root 1038 104°; (2) 
and (3) are combined in 48°~°; 
(2) and (4) are combined in 
99°", see also Day, Messianic 
Kingdom, Punishment; con- 
ceptions of, 27 4#z.; according 
toworks, 88° ; by God Himself, 
733; day of, no intercession 
on, 7102-115, Final, 793-44 618 838; 
predestined by God, 77°; sets 
in at once after death, 771%, 
see Intermediate State ; con- 
ceptions of, zz /ubz/ees:—final, 
at close of Messianic kingdom, 
Jub. § 15, 239°; embracing 
humanandsuperhumanworlds, 
51014; impartial, according to 
opportunities, 52°; Lex talionis 
observed by God in this world, 
43! (Cain), 484 (Egyptians) ; 
punishment to follow at once 
on transgression in some cases, 
3717; retribution, individual 
and national in this world and 
next, § 15; day of, Judith 1677; 
Wisd. 3}8 4° (by righteous, 3”; 
by God Himself, 517) Jub. 227 
231! 361° T.L.3° 3Bar. 12. Ps. 
Sol. 1518; definite reckoning 
for, 2Bar. 271-284 2En.32?-337 
6770; eternal, 1En. 91° 104°, 
cf. 10!; final, 2Bar. 48° 50° 
AA eee Bloom Cn merenls 
1En, 16! 224 254 g1!® g4® 981° 
1004 1038 104°; grievous, 91°; 
of angels, 682; of fire, 91°; of 
God, 149 144 22101118 456 442 
5c# 60% 63812 6510 661 672% 
12,18 682,35 691,27 814 831 844 
go%:8! 917 93% 911415 9523 968 
9735 9880 99! 1001 10358 
1043 108!3 4Kz. 7447073115 gis 
1455 Ps.Sol. 216:18,86,87 87,38 910 
151514 Ah, 2° Zad.12 91286, 
48,5152 tol2 A. & E, 29%2°, 
certain, Sir. 351718, denounced 
on Antiochus, 2Mace. 7%°, on 
Nicanor, 8!1 158-%5, forms of, 
Sib. § 8; of Mighty God, 3°"; 
= assizes of the world, 4*, 
follows ondestruction of world, 
4179-192 ; of secrets, 1En. 68; 
righteous, 27% 608 61° gi™; 
true, 273. See Reckoning. 
Judgements, two, one by water, 
and one by fire, A. & E. 49%. 
Judges, duty of, P.A. 1°; of 
the earth = rulers of Jewish 


1 aoe se 


; /) I 

« ie / ; 4 

_ Ma hm: do? INDEX 
kim HE MW Q VY Jot J] 

community at Alexandria, | King = the congregation, Zad. 

Wisd. 177. 64.; of the con- | 97; no king, Zad. 9". 
gregation,.Zad. 117?, cf. 154°, | Kingly dignity depreciated, 
Judges, the, Sir. 46%. See | *Zad. § 12. ; 

Joshua. Kingdom, kingship, P.A. 37 
Judging, hasty, Sir, 112-13, 4'7 68; and priests, Israel to 
Judith, Book of, account of, | be, Jub. 1618y.; future, eternal, 

short, § 1; author, a Pharisee, on this earth in Testaments, 

§ 753 date of original and | Test. § 16; of Heaven, 3Bar. 
versions, ¢27’ca@ 150 B.C., § 5; 117; righteous to receive, 
historical framework of text, Wisd. 51°; theocratic, under 

§ 6; integrity of text, § 6; later Angel first, then onder God 
use of, § 8; MSS. of, § 3; alone, Ass. Mos. ro!-!9, See 
theology, §9; title, §2; ver- | Messianic Kingdom. 
sions, ancient, of, § 4; Greek, Kings, Zad. 48; after Solomon, 
Syriac, Vulgate, ‘Chaldee’, | wickedness of, Sir, Ayame 


renewal of mankind, Jub. 2326— 
51; retaliation, Jub. 4°1, see Lex 
talionis; seek, those who, 
persecuted, Jub. 12; son of, 
2Bar. 464; supremacy of, Sir. 
§ gii ; teaching concerning, zz 
Aristeas, Jewish, purpose and 
function of, Arist. § 2,128-171 ; 
called Scripture, § 3; divine, 
3, 313, holy, 5, of Jewish race, 
15; oracles of God, 158, 
177; reasonableness of, 128; 
sacred, 313; value of, § 6, see 
Lawgiver; teaching concern- 
ing, 72 2 Baruch and 4 Ezra, 
2Bar.15°7. 38%7.; 22 2Baruch: 


Laodicea, on Lycus, Sib. 347! 
4107 5290, 

Lapithae, Sib. 5185, 

Last, days, 4Ez. 13/8; time, 
1379; times, varying concep- 
tions of in 4 Ezra, 4Hz. 85%. : 
they who live at the, 4Ez, 85° 
147. See Times. 

Lasthenes, 1Macc. 113172,82, 

Latin, Sib. 35! 5168; Version, 
Old, of Sirach, variation of 
order from LXX, in chaps. 
30-6, Sir. §§ 4, 5ii. 

Latins, Sib. 3597, 

Latium, Sib. 3956 51 

Law, the, 1Macc. 149:58,56,57 521, 

































see Pharisaic teaching. 

judith, daughter of Merari, 
Judith 84-49 91 101028 115 y 24; 
14,1618 1 32,8411 y 41,7,8)14)17 y 58,11 
161%719,20,21,25;4 Simeonite,g?; 
(?) festival of, Judith 165. ; 
prayer of, 97-14; slays Holo- 
ternes, 13°; song of, 162-17, 

Juel, son of Baani, 1Esd. 9°, 

Juel, son of Nooma, 1Esd. 9°. 

Julian emperors, 4Ez. 11%. 
Tues 725 

Julius Africanus, Sus. § 5, 54- 
597. 1En. 10(c). 

Justice, Wisd. 18 1129 ; 431, 

Justification, by the Law, 2Bar, 
51° 67° 757; by works and 
faith, 4Ez. 97 138 Sir. 16147, ; 
doctrine of in 2Baruch and 
4Ezra, 2Bar. 219”. See Faith. 

Justify, various meanings of, 
2Bar. 2197. 

JustinMartyr,1En. 8%, 1587, ; 
quoted, 2Bar. 2987. 


Kaber, Jub. 117, 

Kabratan, land of, Jub. 3222. 

Kadesh, Zad. 4° Jub. 161° Judith 
1°; -Barnea, 514, 

Kadmiel, 1Esd. 526, 

Kadmiel, 1Esd. 558, 

Kadmonites, Jub. 1428, 

Kaftur, Jub, 824, 

Kainam, Jub. 81. 

Kamaturi, islands of, Jub. 98. 

Karaites. See Zadokite Party. 

Karaso, Jub. 8}8. 

Kariathiarius,i.e.Kiriath-jearim, 
1Esd. 519, 

Kamaim, Jub.29!. SeeCarnaim. 

Kasbeel, 1En. 6913, 

Kasdeja, 1En. 6912, 

Kedesh, in Galilee, 1Mace. 
11372,73 ; Naphtali, Tob. 12. 
Kedron, 1En. 26%. 1Mace. 
12°77, 158°.41 169, See Cedron. 

Keel, 1En. 82°, 

Kenan, Jub. 41°. 

Kenites, Jub. 1418, 

Kenizzites, Jub. 1418. 

Keras, 1Esd. 529, 

Kesed, Jub. 8° 1113, 

Ketab, rEsd. 530, 

Keturah, Jub. 191 204511,12 237, 

Keys of Kingdom of Heaven, 
3Bar. 112, 

Khikar, Armenian name for 
Ahikar, Ah. passim. 

Khons, Tractate of, Tob. §§ 7,9. 

Kilan, 1Esd. 525, 

Kin. See Marriage. 

King of king of kings, P.A, 3}. 
See God, titles of, 












and the mighty, 1En. 385621-9 
631% 67812; of Gentiles = 
dragons, 9”; of Javan = asps, 
97°; twelve = twelve Caesars, 
4Ez. 121472.; four, 12747. 
Kinsman, like ‘father’, ‘friend’, 


a title of honour, 1Macc. 
11517, 

‘Kinsmen’, a court title at 
Philopator’s court, 3Macc. 
539,44 


Kirama, 1Esd. 529, 

Kirjath-Arba, Jub. 19}. 

Kirkisani, a Karaite scholar, 
Zad. § 2. 

Kiseus = Kish, Add. Esth. A. 

Kites, = Egyptians under the 
Ptolemies, 1En.g0%7.; =(?) 
Edomites, 1En. 901872, 

Kittim, Jub. 247829 3710 See 
Chittim. 

Knowledge, limit to human, 
Sir. 37172,-28 4Ez, 41-11, 

Kohath, Jub. 4414 T.L, 113:8 722 
Test. Agp. II 66, 74. 

Kokabel, 1En. 83 692, 

Kokabiel, 1En. 67. 

Konae, Judith 44, 

Koran, parallels in with Ahikar, 
Ah. §3f 

Kozeba, T.Jud. 62. 

Krasos, Sib. 3439, 

Kronos, the planet, 2En. 30%, 

Kruno. See Kronos. 

Kuchavim, the ninth heaven, 
2En. 21°, 

Kush, Test. 49.1 98. 


Laban, Jub. 199 25° 218,10,12 
281-4,6,8,9,25,26,28,30 “5 01,%,4,6,712 
31? T.Jud.9! T.N. 1 Test. 
App. II 62. 

Labana, 1Esd, 53°, 

Labourer inferior to scribe, Sir. 
3824-80, 

Laccunus, 1Esd. 9%. 

Lacedaemonians, 2Macc. 59. 

Ladder of Tyre. See Tyre. 

Lagus. See Ptolemy. 

Lamb = Samuel, David, 1En. 
89%, 

Lambs=Chasids, 1En. go®1%y2, 

Lamech, Jub. 427,28 738 En, rol 
106124:1012,18 TB 4, 

Lamp, Tob, 813; of Temple 
service extinguished, 4Ez, 1022, 

Land (= Palestine), blessed, 
1En. 271; of His elect ones, 
56°; pleasant and glorious, 
89*°; special sanctity of, 2Bar. 
2977. 

Landmark, remove the, Zad, 111 
8 9; of the Law, break 
down, Zad. 94°, 


856 


26,27,42,48,50,58,04,67,68 448,50 42,45, 
47,52 yol4,61 121 348 7 414,29 
2Macc. 1319 4Mace, 117,34 28,9, 
10,18,28 220 419,28,24 ,16-21,%5,80,84 
622,28 17,8,15 825 24,15 7 15,12,27 
1318,22,24 7 510,29 1616 yy16 gI,10 
Sir. Prologue 9, 20, 1115 15} 
1924 2428 2628 3215)17,24 243 248 
3908 418 42? 455 494 Sus. 3, 62 
Jub. 30! Arist. 171, 313 1En. 
93° 10614 108}, cf. 54 g9!4 T.L. 
13° 14% 102° DN oie AG oe 
4Ez. 319,20,22 717,20,72,81,04 gv9,56 
91,81,82,86,37 7 398,54 7 421,22. ang 
books of Law, attacked, 1 Macc. 
149,58,56,57, defended, 221,26,27, 
48,50,58,04,67,68 548 733. and 
Messianic expectation two 
centres of Jewish thought, 
alternately one or other be- 
comes more prominent, 2Bar. 
§ Io, 15°. ; and Prophets, 
Sir. Prologue 1, 5, 13 Zad. 
§§ 8, 10, 13, see 94°, read 
before battle, 2Macc. 159, cf, 
Book, holy; and Temple, duty 
of Diaspora to, Tob. § 7; 
books of, Arist. 30; devotion 
to the, 3Macc. 34 711 Ass. Mos. 
9°; disobedience to, Wisd. 212; 
eternal, Sir. § gii 1En. 992, 
lamp of, 2Bar. 592, cf. 198; 
everlasting, no atonement for, 
Jub. 331" ; filled with, Sir. 216 
for sinners, tEn. 934; he that 
taketh hold of, i.e. Scribe, Sir. 
1512.; holy, Sib. 3276284. Israel 
will forget, Jub. 114; Israel’s 
eternal and inalienable glory, 
1Bar. § 7, 4-8; Jewish, to be 
universal, Wisd. 184; loyalty 
to, brings own reward, Sir. 33 


(36); not mentioned in 
Add. Esth. §; of eternal 
covenant, Ps.Sol. 105%. ; of 


God, T.R. 38 T.L. 13%3(6-4) 
T.Jud.18° T. Iss. 51 T.D, 69:10(8) 
T.N. 3? T.G. 47 T.A. 75; of 
the Lord, T.R.6® T.L. 9° 
ES toe Oe anid 82607 
TOL SD etme New a Ognenn es 
3? T.A. 68 T.Jos. 45(8) 11 
T.B. 10%; of the Most High, 
T.G. 31; of lawgiver, 4Kz. 
7°; of life, Sir. 171442, 4Ez. 
14°°; of Lord, 1Esd. 193:48 &,; 
of luminaries, 1En, 721.2 ; 
moon, 73' 741; stars, 79}; 
sun, 72°°; twelve portals, 
76; of Moses, T.Z, 34 (or 
scriptures) of our fathers = 
written covenants, 4Ez. oes. 
reading of, by Ezra, 1Esd, § I, 


9°"; renewed study of, and 





abideth, 7715; accepted by 
man, 15°; alone left to Israel, 
85°; a more excellent, given 
to Israel than to all peoples, 
77°; and Zion to be re- 
membered, 848; exacts its 
rights, 4877; glorified in pro- 
portion as Messianic and 
national hopes fail, 1557. ; 
importance of, in 2 Bar., esp. 
in B}, but most in B?, 2Bar. 
§ 10; is light, 1842; is life, 
38; Israel’s unconditional 
possession, 8587.; one, from 
One, 48%; by one (Moses), 
85147. rejected by Gentiles, 
48*7.; will aid Israel, 484 ; 
will requite sinners on God’s 
Day, 4847; with Israel, 4822; 
tn 4 Ezra: =i, written scrip- 
tures of O.T., 4Ez. 1422, burnt, 
1471; ii, oral, transmitted by 
Moses to the wise,14772,; brings 
terror by its condemnation, 
and drives to appeal to God’s 
mercy and forgiveness, 7192_ 
88,86 ; fidelity to=‘ faith’, see 
Faith ; gift of God to Israel, 3}° 
9°1sgg.; imperishable, 9877. ; 
offered to all nations, accepted 
by Israel, 78:24,72. refused 
by heathen, 724; Son of Man 
destroys enemies by, 1338; 
teachers of = Scribes, 829; 
Ten Tribes restored on seeking 
again, 13'sgg.; unique, 527; 
weakness of, as redemptive 
power, § 10; teaching con- 
cerning, zz Jubilees : a revela- 
tion in time of what was time- 
less and eternal, Jub. §§ 12, 
15; the ultimate and complete 
expression of absolute truth— 
this precluded any further re- 
velation byprophecy—spiritual 
interpretation of, § 15 ; teach- 
ing concerning, zz Sirach: 
eternal ; identified with wis- 
dom Sir. § gii ; teaching con- 
cerning, 2 Zad.: Book of, 
hidden till Zadok arose, Ws 
custom of, 91; House of, 
9°85 interpretation of, Gos 
midrash, 98°; order of, 9}; 
study of, 88 98, true meaning 
of, 812) (= welll, (Seen toune 
kept, 2Macc. 14 23 417 61,23,28 
775,80; unwritten, the, 2Bar. 
57°; wisdom identified with, 
Sir. § 1; witnesses to God’s 
mercy, Ps.Sol. 10572. 
Lawgiver, see Leader, Star; 
= Moses, Arist. 131, 139, 148, 
153. 


Laws abont fruit, Jub. 7°”. 

Lawyers. See Scribes. 

Leader, 1En. 827°; of day and 
night, 75°; of sheep, 891°; of 

Stars,172° 747, 80! 821011. of 
Zadokites, first = Star or Law- 
giver; second = Teacher of 
Righteousness, Zad. § toii,iv. 

Leah, Jub. 283-5,9-14,16,17,20-22 
BOe sae GOs S27) Wapads 
18 T.Iss. 14575915 22; death of, 
Jub. 3671. 

Leba Nasr =Salmanassar, Mart. 
isa 

Lebanon, Sir. 39'* 501? (see 
Libanus) Jub. 87 9* 107%38 
TT En: 13°. 

Leisire needed for study, P.A. 
28, 

Lending and suretyship, Sir. 
§12-18 ; and borrowing, 29) 8. 

Length of days, tEn. io0® 711", 
Chir oesn sce) Life: 

Leo, Sib. 5516,52%8,525, 

Leprosy, law of, Zad. 157-8. 

Lesbos, Sib. 5421:816, 

Lessau, village, 2Macc. 147°. 

Letters, in 1 Maccabees, 1Macc. 
§ 7: i. (@) from Jews in Gilead 
to Judas, 51°15; (4) from 
Jonathan to Spartans, 12°18; 
(¢) from Areios of Sparta to 
Onis, 12202 = ii, (2) from: 
Alexander Balas to Jonathan, 
1018-2 ; (4) from Demetrius I 
to Jewish nation, 10% * ; (c) 
from Demetrius II to Jonathan, 
1120-87. (@) from Antiochus VI 
to Jonathan, 1157; (¢) from 
Demetrius II to Simon, 139° #9; 
(f) Antiochus VII to Simon, 
157°; iii. (az) from Romans, 
88-32. (4) from Spartans to 
Simon,142°-®; (c) from Lucius, 
Roman consul, to Euergetes Il 
of Egypt, 1516-22. 

Letters of Philopator, 3 Macc. 
alsa. 745g. 

Levi, 1&sd. 847 Tob. 17 Bel 1 
Jub. 281417 04:18 3 155%)12,18,16,81 
3218:8,9 3222 348,20 295 4434 
BR TR. 65E800 TS, 5*% 
71,2 T.L. 1} 26 52 811 ro4 
Tijad: 57 2° 25%? T. Iss. 57 
Bees 203010 TN 5o-5 688 
8? T.G. 8! T.Jos. 1911 T.B. 
r12©) Test. App. I 2* 3° 7° 
45,8)11,12 53 614 IT 61, 83 Ass. 
Mos. 9! 4Macc. 219; blamed 
for slaughter of Shechemites, 
219; in Fubilees, Levi blessed 
by Isaac, given the primacy, 
Jub. 3113-17; chosen for priest- 
hood because of slaughter of 
Shechemites, Jub. 
dream of, at Bethel, 321; chosen 
to priesthood as tenth son, 
32%8; receives books of Jacob, 
45%; receives tithes from 
Jacob, 324°; vision of, sees 
future on seven tablets from 
heaven, 3221; zz Test. X/I 
Patr. (in original Testaments) 
as high priest, T.R. 68:10-12 
T.S. 72 T.L. 21; as king, T.R. 
67-12 T.L. 84 18%; as law- 
giver, T.R. 68; as prophet, 
T.L. 21° 815 T.B. 9?; as son of 
God, T.L. 42; as warrior of 
Gaus, 62. T.S, 5°5 


Boas 








INDEX 


destroys Shechem,T.L. 5%* 64; 
ordained by God Himself, 21°, 
to new priesthood, 814 18?, 
with a new name, 814; pre- 
eminence above Judah, T.R. 
oye As el sab ect bee) Gate fabeeas 
LE2SG7 ey be Des 7m Nw” 
S24 oT. Gish | Eaiose) 1912s 
Reuben, Simeon, Dan, will 
attack, Dak Deh > De 
54; visions of, T.L. 2°sgq. 
81sgg.; shield given to, 5° 67, 
see Priesthood, Maccabeans ; 
(in first century B.C. additions 
to Testaments), T.L. 1014-1 
T.D. 58-7; Messiah expected 
from, Zad. § 12, see Aaron, 
Messiah ; priest and king— 
reflects Maccabean _priest- 
kings, Test. § 10; recognized 
as priest by Jacob, Test. App. 
II 9; recognized as priest by 
Isaac, 13. 

Levi, Testament of, original 
source of, Aramaic and Greek 
Fragments of, Test. Aff. I1; 
Test. Levi quoted, Zad. 61°. 

Levi, tribe of, Sir. 45° Bel 1; and 
Aaron, Zad. 11%, see Aaron ; 
and Judah, Naphtali bids his 
sons follow, Test. 4f/. 1 18; 
salvation to arise from, T.S. 
bt Teleral! TN, 8? -1.Ge8? 
T.Jos. 19. 

Levi, an elder, Arist. 48. 

Leviathan, 1En. 607 2Bar. 29*. 
4Ez. 64%; reserved for Mes- 
sianic banquet, 6°. 

Levis, 1Esd. 9". 

Levitas of Jabneh, P.A. 4*. 

Levite, Add. Esth. F”. 

Levites, 1Esd. 13:7:9:10,14,16,21 28 

BS 5 26,46,58,59,68 176,8,10,12 §5,10, 
22,42,49,59 Q60,63,69,96 ¢23,37,48,49,53 
Jub.3018 Zad.57 61 15°; are they 
who joined the penitents (= 
priests), 6+. 

Levitical laws of purification, 
Jub. 38 ; priests = servers of 
the Holy One, Sir.414z. 

Lex talionis, see Judgement, 
Retribution in kind: exempli- 
fied in Cain, Jub. 4°}. 

Liar to be destroyed, Sir. 
2024-26, 

Libanus, 1Esd. 4%% 5°° Judith 
17 Sir. 2418 (see Lebanon) 
T.S. 63. 

Libations on tombs, Ah. 27° 
(Syr. A). 

Libnai, Test. App. II 74. 

Mibyay Sibmge 5... 

Lies, man of (= Herod?), Zad. 
§ 6, 9°. 

Life, book of memorial of, Test. 
App. 1159, see Book; bundle 
of, see Bundle of; = eternal 
life in heaven, 4Ez. 7129187 
8137,, see Eternal; everlast- 
ing, 2 Macc. 7°; everflowing, 
786; future, 22 1 Enoch, IEn. 
559 1435 2210 38° 487 564 58° 
61712 6218 672 96° 9814 103°19 
10819; elect, 944; eternal 
(= everlasting), 15*° 374 40° 
58%; eternal (= 500 years), 
tol; long, 25°; =a blessed 
immortality of the soul (not 
body) after death, Jub. 23%*; 
first found in Jubilees in last 








two centuries B.C.; next in 1En. 
gt-104, Jub. § 15; law of, see 
Law; lay up with the Lord, 
Ps. Sol. 9°; of eternity (not in 
Sadducean sense), Zad. 5°; of 
individual continued in chil- 
dren, Sir. 3047.; of world to 
come, P.A. 28, cf. portion 
in world to come, 31°; per- 
petual, Ah. 41 (Arab.); rope 
of, Sib. 3%; pious inherit, 
Ps, Sol. 147; tree of, see Tree; 
trees of = pious, Ps, Sol. 14?. 
See Garments. 

Light, creation of, 4Ez. 6%; 
generation of, 1En. 10811; of 
endless world, 2Bar. 48°°; of 
Gentiles, 1En. 484; of the 
Law, Wisd. 1847. T.L. 14*; 
of Righteousness, T.Z. 9°. 

Lightning, 1En. 14217 173 41% 
431-2 44 598 608-19 ; symbo- 
lizes the Messiah, 2Bar. 53°72. 

Lights, 1En. 591%; feast of, 
I Macc. 4527.; of heaven, 
righteous shine as, 1En. 1047; 
prince of (i.e. Uriel 2), Zad. 71°. 

Like consorts with like, Sir. 
1315-17, 

Like thee, those, 2Bar. 13° 24? 
= righteous surviving in last 
days, 13°”. 4Bz. 4°® 8.02 
1449, 

Lilin, 2Bar. 1087. 

Linen, wearing of, urged, Ah. 
2102, 

Lion, which came out of wood, 
= Messiah whom God has re- 
served for the End, 4Ez. 10%°- 
12557, 

Lions, = Babylonians, 1En. 89°° 
z.; den of, Bel 31. 

Lists of sins, in 3Baruch, 3Bar. 
§6; in Testaments of Twelve 
Patriarchs, T.R. 33-§ T.Jud. 
161; in Wisdom, 14” sqq. 

Live, 1En. 1017 981°; unto God, 

Macc. 71%, cf. Divine life, 77. 
See Eternal life. 

Liver, the, T.N. 2°. 

Living, 1En. 47°, see Waters ; 
creatures . . . beneath throne, 
2 Bare It. 

Locros, Sib. 34%. 

Locusts, law of preparing as 
food, Zad. 1434. 

Loddeus, 1Esd. 849-48. 

Logos doctrine, Wisd. § 5, 91 
1612 1815, 

Lomna, Jub. 1018. 

Lomni, T.L. 121. 

Longsuffering, T.D. 21 6° T.G. 
41 T. Jos. 17? 189 rEn. 605 611% 
P.A. 42 52:8 616 Zad. 25. 

Lord. See God. 

Lord of the word = Moses, Ass. 
Mos, 112°. 

Lost. See Property. 

Lot, Wisd. 108 Jub. 1219.80 131) 
14,17,19,28 767 173; wife of, 
Wisd. 107. 

Lothasubus, 1Esd. 94. 

Love, P.A. 31° 5%!® 61; God, 
Zad. 9°; God, those that= 
Jewish people,Sir. 179; theLord, 
215,16: of God for His creatures, 

Ez. 846-6272,; to man, Wisd. 
11%; to the brethren enjoined, 
TR 62 ISie4ta.G. OLF 7! 
Djos: 1722. Bast Zad, Sh"; 


857 











to God and one’s neighbour, 
T Iss. 5? 76 T.D. 5%; to neigh- 
bour, T.B. 3°34, See Fear of 
God. : 

Lowly exalted, Sir. 11512713, 

Lozon, 1Esd. 5%. 

Mabarejubs 5 7 erm. 

Lucifer, Sib. 5516527, 

Lucius, consul, 1Macc. 151°. 

Lucus, Sib. 347. 

Lud, Judith 222 Jub. 738 961%. 

Luminaries, tEn. 17%; heavenly, 
23° 72l2" yo 8275) “objects 
of worship, Wisd. 137; re- 
newed for healing, peace, and 
blessing, Jub. 17°; world of 
the, rEn. 204. 

Luminary, the great, the sun, 
1En. 24:95:36 ; the smaller, the 
moon, 731. 

Lunar year, Sir. 43°§2. Jub. 
636 1En. 74; disturbs true order 
of feasts, Jub, 69°88, 

Lust, sin of, Ah. 25 (Syr. A). 

Lustful passions, warning 
against, Sir. 67-4. 

Luz= Bethel, Jub. 271%?6. 

Lycia, 1Macc. 152% Sib. 349%.499 

126,129. 

Lycian, Sib. 42°. 

Teyciansy3o!2pracr, 

Lydda, 1Macc. 11347. 

Lydia, 1Macc. 8°. 

Lydian, Sib. 344°. 

Lydians, Sib, 3279.515 588,292,340, 

Lysias, 1Macc, 32298 426:84,35 
6817,55 42; sent to war against 
Jews, in absence of Antiochus, 
327-87; sends army into 
Judah under Ptolemy. Ni- 
canor, and Gorgias, 3°°~°° ; de- 
feated by Judas, 476°; gov- 
ernor of Coelesyria and 
Phoenicia, 2Macc. 10! 114514 
13,15-17,28,85 y 21,27 73%4,26 y 42; 
death of, 142; and Eupator 
make terms with Jews, 13)”. 

Lying condemned, T.Iss. 7* 
DD ab* Ate 68: 

Lysimachus, brother of Mene- 
laus the high priest, 2Macc. 
429189,40,41, 

Lysimachus, son of Ptolemaeus, 
Add. Esth, F?+. : 

Maani, 1Esd. 5%. 

+Maanisakir (or Amanisakir) 
i.e. Camps of Shakir, Jub. 
3447, See Makir. 

Maaseas, 1Bar. 1}. 

Maasmas, 1Esd. 84°. 

Macalon, 1Esd. 574. 

Maccabaean army, 2Macc. 10%; 
family, Zad. §6; high priestsnot 
referred to in Ass. Mos. 5°, 
but in 61; kings, Jub. 3115z.; 
denunciation of, Test. § 1; 
praise of, § 1; policy, change 
of after Judas’ death, 1Macc. 
9%2z.; priesthood to be called 
by new name, T.L. 8", see 
High priests, Levi; revolt, 
commencement of, 1Macc. 
215-28 ; rising, censured by im- 
plication in Ass. Mos. 9*7; 
times, Azar. § 6; victories, 
Jub.29%sg9.; victories reflected 
in account of Jacob’s wars, 
342-872, 379-1%7.; wars, 247°- 
3259, 


Maccabaeans, at zenith of 
power,Test. § 1; and Pharisees, 
4Macc. § 8; later, attacked, 
T.L. 107, 14-167. T. Jud. 219— 
23; rise of, 1En. go%, 

Maccabaeus, 1Macc. 5%! &c. 
See Judas. 

Maccabees, 1 Book of, author, 
a Sadducee, § 3; contents, § 2; 
date, § 4; Greek MSS., § 8; 
original language, Hebrew, §6; 
sources, § 7; (i) letters of 
Jewish origin ; (ii) letters from 
Syrian kings to Jewish leaders; 
(iii) letters from rulers of 
foreign states, see Letters ; 
style, § 5; theology, § 5; 
title, § 1; versions, Syriac and 
Latin, §9. 2 Book of: author- 
ship, § 5; bibliography, § 8 ; 
contents and characteristics, 
§ 1; date, § 3; influence on 
later literature, § 6, MSS. § 2; 
text, integrity and composite 
nature of, § 4; theology, § 7; 
versions, § 2, Greek, Latin, 
and Syriac; discrepancies 
in, § 4; less primitive than 
1Macc., 2Macc.-§ 1; letters 
in, do not belong to Jason 
source, § 4; . parallelisms 
with rMacc., 2Macc. § 1; 
relation of 3Macc. to, 3Macc. 
§ 4, see Jason of Cyrene. 
3 Book of: bibliography of, 
§ 10; contents of, § 1; date 
and origin, § 4; historical 
basis of, § 5; integrity, § 6; 
MSS., § 3; relation of, to 
Aristeas’s Letter,§4, Josephus, 
§ 5, 2Maccabees, § 4, Philo, 
§ 4, Polybius, § 5, Ptolemy 
of Megalopolis, § 5; style, § 7; 
theology, § 8; title, § 2; use 
of, by later writers, § 9; ver- 
sions, § 3. 4 Book of: ac- 
count, § 1; authorship, § 7; 
bibliography, §10; comparison 
with 2Macc., § 10 app.; date, 
§ 5; influence, § 8; integrity, 
§6; MSS., §§ 3-4; theology, 
§ 9; title, § 2; versions, an- 
cient, §§ 3-4. 

Macedonia, Sib, 317%:190,881 4102 
988,873,461, 

Macedonian, 1Macc. 62 Add. 
Esth. E10, 

Macedonians, Sib, 3161,610 88,95 
Add.Esth, E™4; battle at Baby- 
lon with Galatians, 2Macc. 8%, 
See Greeks. 

Macron. See Ptolemy Macron. 

Madai, Jub. 719 8% 99 1035;36, 
See Media. 

Maeander, Sib. 4149:151 5321, 

Maedai, Jub. 822. 

Maelus, 1Esd. 96. 

Maeotic sea, Sib. 3388, 

Magdaladraef, Jub. 33}. 

Magian influences in Tobit, 
non-Zoroastrian, in Egyptian 
form, Tob. § 8y. is 

Magic art, Wisd. 177. 

Magnesia, Sib. 3547, 

Magnesians, Sib. 3349, 

Magog, Jub. 719 98, Sze Gog. 

Mahalalel, Jub. 41415 1924 1En, 
371 83° See Mahaleleel, 

Mahalath, daughter of Ishmael, 
Jub. 2938. 





INDEX 


Mahalelee! = Mahalalel, 2En. 


Se 
Mahli, Test. df. II 74. 
Maiannas, 1Esd. 948. 
Maitabith, Jub. 3823, 

Maka, Jub. 342°, 
Makamaron, king of Canaan, 

Jub. 46°. 

Maked, 1Macc. 526,36, 

Maker. See God. 

+Makir, T. Jud. 68. See Maani- 
sakir. 


Makom = God, P.A. § 5. See 
Maqom. 
Malchira, Mart. Is. 18%. See 


Sammael. 

Mallus, city, 2Macc. 49°. 

Maltanneus, 1Esd. 93°. 

Mamdai, 1Esd. 9*+. 

Mammon, Sir. 317.; worship, 
perils of,31(34)° 4. See Gains. 

Mamnitanemus, 1Esd. g®*. 

Mamre, man, Jub. 1379; oak 
of, 142°, 

Mamre, i.e. Hebron, Jub. 19°, 

Mamuchus, 1Esd. 92%. 

Man, a danger to angels, and to 
own soul, 2Bar. 561°; = angelic 
being, later heavenly Messiah, 
4Ez. 131-87., see Son of Man, 
White men; creation of,Sir.17}; 
from seven substances, 2En. 
30°7.; with seven natures, 
30°. ; with freewill and know- 
ledge of goodand evil, 3015157, ; 
Creator of, is God, Test. 4. 
I 10°; final abode of, pre- 
pared, 2En. 49% 58°; foolish 
by nature, Wisd. 13!; free- 
will of, Sir. 1514; God’s gifts 
to, 17+ 14; insignificance of, 
before God, 1617-23 ;gl-14, 
senses and powers of, Test. 
App. 1 10%; Son of, see Son; 
taught good and evil, Sir. 177; 
time in this world pre-or- 
dained, 2En. 49?; to be judged 
for his treatment of animals, 
58%%7.; works ordained before 
his creation, 532. See Predes- 
tination. 

Man from the Sea = Messiah, 
vision of, 4Ez, 131-58, 

Man oflies = Jannaeus or Herod, 
Zad. § 6. 

Manasseas, 1Esd. 931, 

Manasseh, Mart. Is. 11:7,9,11,12 
2%4,5 3151 54,812 oBar, 64167 
65'; idolatry, prayer and re- 
pentance of, P.Man. § 2; re- 
pentance of, unreal, and finally 
unavailing, 2Bar. 647-10 651, 
See Prayer of Manasses. 

Manasses, husband of Judith, 
Judith 8? 103 1622-24, 

Manasses, son of Asom, 1Esd. 


Mandrakes, T.Iss. 12:3:8 22,4, 

Manes, 1Esd. 9?!, 

Mani, 1Esd. 9%9, 

Manifestation of God. 
Epiphany, Theophanies. 

Mankind, lit. < creatures Be ePaAY 
172, 314 41 62; woes of, Sir. 
4or, 

Manlius, Titus, Roman ambas- 
sador, 2Macc. 1154, 

Manna, Wisd. 162° 3Bar. Gia: 


See 


substance remained, but ‘acci- 


dents’ transformed,  Wisd. 








167472. ; to be restored again, 
Sib. Frag. 34%. 3° 2Bar. 29°. 
Man-pleaser = Sadducee, Ps. 
Sol. 41°21; lays waste houses, 
18,28. 

Mansions, 1En. 417. See Dwell- 
ing-places. 

Many created, few saved, 4Ez. 
88; lost, 74751,61,192_g6277, ° see 
Fewness; to be saved, 2Bar. 
2172. Contrast 4Ezra. 

Magqom (rendered by God), R.A. 
§ 5, 217 3514 61,6, 

Mardocheus, 1Esd. 58, 

Mardocheus = Mordecai, Add. 
Esth, Al11%,15-17 Cl 138 FI. 
See Mordecai. 

Mariamne, Zad. § 6ii(c). 

Marioch, 2En. 3314(B). 

Marisa, 1Macc. 5%, 2Macc. 
poppe 

Mark, on forehead, Zad. g11(6) — 
of sinners, of destruction, Ps. 
Sol. 1510 

Market-place, Tob. 23. 

Marmoth, 1Esd. 8°. 

Marriage, agnatic, Tob. §§6, 9; 
document, §6; feast, Tob. 82° 
9*°sg. 107 121(1119) ;_ no bar 
to vision, 1En. 837; of daugh- 
ters, a duty, Sir. 7572.; of elder 
daughter first, a heavenly or- 
dinance, Jub. 28°; restrictions 
—forbidden with near of kin, 
uncle or aunt, Zad. 79-1; with 
niece, §§ 2,949. See 7Uz. 

Marriages, Jewish, Tob. 41%; 
inculcated as opposed to 
pagan, § 9, see Heathen ; 
mixed absolutely prohibited, 
Jub. § 15, 204 2220 251-10, 

Marsians, Sib. 3°13, 

Martyr stories of 2Macc., §§ 5, 
OnE 

Martyrdom of seven Sons and 
Mother, See Seven Sons. 

Martyrs, Maccabean, 4Ez. 827 
2Macc. §§ 1, 6, 6'sg.!8sg. 7459. 
4Mace. 18 5459, 88. See Anni- 
versary, Atonement, Competi- 
tors, Epitaph, Eternal life, 
Example, Mother, Painting. 

Marvels and portents—signs of 
Messiah’s coming, 2Bar. 29%. 

Marzifan, slave substituted for 
Ahikar at the execution, Ah. 
479 (Syr.). See Seniqar. 

Maseq, son of, Jub. 142, 

Masias, 1Esd. 534. 

Massagetae, Sib. 5127, 

Massias, 1Esd. 92. 

Mastema, Jub. 108 115511; angel 
of, will depart from penitent, 
Zad. 207; chief of demons, 
see Demonology ; powers of, 
Jub. 49: prince, 11511 j 716 
18°12 482,9,12,15; put to shame, 
1814; seeks to slay Moses 
48"; spirits of, 19°; suggests 
the sacrifice of Isaac, 1716, 

Mastick tree and holm tree, 
Sus. 54-3972. 

Matanbuchus, Mart. Is. 24, 

Matarat, Jub. 3823. 

Mathelas, 1Esd. 91°, 

Mathusal. Sze Methuselah. 

Mattathias, son of Asom, 1Esd. 
93. 

Mattathias, 1Esd. 94% 

Mattathias, 1Macc. 2!14,16,17,19, 


858 





24,27,59,45,49 «the real leader of 
Maccabaean revolt, 2Mace. § 1. 

Mattathias, son of Absalom, 
1Mace. 117°, 

Mattathias, son of Simon the 
Maccabee, 1Macce. 1614, 

Mattathias, envoy of Nicanor, 
2Macc. 1419, 

Mattathias, an elder, Arist. 47. 

Matter, formless, Wisd. 111%. ; 
creation out of, 117, see 
Creation ; inherently evil (?), 
weighs down soul, § 9. 

Matthanias, 1Esd. 92”. 

Matthanias, 1Esd. 9*!. é 

Matthia ben Harash, P.A. 4?°. 

Mauk, sea of, Jub. 82226, 

Mazitias, 1Esd. 9° 

Meaning, Zad. 81215 157, 

Meat, sea, Jub. 81227 8, 

Mebri, mountains, Jub. 92. 

Mechembechus, Mart. Is. 53. 

Medaba, city, Macc. 9°. 

Medan, Jub. 1911. 

Medes, Judith 12 1619 Mart. Is. 
3? T.N. 58 Sib. 3160 454,62,03 523, 
147,441, 

Media, 1Esd. 3114 1Macc. 88 
14! Tob, 1415 37 41,20 52,4, 
5,6,710,11 610 7445125915 Jub, 
10°, See Madai, Persia. 

Mediation of angels, Jub. 127. 
3Bar. § 10, 2, 

Mediator between God and 
man, T.D. 62, see Interces- 
sion; Moses as, Ass. Mos.1!4zz. 

Medicament, Tob. 21965 1112.13, 

Medicines, a gift of God, Sir. 
384. 

Meedda, 1Esd. 532, 

Mefusailom. Sze Methuselah. 

Megiddo, battle of, 1Esd. 12°, 

Meir, Rabbi, P.A. 311 432 61, 

Melea, Jub. 191°. 

Melcha, T.L. 113, 
wife of Levi. 

Melchias, 1Esd. 9?°. 

Melchias, 1Esd. 932, 

Melchias, 1Esd. #4, 

Melchizedek, priesthood of,§1 55 
137572, 

Melejal, 1En. 8213, 

Melka, Jub. 85, 

Melka, daughter of Kaber, Jub. 
it 


See Melka, 


Melka, wife of Levi, Jub. 342°. 
See Melcha, Milcah. 

Melkejal, 1En. 8215, 

Memeroth, 1Esd. 82, 

Memmius, Quintus, Roman 
ambassador, 2Macc. 1124, 

Memorial, 1En. 1034, see Testi- 
mony; = name, 1Bar. 4°x. ; 
of God in heart, Ps.Sol. woos 
stone, 4Macc. 1787. 

Memphian woman, T.Jos. 12! 
14125(g) 161, 

: ith 70 T 26 
se geteg eee ees 
Men, children of, Sir. 1730 

Judith 8! &c.; of war, Zad. 
§ 6, ii; white, = angels, 1En. 
872. 

Menedemus of Eretria, Arist, 
§ 1, 201. 

Menelaus, high priest. 2Macc. 
4°3,24,2T,29,82,84,89,48,45,48,50 6,15, 
33 7 129,82 1 33,7 Ass Mos, 5472, 
intrigues of, 2Macc. 422 20 siaue 
to death at Beroea, 137. 


Menestheus. See Apollonius. 

Merari, Judith 8! 167. 

Merari, Jub. 4414 T.L. 117 128 
Test. AZp. I1 60, 74. 

Merchant, liable to sin, Sir. 
2022) 

Mercy, 1En. 61%; and fraud, 
AL 2))) and speruary,, n2° > 
enjoined, T.Z. 545 72:5 81, to 
both man and beast, 51; no, 
1En, 5° 50°; of God, P.Man. 
6-7, 14; -seat, the, 2Bar. 67. 

Merit, P:A. 1° 2? 6%; doctrine 
of, Sir. 37.15; of the fathers, 

- Sir. 47122. P.A. 2? 2Bar. 147. 
84'°; doctrine of, repudiated, 
1Bar. 2197.; of good works, 
even of dead, avails for nation, 
2Bar. 147 84". : 

Merits of righteous, 3Bar.11° 
12°; of no avail for sinners in 
Israel, 4Ez. 87°40 ; presented 
by Michael to God, 3Bar. 147; 
= treasures of faith, won by 
righteous, 4Ez. 6°. 

Meropea, Sib. 3°*°. 

Merran, 1Bar. 37°. 

Mesaloth, place, 1Macc. 97. 

Mesech= Meshech, Test. 4/7. 1 
9. 

Meshech, Jub. 7!° 91%. 

Mesopotamia, Judith 2% 5% 
828 Jub. 9° 27101218 go1218 4 418 
T.Jud. 9! 101. 

Messenger of God, 1Esd. 1°%°1. 

Messiah, coming of, signs of, 
Jub. 318-172, Ln 2 Baruch: 
29% 30! 411; and the Law, 
15°7.; in At has passive rdle, 
29°72. ; in A® and A® has active 
r6le, 297. 40172. '72* x. 5 prin- 
cipate of, revealed, 397. ; re- 
turn of, to heaven, 30! ; whence 
revealed, 29%7.; will summon 
all nations, and slay some and 
spare some, 72”. J 1 Enoch: 
doctrine of, § 11) 3827. 4678. 
481072. go%"z.; titles of, § 11; 
Anointed (God’s), 524; Elect 
One, 45° 4974 51519 525° 55% 
615810 621; of righteousness 
and faith, 39°; Righteous One, 
382; and Elect One, 53°; Son 
Of Man, 462%4 482 629:7,914 
631 69262729 got 711417, see 
Son; Son, My (God’s), 105%. 
In 4 Ezra: death of,incommon 
with ali men, 7°°; earthly, 
12°27. ; gathers together peace- 
able multitude, 13127.; God’s 
Son, 78:29 1352 1497.; hea- 
venly, 12°27.; heavenly pre- 
existence of, 72°-%.; immortal 
companions of, 676. 778 13°? 
1449; = Baruch, Elijah, Enoch, 
Ezra, Jeremiah, 67°7.; = Lion, 
12°2; = Man from the Sea, 
1325; not meant by son of Dis- 
consolate Woman, 107°-°7. ; 
pre-existence of, in heaven, 
129272, 149%. 2Bar. 301; rule of 
400 years, 7°. la Fubilees : 
no role of importance assigned 
to, 3138 ; expected from Judah, 
§ 15, see Hyrcanus, Judas 
Maccabaeus, Simon. 

Sol.: anointed of the Lord, 
7°; conceived as in Psalm 2, 
1723-1; gathers dispersed of 
Israel, 1728-31; judges tribes, 








INDEX 


172° pure from! sin,:) 17415 
purges Jerusalem, 17°)4; rules 
heathen, 17°; wise, 174%. Z7z 
S26. Or.: a holy prince, 34°; 
advent of, 3°°%sgg.; comes from 
heaven to assume kingdom, 
5414-483; intervenes to save 
Jerusalem from Neroredivivus, 
NE WG PUM ADE TAs 
from Judah, Test. § 16 T.Jud. 
245% T.L. 814@) ; from Levi, 
Test. § 16, T.R.i6's? T.L. 84 
18 T. Jud. 2423 T.D.5 T. Jos. 
19°-°7. ; delivers Beliar’s cap- 
tives, 1 leAn0°) bat tiree 
from sin, T.Jud. 244; opens 
Paradise to righteous, T.L. 
181° T.D. 512; walks in meek- 
ness and righteousness, T.Jud. 
241; wars against Beliar, T.L. 
182% T.D. 5/9; prerogatives 
and powers of, in Testaments, 
full summary of, Test. § 16; 
to be free from sin; a priest, 
SEES :epropuet,uagln lu Stes 
king,-1 RI6532 0s /8!* sto 
war against Israel’s foes, T.R. 
OL in Bad. Frags sansce 
1%.; from Aaron and Israel, 
expectation of, §§ 6, 9%° 12, 
918) 9296) 15* 188, so not of 
pure Levitic or priestly de- 
scent, but partly from Levi 
and partly from another tribe, 
i.e. the sons of Herod and 
Mariamne,Alexanderand Aris- 
tobulus, §§ 6ii(¢), 12; hope 
of, abandoned in Ass. Mos., 
Zad. §10v; militant Messiah 
expected, § lov; = prince of 
all the congregation, Zad. 9°; 
= sceptre, 9%; through him 
God will make the ‘ remnant’ 
know His Holy Spirit, 21°; to 
destroy faithless,g'°- °°; true in- 
terpretation of name (Zadok ?), 
210; will know punishment, 


Zad. 18°; will teach Remnant, 
39510, 


Messianic banquet, Behemoth 
and Leathe served for, 
4Ez. 6° ; bliss, 2Bar. 73'-74*; 
element absent zz 1 Baruch, 
1 Bar. § 11; hymns to John 
Hyrcanus, Test. § 1 T.L.18?"™4 
URelpnch, oye “AERO ee 
kingdom,—z7 dss. Mos. § 9; 
ushered in by day of repen- 
tance—to include Ten Tribes 
as well as Two—lsrael finally 
exalted to heaven, § 9. lx 
2Baruch: hopeofwithMessiah, 
Al A? A$; without Messiah 
in Bt; no hope of either 
in B? B%, § Io; temporary, 
aBar. 73227 741; at close 
Messiah returns to heaven, 307; 
righteous rise to blessed life, 
30? 54! 597; unrighteous cast 
into fire, 5424 557 59710. lx 
1 Enoch: 58-° 1018-11? 274% 
381-398 455 6 464-5 2° 53°" 58, 
61, 62, 6928-29 711417 go88 ‘gt 
12-15. doctrine of, 1En. § 11 ; 
eternal, on earth, after final 
judgement, 1-36; temporary 
on earth, followed by final 
judgement, g1-104; eternal, 
on earth and in heaven, ini- 
tiated by final judgement, 37— 








71. lz 4 Ezra: ends in death 
of all for seven days, 4Ez. 
728-81 ; initiated by overthrow 
of Rome, 12%4; initiated by 
revealing of Messiah and his 
immortal companions, 72°~?8 ; 
lasts 400 years,7”*; no room for 
in 4Ez. 671°; placed in Pales- 
tine, 9°. Jn Fubzlees: imme- 
diately expected in Jub. §§ 1, 
15, 17° 239%51 ; limited to elect 
of Israel, 12°; ruled bya Levite, 
see Messiah; to be gradually 
realized on earth by an ethical 
and physical transformation, 
see Heaven, New. Then all 
sin and pain disappear. Men 
have long life—r,ooo years, 
and after death, spzr¢tuad im- 
mortality ; regarded as already 
set in, § 15, cf. 1En. 83-90; 
when sct up, Satan no longer 
able to injure mankind, Jub. 
§ 15, 237°; when at close, final 
judgement to be held, see 
Judgement. J Szb. Or.: §8, 
3707-784 5414. coming of, 345-6; 
peace and plenty in, § 8, 
5260-285; prophets take away 
sword in, 3787-784, 72 Strach : 
hope of, Sir. 4421 4525 4712 
4.10;24,25 gol? 024 5112 avi, 
In Tobit: on earth of pious, 
Tob. 14%. Lz Wesdom: view 
of, Wisd. § 9; saints rule in, 
Wisd.3° 51°, teaching of O.T. 
absent from 2 Enoch, 2En. § 3; 
woes, 2Bar. 2742. Jub. 231% 
Alizi§ 105 402615 Gta .and 
bliss, Sibs3 70950": 

Metabedzaab, Jub. 38”. 

Methosalam, 2En. 561 &c. 
Methuselah. 

Methuselah, Jub. 47927 75 1En. 
POM) SI Sat C83 eOs kus 
106448 1073 2En. 111°; awaits 
return of Enoch, 381°; wishes 
to prepare food for Enoch, 
561.2; is bidden to summon 


See 


his brethren, 571%; erects 
altar, 68°. 
Metonic cycle. See Cycle. 


Micaiah the prophet, Mart. Is. 
29; son of Amada, 21?215,16, 

Michael, A. & E. 137 14%? 15? 
212 222 251 28%4 291 411 437 
451 46% 484457 5115, A. & EH. 
311 Apoc. Mos. 3? 13? 221 374° 

ot 43)? 1En. 9! 10! 20° 248 
4o? 54° 6045 6712 6854 Gglh}s 
masses. PAL 567. ea De6? 
Test. App. 1 84 9bs® En, 22589 
310 3Bar. 11246789 124578 

13235 141.2 151; functions of, 
3Bar. 1127.; guardian of Israel, 
“advocate of the Jews’, Sir. 
17!"%.; holds keys of King- 
dom of Heaven, 3Bar.117; 
leads Israel against foes, Ass. 
Mos. 107: presents merits of 
righteous to God, 3Bar. 14?; 
receives prayers of men, I1*. 
See Angels, Archangels. 

Michael, priest, 1Esd. 8°*. 

Michmash, rival centre of 
government under Jonathan, 
1Mace. 92. 

Middle of earth = Jerusalem 
or Palestine, Test. Af. I 8. 
See Jerusalem, centre of earth. 


859 








Midian, Jub. 19% 351% 46}; 
children of, Judith 27°. 

Midianites, T.B. 101°; -= asses, 
1En. 891916, 

Midrash of the Law, Zad. 9°%. 

Midrash Wajjissau, T.Jud. 3-9 
notes. 

Mighty, avoid quarrels with, 
Sir. 84. See Rulers. 

Migraim, Test. 4p. I 94. 

Migration of the penitents (= 
Zadokites) from Judah to 
Damascus, Zad.61 8°; from 
Jerusalem, 9*°. 

Milcah, wife of Levi, Test. 
App. 11 62. See Melka. 

Miletus, Sib. 59°. 

Milkiel, 1En. 893%. 

Millenarianism, 2Bar. 29°. 

Millennial day, Millennium, 
2En. 33127. 

Minim = Christians, 
against, P.A, 31672. 
Miracle, Jews saved by, 3Macc. 

221 618, 

Miriam, Jub. 474 2Bar. 591. 

Misael, 1Esd. 9#+. 

Misael, Azar. 66, See Mishael. 

Mishael, 4Macc. 13° 16°.?4 1812, 
See Hananiah, Three Children. 

Mishnah, the, P.A. § 1; origin 
and growth of, P.A. § 2. 

Misur, Jub. 291°. 

Mithradates, treasurer of King 
Cyrus, 1Esd. 2. 

Mithradates, a Samaritan, 1Esd. 
Deo 

Mitzvah, Sir. 8%. 
Commandment. 

Mizpeh in Gilead, 1 Macc. 5°°. 

Mizpeh, near Jerusalem, 1 Macc. 
346, 

Mizraim, Jub. 7° 9! 10°°. 

Moab, Judith 1% 5722 78 Jub. 
37519 386; field of, 381%. 

Moabites, 1Esd. 8°°. 

Mochmur, Judith 7}. 

Modin, 1Macc. 21:15,28,70 919 
135,30 164 2Macc. 1314; Macca- 
baean sepulchre at, 1Macc. § 4. 

Moeth, 1Esd. 8°. 

Moloch, Jub. 307°. 

Momdis, 1Esd. 9**. 

Money, Tob. 41 5*1°; love of, 
warnings against, T.Jud. 17+ 
18% 1917, 

Monotheism, Sib. Frag. 11°?; 


formula. 


See also 


Frace3ise° gSibsi3 ae mee 
God, titles of. 
Month, 1En. 744°; first = 


Nisan (2), 1Mace. 9°. 

Months. See Ab, Adar, Dystrus, 
Epiphi, Pachon, Xanthicus, &c. 

Mooli, 1Esd, 847 T.L. 123. 

Moon, Sir. 43°8 1En. 8° 41%" 
60!2 6929 72% 7287-7417 7558 
782-6 Bolt 82% 8311 10010; 
course of the, 2En. 16°? 3Bar. 
g'8; Feasts determined by, 
Sir. 437; names of, 1En. 78? ; 
punished, 3Bar. 9’; signs in, 
at last day, Ass. Mos. 10°. 

Moors, Sib. 3°1°. 

Moossias, 1Esd. 9°. 

Mordecai, day of, 2Macc. 15°°; 
discovers eunuchs’ plot, Add. 
Esth. Al2-17; dream of, AT!" 
interpreted, F!-®; prayer of, 
C110, See Mardocheus. _ 

Moses, 1Esd. 1%! 549 769 83 9°? 


2Macc. 129 241011 76,30 ‘Tob, 
18 618 11,1284. Sir, 2423 451-5 
4647 Wisd. rol 1Bar, 120 22,28 
Jub. Prologue, 1~4:19;22,27 21 
23°2 301] 331318 4922 Arist, 
144 (see Lawgiver) Mart. Is. 
39 1En, 8916-18,2°-88 TS, 92 
1T.Z. 3% Sib, 3253 Ass. Mos. 
y134;5 a I y1,2,4,14,17,19 121,2 
2Bar. 3° 45 174 591 8425 4Ez. 
72083129" 148 4Mace. 217 2 1719 
1818 P.A. 11 Zad. 719 923 207; 
burial of, opposed by Satan, 
performed by Michael, Ass. 
Mos. § 27., twofold presenta- 
tion of, after, § 27.; ‘ Greatness 
of’, relation of, to2Enoch, 2En. 
§ 4. Jn Ass. Mos.: intercessor 
for Israel in spiritual world, 
12°; mediator, 114 312; pre- 
existent, 114; unique relation 
of, to Judaism, § 9. Jz 2 Bar.: 
revelations made to Moses, 
2Bar. 59* 1; functions of 
Enoch transferred to, 2Bar. 
59° Un. In Jubilees: receives 
tables of Law, and also a 
special revelation = Jubilees, 
on Mount Sinai, Jub. 145¢¢., 
and a revelation of Messianic 
bliss at the end of time, 1%; 
regarded as taught by God 
the later as well as the earlier 
history, 14. J Zad.: and 
Aaron, 71°; commandments of 
God through, 82; covenant 
that M. established with Israel, 
198; delivered Israel, 71°; Law 
of, 197911314 202; speak against 
M., 18° ;—law of, 2Macc. 730 
Sus. 3, 62, &c.; other books 
of, Ass.Mos. § 3; song of, 
2Mace. 7° 4Mace. 189; Testa- 
ment of, Ass.Mos. § 2. 

Moses, Assumption of, account, 
§1; author, a Pharisaic Quiet- 
ist, §8; bibliography, § 11; 
date, §7; influence on N.T., 
§10; not really Assumption, 
but Testament, of Moses, § 2 ; 
other books of Moses, § 33 
theology, §9; version, Latin 
from Greek, Greek from He- 
brew, §§ 4, 5,6; relation of, to 
1Enoch, § 10(a). 

Mosollamus, 1Esd. 844. 

Mosollamus, 1Esd. g}4, 

Mother of the Maccabaean mar- 
tyrs, 4Macc.8°15145g.; speeches 
of, 127 16%16 186; death, 17}. 

Mount (Sinai), Jub. 1424; the, 
Jub. 4°; of the East, Jub. 426; 
of the fathers, 4Macc. Ao. 

Mourners, duty to, Sir. 734. 

Mourning for dead, Sir. 3816-28, 

Mouses, T.L. 123. 

Mozarabic Psalter contains P. 
Man. § 137. (text given). 

Muak, Jub. 8°. 

Mnaleleth, Jub. 414. 

Muppim, Jub. 4475, 

Muratorian Fragment, Wisd. 
§7; ? refers to Sirach, Sir. §8. 

Murine, Sib. 3544, 

Mushai, Test. 49¢. II 74. 

Muzaloth, the eighth heaven, 
2En, 217, 

Mycenae, Sib, 3°47, 

Myndos, 1Macc. 1523, 

Myra in Lycia, Sib. 41%, 





INDEX 


Mysiancommander, 2Macc.57472. 
Mysian(s), 3270:483,514, 

Mysteries, Wisd. 272 622 1428 
1En. 71 848 168 106!%; syn- 
cretism of Greek philosophy 
and Hebrew religion among 
Alexandrian Jews, Wisd. 6227. 
Mystery, 1En. 103% 104"; cult 
=secret sins, Wisd. 17°72, 


Naaman, son of Benjamin, Jub. 


+ . 

Neaihee 1Esd. 9$1. 

Nabarias, 1Esd. 94. 

Nabataeans, 1Macc. 5° 93°. 

Nabuchodonosor, i.e. Nebu- 
chadnezzar, IEsd, 140,41,45,48 
210 57 615,18,26 rBar, 1%1112 Ep, 
Jer.2 Add.Esth. A’. Zz 1Bar. 
= Vespasian, 1Bar, § 7. 

Nabusemakh, executioner, Ah, 
45rTke- 58,9510 423 (Syr,), 

NabuSumiskun, name of execu- 
tioner in Papyrus of Ahikar, 
Ah, 4! e¢ pass (II, p. 778). 

Nadab, Tob. 11¥ 1419 

Nadabath, city, 1Macc. 937. 

Nadan, adopted son of Ahikar 
(Syr. and Arab.), Ah, 1° ¢ 
passim. 

Nadin, adopted son of Ahikar 
in Papyrus of Ahikar, 115 ¢¢ 
passin. 

Nahor, Jub. 118 121,31 (I, 
Pp. 778) 197°. 

Nahum, prophet, Tob. 144. 

Naidus, 1Esd. 921. 

Name, called by the, Zad. 6; 
good name, P.A. 28 417; men, 
called by, Zad. 2%1°, numbered 
by their names, 172, recorded 
by, 178; of God, profaning of, 
Jub. 30% PA. 14 46° 511, 
supernatural efficacy ascribed 
to, P.Man. § 8, 3; to profane, 
Zad. 19°; to think upon, 94°; 
to trust in, 9°4; of Heaven, 
PLA, 216 45,14 520: of the 
Lord, deny, 1En. 41? 452 467; 
saved in, 487; swear by, 1Esd. 
148; Holy, Sir. 502%, Wisd. 
10; incommunicable, 142! ; 
of Messiah, Zad. 21°; =person 
(of Enoch), 1En. 6532 701.2, 
See Righteous. 

Names, 1En. 5°; blotted out of 
book of life, 108% ; call by, 43} 
6971; play on, T.S. 22 TIL. 62 
1145-678 T Jud. 18 T.Iss, 135 
5° T.Z. 18 TIN, 15:12 T.A, 12 
T.B. 16; written, 1En. 104). 

Nanaea, temple of, 1Macc. 627, 
2Mace. 11872,14, 

Naphidim, sons of Watchers, 
Jub. 722, 

Naphil, Jub. 722, 

Naphisi, rEsd. 5°2, 

Naphtali, Tob. 11:4 73 Jub, 2819 
3372 385 442730 T. Jud, 252 
T.N. 11:56 93 Test. App. I 
1’ 1010; Testament of, late 
Hebrew, see Appendix I to 
Testaments of Twelve Patri- 
archs, 

Naphtha, Azar, 23. 
thai, 

Narel, 1En. 8213, 

Nasi, 1Esd. 532, 

Nathan, 1Esd. 844. 

Nathan, Tob. 51. 


See Neph- 





Nathan, Sir, 471. 

Nathan, adopted son of Ahikar, 
Ah, 1° e¢ passim (Arm.), 

Nathanael, captain over a thou- 
sand, 1Esd. 1°. 

Nathanael, rEsd. 9*?. 

Nathanael, Judith 81. 

Nathanias, 1Esd. 9%, 

Natthaeus, Arist. 49. 

Nations have angelic patrons, 
Sir. 171". ; three abhorred,— 
Seir, Philistia, and Sichem, Sir. 
502,26, 

Natives, rank of (Aaoypadia), 
3Macc. 2787, 

Natural phenomena, angels of, 
seé Angels; obedience of, Ep. 
Jer. 61-63; personified under 
names of gods, Wisd. 132. 

Nature, changes not, T.N. 3%, 
cf. 1En. 2; God as Lord of, 
see Praise; on the side of the 
righteous, Wisd. 517 1617—24 
(184) 198; worshipped, 132. 

Nazarites, 1Macc. 3°, 

Nebaioth, Jub. 1714, 

Nebrod, Jub. 87. 

Nebuchadnezzar, 1Esq.14¥»41,4548 
Tob. 14 Judith §6, 145,7,11,12 
21,4)19 328 41 68,4 771,4,7,28 7218 
14! 2Bar. 79! 3Bar. 11 Zad.15; 
wild condition of, parallel to, 
in Ah, 514. See also Nabu- 
chodonosor, 

Nebuhal, servant of Ahikar, 
Ah. 77 (Arab.). 

Nebuzardan, Nadan’s younger 
brother, Ah. 3° (Syr.). See 
Benuzardan, Boudan. 

Neck, branding of, Ps.Sol. 257. 

Necromancy, Zad. 145. 

Neelatamauk, city of Ham, 
Jub. 71427, 

Negeb, the, Ps.Sol. 82, 

Nehemiah, 1Esd. §§ 1, 4 iii., 58 
(see Nehemias) 2Macc. 128: 
20,21,28,81,88,85 213 Sir, 4913 7 En, 
89". ; memoirs of, 2Macc. 
2!8; overshadowed by Ezra, 
1Esd. § 1; praised, but no 
mention of Ezra, Sir. 49157. 

Nehemiah, 1Esd. 549 See 
Attharias. 

Nehemiah, an elder, Arist. 47. 

Nehemias, 1Esd. 58. See Nehe- 
miah, 

Nehorai, P.A. 438, 

Nehunia ben ha Kanah, P.A. 37. 

Nekodan, 1Esd. 537, 

Nemean flower, Sib. 54°. 


Nemesis, Sir. 2725-29. See Re- 
ward. 

Nephtalim, Tob. 15. 

Nephthai or Nephthar = 


Naphtha, 2Mace. 1°67, 

tNeqael, 1En. 692. 

Neriah, 1Bar. 11 2Bar, 1} 78}, 

Nero, deeds and impieties of, 
Sib, 528-$4,187-102,203,218 - regi” 
vivus, 3°37, 4119-122,139 '593-107, 
968-877, destroyed at gates of 
Jerusalem, 51°, 

Nestag, Jub. 119. 

Net, Zad. 67:19 201; three nets 
of Belial, Zad. 619, 

Netophas, 1Esd, 518, 

New Covenant, Zad. 815, 
Covenant. 

New Creation, Wisd. 19%. See 
Creation, Heaven, House. 


See 


860 








New Jerusalem, Tob, 137-184, 

New Testament, influence of 
1 Enoch on, 1En. § 10(6), 
§ 11; parallels with Ahikar, 
Ah. § 3 ¢; relation of, to 
2 Enoch, 2En. § 4. 

New world, 2Bar. 441%. 

Next of kin, Zad. 818 9}, 

Nicaea, Sib. 3548, 

Nicanor, 1Macc, 33° 72672,31,32,38, 
39,48,44,47, 91 gMacc, 8910)12,14,28, 
24,84 93 1 412,14,15,17,18,28,26-28,30, 
37,89 [5 1,6,26,28,80,82,98,85,87 «son 
of Patroclus, 2Macc. 8°; 
governor of Cyprus, 12?; 
threatens Temple, 14%°; in- 
trigues and threats of, 2Macc. 
141-46; death of, 1Macc. 748 
2Macc. 158, 

Nicanor’s day, 
1Mace. 74%, 

Nicanor, an Egyptian, Arist. 
182. 

Nicanor, =Seleucus N., 4Macc. 

20 


2Macc. § 1, 


Niiman, Jub. 347°. 

Nile, Sir. 2427 392? 4714 Arist. 
116 Sib. 47 556,92,484. 

Nimrod the wicked, Test. 4p. 
Kiss 

Nineveh: Toby ret Gh, 22ers 
114185918 7 41,4,8,15 Judith 1116 
271 Jub. 98 Ah. 11 38:9 &e. See 
Asorestan, Assyria, Athur. 

Niphis, 1Esd. 571, 

Nisan (month), 1Esd. 5° Add. 
Esth. Al (Nisa) Ah. 6114 (Syr.) 
672,26 (— April) &c. (Arab.). 

Nisrin, a plain near Nineveh, 
Ah, 3%%114,15 (Arab.). See 
Eagles’ Dale, Sis. 

Nittai the Arbelite, P.A. 157, 

Noah, Tob. 41% Sir. 4417 Wisd. 
104 Jub, 428,93 55,19,21,22 62,10,15, 
18,2427 1,8, 10,16,19,20 g4,8,9,11,18 
gl 101,2)10,12,18,15,82 42 y 420 
197427 2218 7En, 102 65:2 671 
10618 1073 T.B. 10% Sib, 382 
2En. 354. 3Bar. 418 4Kz. 311 
4Macc. 1551; prays against 
demons, Jub. 109-*; sons of, 
Zad. 41; words of, Jub. 211°, 

Noah, book of, Test. 4%. II 
573 Book of, = 1En, 6-11, 
547-55? 60, 65-69% 106-107 
1En. §§ 1, 6; date of frag- 
ments in I En. § 7. 

Noam, Jub. 433, 

Nobles of the people, Zad. 85°, 

Noeba, 1Esd. 531. 

Nooma, 1Esd. 935, 

Note of hand, Tob. 5%. 

North, land of the= Damascus, 
Zad. 94. 

Number, definite, of created, 
2Bar. 234-2. ; of Kasbeel, 
1En. 69!8; of mankind, 2Bar. 
2119 2345; of righteous, 1En. 
47° 4Ez. 43%%., cf. 2Bar. 2110 
48*; of stars, 1En. 9314; of 
those who pass away, cared for, 
2Bar. 48° ; without number— 
angels, 1En. 719, cf. 718; days 
of holy, 58%; fountain of 
righteous, 6512; times, 10813; 
weeks, 9117. 

Numbers used for names 
(number = value of initial 
letter of name), Sib. 5}? &c. 

Numenius, son of Antiochus, 


uMace. § 7iii(c) 1236 14%*4 
I Ree 
Nun. See Joshua. 

Oabdius, 1Esd. 97". 

Oak, the, 2Bar. 61”. 773°; 
where Ezra received inspira- 
tion, 4Ez. 14. 

Qathy 1En. 69'=2;25 Zad. 9% 
108 191; binding, 20°; of the 
covenant, 19°; of cursing, 
107; of the woman, disallow- 
ing of, 207. 

Oaths, false, Wisd. 14°. 

Obdia, 1Esd. 55°. 

Obedience to Law and Rabbis 
enforced, 2Bar. 46°. 

Obeth, 1Esd. 8°*. 

Ocean, Sib. 3225 576580; stream, 
1En. 1752. 

Ochielus, captain over a thou- 
sand, 1Esd. 1°. 

Ocidelus, 1Esd. 9??. 

Ocina, Judith 278. 

Odoarres. See Odomera. 

Odomera, 1Macc. 9°. 

Offering, none offered for three 
thousand years in Sion, 4Ez. 
10%. 

Offerings, Sir. 781. Sze Sacrifice. 

Office, Zad. § 4 [2°] 6° 9°”. 

Officials, titles of at Philopator’s 
court, 3Macc. 5114 69° 73. 

Ohad, Jub. 44%. 

Oil, given by Michael to angels 
with full baskets, 3Bar. 15?; 
holy, T.L. 84; of fragrance, 
Apoc.Mos. 407; life, A. & E. 
362; mercy, A. & E. 401; of 
mercy ov of glory, 2En. 22%? 
567. 

Ointment, sweet, 2En. 228, cf. 
Apoc. Mos. 9° 13}. 

Olamus, 1Esd. 9°°. 

Old age, Wisd. 48. See Aged. 

Old Testament, attitude of Za- 
dokites to, Zad. §8; relation 
of Tobit to, Tob. § Siv. 

Olives, Mount of, T.N. 57. 

Onan, T.Jud. 10 Jub. 41% 

34 

Onias I, high priest, 1Macc. 
127.821, See Spartans. 

Onias III, high priest, 2Macc. 
31:5,31,85,35 41,3,38,94,85,50,38 7 512, 
14; killed, 45°; Judas sees in 
vision, 15/214 1En. go®z. 
4Mace. 4413:15, 

Onias IV, temple of, at Helio- 
polis, Sib. 5°°7. 

Onus, 1Esd. 57*. 

Onyx, Sir. 2417. 

Ophannim, 1En. 617° 717 2En. 
29°(8). 

Ophir, gold of, Sir. 71# 2Bar. 
iferar 

Opportunity, judgement accord- 
ing to. See Judgement. 

Oppressed, cry of, God hears, 
Sir. 3512-29 (3514-%8). See Poor. 

Opus Imperfectum in Mat- 
thaeum, Mart.Is. §§ 5, 6, 1-247.; 
uses Testaments, T.Jud. 107. 

Ora, Jub. 11}. 

Oracle of God, Arist. 97. 

Oral. See Tradition. 

Orders of Angels. See Angels. 

Ordinances, Zad. 874 91; (or 
Foundations) of the covenant, 
112; of the Gentiles, 101. 


INDEX 


Orgies, heathen, Wisd. 12° 14%. 

Origen, Sir. § 8 T.R. 21”. 1En. 
1o(¢) 19°.;  Hexapla of, 
1 Esdras in, 1Esd. § 2. 

Original sin, in 2Baruch and 
4Ezra, 2Bar. 18772. 2347. 5412. 
4Ez. 37° See Evil, Free-will, 
Inclination. 

Orioch, an angel, 2En. 3311(B). 

Orion, Sib, 5520:524, 

Orjares, 1En. 781, 

Ornaments, wearing of, forbid- 
den, T.R. 55, cf. 1En. 81. 

Omias, Arist. 47. 

Orphans and widows, care of, 
Tob. 18 Sir. 42°, cf. Zad. 18°. 

Orthosia, 1Macc. 1537. 

Osaias, 1Esd. 848. 

Ostanim, shining station of, 2En. 
201(B). See loanit. 

Othonias, 1Esd. 9%. 

Ouranos, Sib. 3!. 

Overcometh, he that, 4Ez. 711: 
128 cf. «Contest ’, 7127. 

Overthrow, i.e. Babel, Jub. 107° 
122: 

Ox, son of Joseph, Judith $1. 

Oxus, IEn. 7742. 

Oxyrhynchus Greek Fragment 
of 2 Baruch, givenin 2Bar. 12?- 
TAS 

Ozeel, T.L. 122. 

Ozias, 1Esd. 5°. 

Ozias, 1Esd. 87. 

Ozias, son of Micah, a Simeon- 
ite, ruler of Bethulia, Judith 
618,16,21 728,50 §9,11,28,85 7o8 7 318 
14° 15%, 

Oziel, Judith 81. 


Pachon, month, 3Macc. 6°°. 

Painting, suggested by the mar- 
tyrdoms, 4Macc. 177. 

Palaea Historica of Vassiliev, 
Ass. Mos. § 2. 

Palestine, description of, Arist. 
107-120; = Eternal Land, Sib. 
541, . See Holy Land. 

Pallu, Jub. 44. 

Pamphylia, rMacc. 15%. 

Pamphylians, Sib. 316%209,515 
340,460, 

Pandonia, Sib. 3°4°. 

Paphos, Sib. 4178. 

Papyri, 3Macc. §§ 1, 4. Arist. 
127. 

Papyrus, Aramaic, of Ahikar, 
Ah. § 4 (II p. 77759-)- 

Parable, 1En. 1% 38% 43* 45+ 
573 58! 60! 681 69”. 

Parables, the, 1En. 37-71 ; first, 
381; second, 451; third, 587; 
the Book of, 68}. 

Parables, Sir. 4717”. Ah. 8141; 
and proverbs, Sir. 39%; of 
N.T., parallels to in Ahikar, 
see Fig-tree, Prodigal Son, 
Unfaithful Steward ; of wicked 
servant and unfruitful fig-tree, 
relation of to Tobit and Ahi- 
kar, Tob. § 11 Bi. 

Paradise, A. & E. 11 34? 4 94 
rot 2543 283 311 32) 361 373 
401 488 S.A. & E. 317 33% Apoc. 


- Mos.1! 6? 93 13! 15? 168 172%? 


2223 26? 277 281 29-4 ge 4027 
428 1En. 207 Sib. Frag. 3% 
2Bar. 435° 598 4Ez. 36 47.8 796,128 
§®2- the earthly, 2En. 8°7.°(A) 
81,38(B) ; = Garden of Eden, 





earthly, created before world, 
4Ez. 3°”.; heavenly, 2En. 
81-4572, 428 6510 4Ez. 428 7128 
82077.5272,: of delight, 7°, see 
Refreshment ; opened for the 
righteous, 8°?; its unfailing 
table, 9°.; in third heaven, 
Apoc. Mos. 40? 2En. 8'4; of 
the Lord = trees of life = His 
pious ones, Ps.Sol.14?; of 
righteousness, A. & E. 25°; to 
be opened to righteous, T.L. 
1810; of vision, A. & E, 28°. 

Paran, wilderness of, Jub. 177? 
2017, 

Pardon (of God only), Zad. 2° 
55 648 og! 188, 

Parents and children, 4Macc. 
13)9 1415 m51sg. 16°; duty to, 
Sinnyoee 

Paronomasiae in 2 Baruch, 2Bar. 
§ 68°. See Names, play on. 

Parthian land, Sib. 414. 

Parthians, Sib. 5*°°; and Medes, 
1En. 565. 

Party. See Pharisees, Saddu- 
cees, Zadokite Party. 

Passions, 4Macc. 1°sg.; classi- 
fied, 12972, 21sq.?%z. 

Passover, 1Esd. 11-”? (see Jo- 
siah) Wisd. 18°; regulations 
regarding, Jub. 49-8; wine 
drunk at, 49°. ; time of sacri- 
fice, 49172. 

Patara, Sib. 3441 41”. 

Path to future life, narrow and 
difficult, 4Ez. 71°. See Ways. 

Patheus, 1Esd. 9”. 

Paths, good, 1En. 91*; of death, 
94%; peace, 94*; righteousness, 
Jub. 12 1En. g13®19 923 gq? 
991° Zad. 141, see Ways; un- 
righteousness, IEn. 911° 941; 
uprightness, g11# 1048 1057; 
violence, 91181; wickedness, 
94°. 

Patience, T.Jos. 27 10)”, 

Patriarchs, immortal life of, 
4Macc. 79 1317 1675 1875, 

Patristic literature, influence 
of 1 Enoch on, tEn. § 10(¢). 

Patroclus. See Nicanor. 

Pattern, heavenly. See Hea- 
venly. 

Paul, Saint, referred to (?), T.B. 
111.27; relation of, to Wisdom, 
Wisd. §§ 5, 8. 

Paul, Apocalypse of, relation of 
to 3 Baruch, 3Bar. § 5; uses 
2 Enoch, 2En.°§ 4. 

Peace, 1En. 579 1017 11? 584 
Gi oa Pe AS 112,18 32; no 

eace, IEn. 18 54 11? 126 13! 
164 948 981415 go! 101% 1028 
103°. 

Pedias, 1Esd. 9**. 

Peleg, Jub. 88 101%. See Phaleg. 

+Peleg, house of, Zad. 9*°. 

Peleus, Sib. 347. 

Pella, Sib. 5+. 

Peneius, Sib. 314° 51°5. 

Penemue, 1En. 69°. 

Penitence, 1Bar. passim; a 
sacrifice, Azar. 16, 17. 

Penitent, respect for, Sir. 8°. 

Penitents of Israel (=Zado- 
kites), Zad. 61 86 9%4; all called 
princes, 8°; leave Judah, 6* 8°; 
sojourn in Damascus, 8°. See 
Repent. 


861 





Pentapolis = cities of plain, 
Sib. 51°; =Cyrenaica, Wisd. 
108, 

Pentecost, feast of, 2Macc. 12%? 
Tob. 21. See Feast of Weeks. 

Pentephri, T.Jos.121131945r58, 

Perez, Jub. 4174 44». 

Perfection of holiness, walk in, 
Zad. $71; men of, 920:52,53, 

Pergamus, Sib. 51°. 

Period, Zad. § 4, 157. [2°] 6°57 
81 [94°] 98; of the destruction 
of the land, 81; of the visita- 
tion, 91911; of the wickedness 
(i.e. till Messiah arises), § 10 
iv, 8912 154 197; [of the wrath, 
15) 

Periods. See Hours. 

Perizzite, Judith 5.. 

Perizzites, Jub. 1418 307 1Esd. 
889, 

Perjury, Wisd. 14%. See Oaths. 

Persecution, of Jews by Antio- 
chus, 4Macc. 4%sg.; of the 
righteous, Wisd. 21% See 
Antiochus Epiphanes. 

Persepolis, city, 2Macc. 9?. 

Perseus ,of Macedonia, 1Macc.$°. 

Persia, 1Esd. 312914 56880 1 Macc. 
381 645 (and Media 6°) 14? 
2Mace. 11219 91:21 Judith 17 
Sib. 344° Ah. 37 (Arab., Syr.). 

Persian, Add. Esth. E? Belz 
Aristo 120Sibe nly 2 enle, 
Arist. 119, 120. 

Persians, 1Esd. 157 2122,8:11,16,30 
55,71 74 81 2Macc. 1°% Judith 
1610 Add. Esth. E™?8 Arist.35 
TN. 58 Sib.3159,169,207,291 62,63, 
65,87 “5 22,101;116,147,441 4 Mace, 
18° ; and Medes, 1Macc. 11 &c. 

Pessimism, 4Ez. § 10, 377. 477 
73? 9°; of 2 Baruch B? BS, 2Bar. 
§ 10. 

Pestilence, Ps. Sol. 747. 15°. 

Petasus, use of, 2Macc. 4. 

Peter, Apocalypse of, 1En. 
10617. : 

Phaath Moab, 1Esd. 5 8%. 

Phacareth, 1Esd. 5**. 

Phaisur, 1Esd. 9”. 

Phakorites, Jub. 1418. 

Phalaris, 3Macc. 579*?. 

Phaldeus, 1Esd. 944. 

Phaleas, 1Esd. 57%. 

Phaleg = Peleg, Test. Ap. 1 8°. 

Phalerum, Arist. 9. 

Phalias, 1Esd. 9*°. 

Phaltie], captain of the people, 
4lz. 516. 

+Phamael = Phanuel, 
3Bax. 22: 

Phanuel (only in Parables), 
1En. 40° 54° 71%%18, see An- 
gels, Archangels : = Ramiel(?), 
3Bar. 257. 

Pharakim, 1Esd. 5°. 

Pharaoh, 1 Macc. 4° 3Macc. 2°64 
Sir. 1615 Jub. 1319:15 3.411 39214 
171S  gol8-6,8,9,11 4722 431921 
4558 46% 47%59 4849 492 TZ. 
3° T.Jos. 21 84 13°; daughter 
of, Jub. 47%; (=Neco) fights 
with Josiah at Megiddo, 1Esd. 
ai 

Pharathon, city, 1Macc. 9°°. 

Phares, 1Esd. 5°. 

Pharida, 1Esd. 5°?. 

Pharisaic affinities of, 2Macc. 
§ 5; exclusiveness, 1En. 97* 


angel, 


104°; insertions in  Sirach, 

Sir. § 4; Quietist, early type 

of = Chasid, Ass. Mos..§ 1 ; 

recension of Sirach, Sir. § 4; 

teaching of Judith, Judith § 9; 

Law, strict observance, Sab- 
bath and new moon and eves 
kept, fasting (8), tithings, 
future life, § 9. 

Pharisaism, Apocalyptic or 
spiritual side of, directed its 
studies to the Prophets, Zad. 
§§ 8, 9. 

Pharisees, attacked in Zad. Frag. 
§§ 2,9, 10, 12; as a party, § 5, 
see Zadokite Party; = builders 
of the wall, § 94°, see Wall; 
= they that remove the land- 
mark, § 12, see Landmark ; 
breach of with John Hyrcanus, 
Test. §§ 1,10; =‘ children of 
heaven’, 1En. 1011; positive 
work of, Sir. § 4; referred to, 
2Bar. 42°”.; religious and 
literary strife with the Sad- 
ducees or Hellenistic party, 
1En. 9847. 1024-10418; = 
righteous in Ps.Sol. § 5; 
struggle of against Jannaeus, 
Sus. § 7; varying relations 
with the Maccabees, see 
Chasidim; views of, are re- 
flected in Test. § 11; watch- 
words of almsgiving, repen- 
tance and prayer, Sir. § 4 (I, 
p- 283). 

Pharnak, Jub. 92. 

(Pharos, Arist. 301.) 

Phaselis, 1Macc. 1573. 

Phasiron, children of,1 Macc. 9°°, 

Phassurus, 1Esd. 5%. 

Pherezites, 1Esd. §®9, 
Perizzites. 

Phicol, Jub. 2476 

Philadelphus IJ, Arist. 11522, 

Philip, bosom friend of Antio- 
chus, 2Macc. 92° ; chancellor 
in Antioch, 135 (? rMacc. 6°); 
courtier (‘Friend’) of Antio- 
chus, 1Macc. 61435563, 

Philip the Macedonian, 1Mace. 
ie 

Philip V of Macedonia, 1Macc.8°. 

Philip, a Phrygian, 2Macc. 522; 
governor of Jerusalem, 61 85, 

Philip, Sib. 5°, 

Philistia, Jub. 3719; abhorred, 
Sir. 5025. 

Philistines, 1Macc. 324,41 422,30 
5088 Sir, 4618 447 Jub. 248)! 
19226,18;25,28 387 (see Caphtorim) 
4Macc. 37; = dogs in, 1En, 
89% *°; fierce hatred of,in Mac- 
cabaean wars, Jub. 2428-82. ; 
final rooting out, and punish- 
ment in Sheol of, 2428-32, 

Philo, and 3 Macc., 3Macc. § 4; 
quoted, Wisd. 1918, 2Bar, 
21*7,; relation of, to Letter 
of Aristeas, Arist. § 9; to 
Wisdom, Wisd. §§ 5, 7; views 
of, 2En. 2357. 2427. 30872, 

Philocrates, Arist. 1, 120, 171, 
295, 322. 

Philopator, Sze Ptolemy IV, 

P hilosophy, 4Mace. 11 5459, 

7,21, 

Phineas, the 
4Macc, 1812, 
Phinees. 





See 


zealous priest, 
Seé Phinehas, 





INDEX 


Phinees, i.e. Phinehas, 1Esd. Bo 
92,28 

Phinees, a priest, 1Esd. 8°3, 

Phinehas, son of Eleazar, Sir. 
45°5 5074 1Macc. 265%; ob- 
tained covenant of everlasting 
priesthood, Sir. 5024 1Macc. 
2°4, See Phineas, 

Phinoe, 1Esd. 531, 

Phoebus, Sib, 44 5924,526, 

Phoenice, Sib. 5225, 

Phoenicia, 1Esd, 217:24,25,27 448 
68)7,27,29 71 §19,28,67 Mace. 358 
4%2 88 roll 3Macc. 3! Arist. 
12, 22 Ass, Mos. 1° Sib, 5456 
4Macc. 47. See Coelesyria, 
Syria. 

Phoenicians, Sib, 3168,492,597, 

Phoenix, belief in, 3Bar. 647,19 


Phoenixes, 2En. 1217, 151 198, 

Phogor, Tob. 12. 

Phoros, 1Esd. 59 830 926, 

Phrurai, i.e. Purim (?), Add. 
Esth, F1, 

Phrygia, Sib. 3,140,401,407, 

Phrygians, Sib, 319,205,514 471 130, 

Phua, Jub. 4418, 

Phylarches, 2Macc. 832, 

Physcon stories, 3Macc. § 5. 

Physician, Sir. ro!® 1819; or- 
dained by God to be resorted 
to in sickness, Sir. 381-15, 

Physicians, Tob. 21°. 

Pious, Ps.Sol. 319 41:7,9 928,40 
g® 107 1258 73911 y4%7 y59 
Tye 

Pirké Aboth, account, short, 
P.A. § 1; bibliography, § 6; 
historical and critical account, 
§ 2; influence on later litera- 
ture, § 4; MSS., § 3; theology, 
§ 5; relation of, to Sirach, Sir. 
§ 700). 

Pisces, Sib. 5523, 

Pisidians, Sib. 5349, 

Dison, Sir. 24%, 

Pit, Ps.Sol. 161. (see Destruc- 
tion) Sir. 41° 99 486 512, see 
Hades, Sheol; children of, 
see Children; snares of, Zad. 
1612; of destruction, P.A. ares 
of Hades, Sir. 2119; of tor- 
ment, 4Ez. 7°, See Gehenna. 

Pitane, Sib. 5120, 


Pithom, Jub. 4614. See also 
Python. 

Place. See High, Holy. 

Place prepared for repose of 
each soul, 2En. 49% See 
Chambers. 


Planets, 2En, 273 3087, 

Plant (= Israel orthe righteous), 
of righteousness and truth, 
1En, 1017. ; of righteousness, 
93°, = Israel, Jub. 167672. 368; of 
righteousness, the eternal, 1En. 
93"; of righteous judgement, 
93°; of uprightness, 933, = 
Israel, Jub. 11°; of the eternal 
seed, 1En. 848, 

Planting of pious, rooted for 
ever, Ps.Sol. 143; root of 
God’s ( = Zadokites), Zad. 15, 

Platonism, influence of, in 
Wisdom, Wisd. § 9. 

Pleiad, Sib. 5522, 

Pluto, Sib. 3143, 

Political problems, Arist. § 6,5. 

Pollute, one’s holy spirit, Zad, 





734, cf. 870; sanctuary, 78 948, 
cf. 6; wealth, 812. 

Pollution, of holy things, i.e. 
Temple, Ps.Sol. 18 23 81%; of 
the nations, 1Esd. 149; of the 
sacrifices, T.L. 16472. 

Polybius, relation of 3 Macc. 
to, 3Macc. § 5. 

Polygamy denounced, Zad. 71-4, 

Pompey, Zad. § 6; invades 
Judaea, 1Bar. § 7; the foreign 
conqueror in Ps.Sol. §-5 ; 
alien, 17°; boasting of, 233-85. 
comes from West, 1714; dese- 
crates Temple, 22 42; enters 
Jerusalem in peace, 818-20; 
lawless. one, 1713; slain dis- 
honourably in Egypt, 2°%sgq. ; 
the insolent one, 290; =the 
dragon, 229, 

Poor and oppressed, right con- 
duct towards, Sir. 41-10; 
anxieties of, 31 (34)!-4; can- 
not associate with rich, 1318-20, 
duty to, Sir. 75%:83; how treated 
by world, 13?!-23 ; of the flock 
=they that give heed to God, 
Zad. 918) ; robbery of, Zad. 
818, brings pestilence, P.A, 
5/2; strengthen hand of 
(almsgiving), Zad. 817 183, 

Portents in Nature, signs of the 
end, 4Ez. 54-9 621,22, 

Porters at temple-gates, 1Esd. 
1285 

Poseidon, Sib. 3142 5157, See 
Thunderer. 

Posidonius, 2Mace. 14}. 

Potiphar, Jub. 3411 39? 4010 44%, 

Potter and clay, T.N. 22-4, 

Power, angels of. See Angels. 

Powers, of heaven, rEn. $22; 
on earth, 611°; over water, 
G70 

Powers=angels, 3Bar. 187,; of 
the Lord, Azar. 39. 

Praise of Fathers of old, see 
Fathers; of God, see,God , 
of Simeon, high priest, son of 
Jochanan, Sir. 4915_-s0%. of 
wisdom, Sir. 241-84, see Wis- 
dom. 

Pravuil, an archangel, 2En. 
224,12(A) 232, See Vretil. 

Prayer, Tob. § 10 B (2) 316 128 
Sir. 511? Arist. 196-197 P.A. 
27; almsgiving and fasting, 
Tob. § 10 B(2); and fasting, 
T.Jos. 3¢ 48 1042 T.B. 14: 
at dawn, Wisd. 1628; for de- 
liverance, 3Mace. 58sg. Olga; 
for Israel, a, Sir. 361-17 
(337 184 3616-22) - for sanctity 
of Temple, 3Macc. 25g. ; 
for sins, Sir. 211; hours of, 
2En. 51*; memorial of, Tob. 
122; need of, in all things, 
Sir, 3715; of Ezra, see Con- 
fessio Esdrae; of the poor, 
efficacy of, Sir.3514-17; of right- 
cous, IEn. 471:%4 973:5 908 
Zad, 141, heard by God, Ps. 
Sol. 68; prominence of, zz 
Test. XII Patr.; Jacob’s, for 


T.Jud. ‘192; ‘Gad, T.G ie 


Benjamin, T.B. 10}; ten eldest | 


sons, T.B. 3°; Levi’s, T.N. 68; 
Rachel’s, T.B. 14; Simeon’s, 
T.S. 218; Simeon’s mother’s, 


862, 





T.S. 22; Joseph’s, T.Jos. 38 67 
ii: then 

Prayer of Manasses, date of 
composition, § 6; description, 
§1; history, literary, of, § 3; 
language, original, of, § 7 ; 
MSS., Latin, of, § 137.; origin 
of, §2; preservation, § 4; sum- 
mary, § 13; text, §12; theo- 
logy, § 8; title, §5; versions 
of, §§9, Io, 11, 13—English, 
§13; Greek and Latin, § 9; 
other, § 11, Syriac, § 10. 

Prayers, for dead, 2Macc. 1242: 
.; of Judith, Judith 92-4 
137; of men, received by 
Michael, 3Bar. 114. 

Precept, P.A. 2! 4%18; reward 
of, P.A, 21:218,20 34 42, 

Precepts, on- right-doing, Sir. 
4°0-*8: for everyday life, 429-58, 
see Duty; for conduct, 744-17, 

Predestination, Sir. 33 (36)7-18 
Ass. Mos. 11:14 3218 (see Pre- 
existence) 2En. 49? 501 (see 
Man, works of) Zad. §§ 94° 
13, 2°19, see Election; and 
Free-willin Judaism,2Bar.5,45» 
n.; tn 4 Ezra, of duration of 
age and time of end, 493-48 
6*-8 ; of harvest of evil, 428-*1; 
of number of righteous, see 
Number ; Judgement, 77°. 

Pre-existence, Wisd. 81%. ; 
heavenly, of Messiah, 4Ez. 
13°62. 1En, 48%, see Messiah ; 
of Moses, Ass. Mos. 1147. ; of 
souls, 2En. 235y., see Souls, 

Preferences, God’s, in Man and 
Nature, Sir. 337-15, See Pre-’ 
destination. 

Pre-Maccabaean elements in 
1 Enoch, 1En. §1; high priests, 
Ass.Mos. 595472. 

Preparedness, need of, Sir. 
1819-26, See Foresight, Fore- 
thought. 

Presence, angels of, see Angels; 
presences, the four, 1En. 40!-8, 
see Angels. 

Present, enjoy the, Sir, 1414-16, 

Presumptuously, acting, Sir. 316, 

Priam, Sib. 3427, 

Pride, ruinous in rulers, Sir. 
108-18, 

Priest, Zad. 1557 175; confess 
to, 108; duty to, Sir, 729-31, of 
God, purity required in, Ah, 258 
(Syr. A); of Most High God, 
title claimed. by Maccabaean 
high priests, Jub. 321 Ass, 
Mos. 61. 

Priesthood, above the kingdom, 
T.Jud. 21%; robes, staff, dia- 
dem, anointing, &c. (veer tele 
82-10; rules of, Test. App. I 
15-57—purity, 16-22, 53-55; 
wood for sacrifice, 23-25; 
sacrifice, method of, 25-47; 
salt, 26, 29, 37, 52. See Mel- 
chizedek. 

Priests, Jewish, in 


Egypt, 
3Mace. 61 713, 


| Prince, Zad. 4*; no prince, 949: 
Reuben, T.R. 17 44; Judah, | i ss sche 


of all the congregation=the 
sceptre, 5°; of lights, see 
Lights. ? 


| Princes = the penitents of Israel 4 


Zad. 8°; digged a well, Ser 
of Judah, 91%7., see 86; of old, 


i.e. angels, who fell, Sir. 167. 
See Giants. 
Prodigal Son, parable of, paral- 
lel phrasing in Ah. 84 (Arm.). 
Profane. See Holy, Name, 
Sabbath, Sanctuary, 
Profane man, Ps.Sol. 417. 
Pollution. 
Property, lost, law as to, Zad. 
107°; of camp, 107. 
Prophecy, Sir. 24°°z.; of heaven, 
T.B. 3°; of Moses in Deutero- 
nomy, Ass. Mos. 1°. 
Prophesy a lie, Zad. 87. 
Prophet, Zad. 5° 6° 9%, see 
—¥zekiel, Isaiah, Zechariah ; 
expected, to decide on polluted 
altar, 1 Mace. 44°; Messianic, 
T.B. 9?; no longer any, im- 
plied in «Mace. 9?'”.; of 
God, the, = Moses, Ass.Mos. 
t14®; of the Most High, 
i.e. John Hyrcanus, T.L. 8). 
Prophets, 1En. 108° P.A, 11; 
books of =Chiun your images, 
Zad. 9’, ten times quoted 
any Zads §§ 8, -9°°,. 10; see 
Halachoth, Law and Pro- 
phets; Job among, — Sir. 
49°.; made by Wisdom, Wisd. 
7°7~,; shall take away sword, 
be judges, Sib. 3781; | the 
Twelve, Sir. 491% See Law 
and Prophets. 
Prophets, works of, pulled down, 
1Mace. 9°. 
Propitiation = forgiveness, Sir. 
its 7B 
Propontis, Sib. 3447. 
Proselyte, Zad. 17°. 
Proselytes, Tob. 1° 2Bar. 4147. 
Aas. 
Proselytizing, 2Bar. 14. 
Proseuche, place of prayer, in 
Egypt, 3Macc. 77°. 
Prosperity of wicked,Sir.1118~**. 
Proverbs, the Book of, relation 
of to Wisdom, Wisd. § 5; of 
Ahikar, Ah. 21-1; various, 
Sir. 88 1324-14? 1879. 
Providence, Arist. 201. 
God, titles of. 
Provinces, one hundred and 
twenty-seven, Add.Esth. Bz. 
Prudence, evil sort of, Sir. 197%. 
Psalms of Solomon, account, 
short, § 1; character, § 5; 
date, § 5; MSS., Greek, § 2; 
origin, § 5; original language, 
Hebrew, § 4; references to, § 5; 
relation of Ps. Sol. 11 to 1 Bar. 
489-5, 1Bar. § 6; Syriac ver- 
sion, from Greek, § 3. 
Psalter, Canticles appended to 
contain P.Man., P. Man. § 4. 
Psammetichus, Arist. 13. 
Pseudepigrapha, 1En. § 1; im- 
plied in Zad. Frag. 9” (A), 
(Jeremiah’s word to Baruch, 
Elisha’s to Gehazi); recog- 
nized largely until A.D. 70, Zad. 
§ 8. 
Pseudo-Cyprian, 1En. 1°7. 
Pseudonymous publication,1 En. 


See 


See 


SAG 

Psychology, Arist. § 4 (6), 155- 
156, 160, 213-216, see Heart, 
Ynclination, Senses; heart be 
changed and converted to a 
different spirit, 4Ez. 67°; of 








mind, sprung from dust, 7° ; 
mind grows with us, 7°4; heart 
and understanding, 8°. 

Ptolemaeus, Add.Esth. F144. See 
Lysimachus. 

Ptolemais, 1Macc.. 51571:55 ro} 
39,56-58,60 122,24 245,48 yo1? 
2Macc, 1374 Arist. 116; ‘at 
the harbour,’ 3Macc. 717. 

Ptolemy I, son of Lagus, Arist. 
uggeris 

Ptolemy II, Philadelphus, Arist. 
35, 41 Arist. § 1. 

Ptolemy IV, Sir. 10° "7. 3Mace. 
§§ 1, 5, U2. et passin. 

Ptolemy VI, Philometor,1 Macc. 
138 oPlyz 55,57 (711) 118,8)18,19- 
18 2Macc. 4?! 929 1018 Sib. 31972. 
316;7388-400,,608,,, 4Macc. 42%. 

Ptolemy VII, LEnuergetes Il 
Physcon, 1Macc. 15). 

Ptolemy, king. See Aristobulus. 

Ptolemy VIII (Lathyrus) and 
Cleopatra, Add.Esth. F447, 

Ptolemy Macron, son of Dory- 
menes, IMacc. 3°87. 2Macc. 
445,46 68 88 ; governor of Coele- 
syria and Phoenicia, 8° 10!; 
suicide, 101%. 

Ptolemy of Megalopolis, history 
of, 3Macce. § 5. 

Ptolemy, son of Abubus, son-in- 
law of Simon, murders Simon, 
Macc. 1612,15:16,18. 

Punishment, P.A. 534; after 
death, no mention of in Sirach, 
Sir. § gv, see Future; appro- 
ptiate, Wisd. 117°; differen- 
tiated, 6° 1119; eternal, see 
Destruction. Jz 1 Ex., 4177. 
60° 808 10617; earth cleansed 
from all, 10; of kings, 1En. 

67; on the earth, great, 10677 ; 
of (from) Lord of Spirits, 
7 60%; (?Messiah shall 
know, Zad. 18°;) mild recom- 
mended, Arist. § 6, 188, 208 ; 
of Jerusalem, 4Macc. 47'sg. ; 
place of, Adam and Eve in, 
2En. 414”.; remedial, Wisd. 
§ 9; temporal, Sir. 9118, See 
Angels, Chastisement, Eternal, 
Future, Judgement, Wrath. 

Pupils, class of, i.e. Yeshibah, 
Sir. 512%.; rules for, by schools 
of Shammai and Hillel, Sir. 
BI o72, 


| Purgatory, belief in, 4Ez. 71°. 


Purification, Levitical laws of, 
Jub. 34-4; of Jerusalem, by 
martyrs, 4Macc. 11! 18". 

Purim, feast of, Add. Esth. F™. 

Purity, exclude from Zad. 1018, 
14, “See Excommunication. 

Put, Judith 27° Jub. 71°9' Test. 
App. I 94. 

Pyramus, Sib. 4°7. 

Python = Pithom, Sib. 51°72. 


+Qafratef, Jub. 341°. 

Qelt, Jub. 8%. 

Quarrels, warnings against, Sir. 
288-32; with powerful, rich, 
and boastful, warnings against, 
81-8. See Disputes. 

Quarters, the Four, 1En. 777%. 

Quietism, Ass.Mos. § 9. 

Quotations from O.T., how in- 
troducedin Zad. Frag., Zad.§ 8; 
include Law, Prophets, and 





INDEX 


Hagiographa, § 8; from an 
apocryph, ‘Jannes and Jam- 
bres,’ § 8. 


Raaboth, Jub. 3871. 

Raamses, Jub. 464. 

Rabael, i.e. Arbela, T.Jud. 7°. 
See Robel. 

Rabbi = Judah the Prince, or 
the Holy, P.A. 232. 477 6°. 

Rabbinic citations of Sirach, 
Sir. § 3 il. 

Rabbinites attacked 
Frag. § 2. 

Rabbis, party among, favour- 
able to apocalyptic, 4Ez. 147. 

Rabshakeh, Sir. 487°. 

Rachel, Jub. 2818-5,8-10,12,16,17, 
19,20,24 go1,2 12 3 78,88,34 33222 
3416 36% 442826,27,82 T Iss, 1% 
6-8,10,14(g-@) 21,2,4 TN, 19-9 
Dosh 20° ly Bates tis est, 
App. 114; death of, Jub. 324. 

Rafa, mountain range, Jub. 
Q12,16,28, 

Ragan, Judith 1°19, 

Rages, Tob. 41:29 5° 618 9?. 

Raguel, Tob. 11. 

Raguel, Tob. 3717 61438 718, 

Raguel, an angel, 1En. 204 23*. 

Raguil, an angel, 2En. 33° (A, 
‘Rasuil’ B), cf. Raguel, 1En. 
204, 

Rahab, monsters of, Sir. 437°. 

Rakeel, Jub. 4°%. 

Ram = Chasidim, 1En. 901%"; 
David, 891-49; Elijah, 90%; 
Judas Maccabaeus, 901%"1°; 
Saul, So?st% 

Ramathaim, 1Macc. 11547. 

Rameses, Judith 12° Jub. 45°. 

Rameel, 1En. 67. 

Ramiel, 1En. 6’. 

Ramiel = Remiel, 2 Bar.55°7.63°- 

Ransom for sin, martyrs’ death 
as, 4Macc. 177%. 

Raphael, Tob. 317 54 61%14:18 of 
1245 rEn. 9! 104 208 2298 328 
40? 54° 68%%4 718%18, ‘see 
Angels, Archangels ; func- 
tions of, in Tobit, later attri- 
buted to Michael, Tob. § 10. 

Raphael, Tob. 11. 

Raphaim, Judith 87. 

Raphia, battle, 3Mace. 17°. 

Raphon, city, 1Macc. 5%”. 

Rasses, children of, Judith 2”. 

Rasueja, Jub. 81. 

Rasuil. See Raguil. 

Rasujal, Jub. 41° 
Rasuu, Jub. 347. 

Rathumus, the story-writer, a 
Samaritan, 1Esd. 21617,25,80, 

Ravenna, Sib. 52%. 

Ravens = Syrians, 1En. go®/’. 

Ravine, deep and dry (= valley 
of Hinnom), 1En. 264°; deep 
and narrow (= Kedron or 
valley of Jehoshaphat), 1En. 
263, See Abyss, Chasm, Valley. 
Razis, an elder at Jerusalem, 
commits suicide, 2Macc. 1487. 
Reason (Inspired), in 4Macc. 
115g. 225g. 345g. 551 63159. 13°59. 
164sg.; definition of, 4Macc. 
142. 115; as master-gardener 
of the mind, 12°; compared to 
a harbour-mole, 13°; guide 
of the virtues, 1°°; not extir- 
pator, but antagonist of the 


in Zad. 


863 








passions, § 1, 1835; not master 
over forgetfulness, &c., 1° 274 
3!; isa spark, Wisd. 277. 
Rebecca, Jub. 19112,16,26,31 224 
234 2614 263)5)7,9510,11 941,6,7,8, 
12,18,18 81 2916 313,5,6,80 5 30,31 
332 35b18 3621 TLL. 68. 
Rebellion. See Israel. 
Rebuke, in righteousness, Zad. 
91°; one’s brother, 81°; neigh- 
bour, 1075. See Reproof. 
Recensions, two—of Daniel—of 
Hebrew Psalm, Ps.Sol. 11 and 
1 Bar. 4°-5°— of Zadokite Frag- 
ments (A and B), 1Bar. § 672.°°. 
Reckoning up of sins, Wisd. 4”°. 
Recompense, of God to those 
who serve Him, Sir. 1715-%; 
of the wicked, Zad. 9”. 
Record, Zad. 4° 16° 17°. 
Rectitude (amAdrns), T.R. 41 
T.S. 327. 45 &c. See Single- 
ness. 
Red Sea, 1Macc. 4° Judith 518 
Jub. 87 9%4 Ass. Mos. 311. 
Reelias, 1Esd. 58. 
Reem, the, Test. Aff. I 3}. 
References, in Zad. Frag. to 
‘ Book of the Hagu’, Zad. 11? 
&c., see Hagu; ‘ Jannes and 
Jambres,’ 71°; Jubilees, 201; 
‘Ordinances of the Covenant,’ 


112; Testaments of XII 
Patriarchs, 61°, See § 8. 
Refreshment, place of, 4Ez. 


736,38, See Paradise. 

Regim, 2En. 11° 577. 

Register, Zad. 9?°(B). 

Registration of Egyptian Jews, 
3aMacen222 4itsgn 7 Pe. 

Regulation, in Zad. Frag.: a 
to almsgiving, Zad. 181; as 
to judges, 111-4; for the many, 
181; of Censor of camp, 161; 
of dwellers in cities of Israel, 
1514; of dwellers of all the 
camps, 171. 

Reins, the, T.N. 28. 

Remembrance. See Book. 

Remiel, 1En. 208 2Bar. 55° 
3Bar. 257., see Ramiel; = 
Jeremiel, angel, 4Ez. 45%. 

Remnant, Zad. 14 25°; to be 
taught by Messiah, 2°10. 

Restore of ungodly, Wisd. 47°- 
Bite 

Renew. See Creation, Earth, 
Heaven, Luminaries. 

Repay evil with good, Ah, 27 
(Syr. B). 

Repent, 1En. 50? 551; of trans- 
gression, Zad. 2° 941, cf. 9). 
See Penitents, Return. 

Repentance, Sir. § 4 Wisd. 127° 
P.A. 41%22 521; and confession, 
Sir. 42672. 1725-5? 1871; appointed 
by God forsome (as Manasseh), 
P.Man. 7, and not for others 
(as Abraham), § 8; call to, 
Wisd. 1123 121919; cleansed 
through, Zad. ro!®; covenant 
of, Zad. 915(B); day of, Ass. 
Mos. 118; example of, Sir. 
44572. ; exhortation to, Sir. 
1725-82 ; God’s mercy leads to, 
Wisd. 1123; meritorious, Sir. 
17%, 182472.; of individual, 
T.R. 12 2)-T.S: 28 T.jud. 154 
TWiGa5ee® Palos. 68s TB. 5s 
of nation, T.Jud. 23°. T.Z. 97 


un 


T.D. 64; necessary to coming 
of kingdom, Ass.Mos. 1/8. ; 
one day before death, i.e. at 
once, P.A. 2/47%.; place of, 

Wisd. 121%? 4Ez. 91; place of, 
no, 2Bar. 8512; = return to 
Law; G4lz 75s chmuZad. 
19%11:14 202; unto hope, 
1En. 408. Contrast ‘ No place 
of repentance’, 1En. 6514, and 
631-11, 

Rephaim, Jub. 1438 20°. 

Reproof of friend, duty of, Sir. 
Io" Zad, 101°, 

Resaias, 1Esd. 5°. 

Resignation to God’s Will, Sir. 
Denon 

Rest, a, 4Ez. 852; for souls of 
righteous, not of wicked, 4Ez. 
780,91,95, 

Restitution, Zad. 10° 19°. 

Resurrection, 2Macc. 124% 1En. 
§ 11(¢), R14, 57 2215 511 615 
g0°8 911° roo® T.Jud. 2544 
bys, Gi) ANGER ia? al dae 
5077. 65°; at close of tem- 
porary Messianic kingdom, 
2Bar. 307; belief in, 2Macc. 
7°sq.1244; for judgement, 2Bar. 
501; 27 1Hnoch, differing con- 
ceptions of: (@) to earthly 
Messianic kingdom of eternal 
duration of soul (spirit) and 
body, 1En. 6-36, 83-90; (0) 
to spiritual kingdom, in which 
the righteous have a spiritual 
body, 37-71; (¢) resurrection 
of spirit only, 91-104, cf. 91° 
100°; not referred to in 1Bar. 
§ 11; of body, 2En. 65° 2Bar. 
50-512., not expected in Jubi- 
lees, Jub. § 15, nor in 4 Ezra, 
§ 9; of godly, Sib. 41871% ; of 
good and evil deeds, 4Ez. 7°*°; 
of life and spirit, 2Macc. 14%; 
of martyrs to life everlasting, 
7%14,14 see Life; of patriarchs, 
then of righteous, Test. § 16 
T.B. 10%; postulated for 
participation of pious dead in 
blessedness of final age, 4Ez. 
5%2.; of righteous only with 
bodies, 2Macc. 71475 1446; to 
life eternal, i.e. participation 
in Messianic kingdom on 
earth, 2Macc. §7; spiritual, 
of righteous, Jub. 23%. 

Retribution, P.A. 17 218-20 412, 
13,19 51,2,11,26 65; doctrine of, 
in Sirach, Sir. § gv, 211%, ; 
confined to this life, 41%; 
individual, 2811 912 1126 122; 
continued in fortunes of de- 
scendants, 117872, 2324-26 401d 
41® 44-15, see Sheol; future, 
Wisd.19!z.; inkind, §1,11516; 
national and individual, 1 En. 
§ 11; on the sinner, Sir, 326-28 
16814, see Punishment, Wrath; 
theory of, 2Macc. 612-16, See 
Judgement. 

Return, from corrupt way, Zad. 
19’; to law of Moses, 19%1!:14 
20%, 

Return to Jerusalem, first, under 
Cyrus, 1Esd. 28-45 (Sheshbaz- 
zar); second under Darius, 
51-48 (Zerubbabel), register of, 
57-46; under Artaxerxes, 81-40 


INDEX 


Reu, Jub. 1038 111, 

Reuben, Jub, 28417 332s457,8)9,15,22 
3420 3878 42l8 44l2 TLR, 11,25 
30 72 1.52) ae Os aleltids 
PO ee I DISS aE IN 7A, 
a7 45st Geo Vesta Agpebuas 
defiles Jacob's bed, T.R. 18 3143 
punished, T.R. 17. 

Reveal, hidden things wherein 
all Israel had erred, Zad. 51; 


Revealed, everything that was 
of the law, Zad. 191”. 

Revelation. See Apocalyptic, 
Apocrypha. 

Reyelations, gained by Adam 
after eating of tree, A. & E. 
20°=-2, of Enoch, to. be 
handed down, 2En. 33°; and 
kept till the end of time, 3311; 
revealed to faithful in due 
time, 357; preceded by fasting, 
seé Fasts; to be kept secret = 
Apocrypha, 1En. 82! 104-18 
Ass. Mos. 116 rolt-r11. 4Ez. 
128772, 1476:46,47, See Faithful. 

Revenge forbidden, Ah. 217.18,21 
(Syr. B). See Forgiveness. 

Reward, P.A, 24:2,19,20 94 41 5165; 
for faithful, 4Ez. 7°°; laid up 
with Most High, 13°; of filial 
duty, Sir. 34-46; of loyalty to 
the law, 33(36)1-%; of right- 
eousness and sin, 278-10; of 
righteous, 329-3! 1122 1613.14; of 
those who seek Wisdom, 41-}; 
of wise, 207728, Sze Nemesis, 
Recompense, Retribution. 

Rewards of precepts, P.A. 247. 

Rhea. Sib. 2122,132,185,138,143,148, 
150,402 131, 

Rhodes, 1Macc. 1525 Sib. 3444. 

Rhodians, Sib. 41%, 

Rhodocus, a traitor, 2Macc.13”1, 

Rhodophorus, title of Ptolemais, 
3Macc. 72". 

Rhyndacus, Sib. 344%. 

Rich, avoid quarrels with, Sir. 
82; avoid associating with, 
137-8; and poor cannot asso- 
ciate, 1318-20; how treated by 
world, 1374-88; anxieties of, 
31(34)}*; fool, parable of, 
11%; Lord of. See God, 
titles of. 

Riches, Tob. 12° 1En. 467 948 
964 97!° 1008, cf. 98? 1035, 
See Mammon, Wealth. 

Right-doi i 

ee precepts on, Sir. 

Righteous, 1En. 1872. 56 1017521 
25 388-5 304 424 46 gul,24 
48479 502 £37 £67 58355 602 618 
628 824 g1!0 94811 93,7 96158 
97h% 9812-14 © 993” “1905s7,10 
102410 1931 104161213 Ps, Sol. 
288 38-814 49 108 135-8 148 58 
1615; good name of, lasts for 
ever, Sir. 414-18, see Reward ; 
observed faithfully the law, 
4Ez. 78%%4; One, see Mes- 
siah; only seem to die, Wisd.3%; 
= Pharisees or Chasidim in 
Ps. Sol. § 5, hope in future 
life, 139M 148° 1516 y71-3, 
Messianic expectation, spiri- 
tual, 1773 18°, oppose non- 
Davidic,i.e. Hasmonaean mon- 
archy, 17%; pious, § 5,329 &e.; 







political Quietists, 12°; poor, 
to’ 152 18%; prayer of, 1En. 
47024 97835 99° Zad. aes 
risen, the, 2Bar. 5117. ; soul 
of, attacked, Zad. 11°; to shine 
as light of stars, 2Bar. 511° 
4Ez. 727. 

Righteousness, Tob. 45° 128; = 
almsgiving, Sir. 71°%.; by the 
Law, 2Bar. 67°: imputed, de- 
med, v4 Hz. 7 02 Sloss eG tom 
4077,; Messiah and, 1En. 39° 46° 
53° 61* 623 711416; various 
conceptions of, 2Bar. 2412. ; 
week of, 1En. 911%: See Paths, 
Statutes, Teacher. 

Rim. See Riman. 

Riman, 2En. 57? (A, ‘ Rim’ B). 

River = Euphrates, 4Ez. 134% 
44,47. 

River, - fiery,, 2En. 1022, cf. 
LEn? 141% 

Rivers, the seven, 1En. 775-7. 

Robe, of. priesthood, T.L. 8?; 
of righteousness from God, 
1Bar. 52. . 

Robel, i.e. Arbela, Jub. 34%. 

Rock of Isaac, i.e. God, Sir. 
5 12241, 

Roimus, 1Esd. 58. 

Roman, Sib. 41%°.; conquest of 
Judaea, 1Bar. § 1; destruction 
of Jerusalem, Jews suffer ter- 
ribly in, zBar. § 7; emperors, 
history of, Sib. 512-50; Empire 
=eagle of 4Ez. 10-1255; 
coom of, 1141-45, 

Romans, 1Macc. § {iii (a)(c) 
(letters to, 81~527., see Letters) 
81,23,27,29 y 216 7 440 7516 2>Mace, 
git 10,88 71845) letter of, 1194, 
historicity of, § 1. See Gabi- 
nius, Judaea, Pompey. 

Rome, 1Macc. 110 71817,19,24,26,28 
1218 1 416,24 1515 Sib, 345,52,161, 
350,352,856,364 123,138,145 -139,448, 
463; already feared in Sib. 

175-193; conquest of Greece 
by, 3°sgg.; doom of, 5386-402 . 
great disaster to,in Asia, 3350-362, 
wickedness concentrated in, 
in Eagle Vision, 4Ez, 11-12, 
§ 10; will fall under Messiah, 
2s25 

Root. See Planting. 

Rosh, Jub. 44%. 

Rotheus, T.N. 11°, 

Royal treasury, Tob. 12°, 

Rude man, i.e, 407, P.A. 272, 510, 

Rufinus, Sir. § 8. 

Rule, i. e. halachah, P.A, 316,28 

10,11, 

Ruler of Zadokites, to be Priest 
or Levite, Zad. 15478 Sze 
Judges. 

Rulers, need of wisdom in, Sir, 
gi" 10°; pride in, ruins nations, 
10%18 ; avoid associating with, 
13°18, See Mighty. 

+Rumael, 1En. 692. 

Rumjal, 1En. 692. 

Rust, of wickedness, Sir, 1210.11 , 
treasures not to, 292, 


Sabanneus, 1Esd. 93%, 
Sabannus, 1Esd. 863, 
Sabateus, 1Esd. 948. 
Sabathus, 1Esd. 928. 
Sabbateus, 1Esd. 914, 


Sabbataeus, an elder, Arist. 48. 


864 


Sabbataeus, an elder, Arist. 49. 

Sabbatarianism, 2 Macc. 85g. 
1238 154, 

Sabbath, 2Macc. 575 6511 9828 
1513 Jub, 2!17-21,24,28-31 418 
2En. 327; carefully observed 
by Judas Maccabaeus, 2Macc. 
826-29; day, 1Macc, 23%35,38 « 
massacre of faithful Jews on, 
285-88 984,43 1084; by Apollonius, 
2Macc. 54", Jn Fubelees: §15, 
217-81; appointed as a sign for 
all God’s works, not observed 
by lower orders of angels, as by 
higher, § 15, 21:17,82; observed 
by highest angels, 218: by 
Israel also later, 220-24,27-33 ; 
fasting on, 50!¥; journey on, 
508. ; laws regarding, 50818 ; 
strict observance of, 50872. ; 
war on, 501%, see 1 Macc. 
251-88 2Macc. 644151, Ly Zad. 
frag.: holy, Zad. 13! 148; 
journey, limit to. 13714; laws 
regarding, 131-41,18-27. ob- 
serve, 81° 131; profane, 14°; 
keeping of, permitted by 
Demetrius I, 1 Macc. 1034; 
meaning of, in Ley. 231516, 
(i)=feast day, (ii) = seventh 
day of unleayened bread, (iii) 
= weekly Sabbath, Jub. 1517.; 
mourning on, forbidden, Apoc. 
Mos. 43%7.; not to be kept, 
2Macc. 6°; profaning of, 
tMacc. 14%)45 2347. ; profaning 
of, tolerated, 1Macc. § 3, 2417. ; 
sign of resurrection and rest of 
age to come, A. & E, 512; 
strict observance of, leads to 
massacre of Jewish fugitives, 
tMacc yp 22% ates : 

Sabbaths, Jub. 12%14 2319 so1-s, 
6,7,9,10-18 ; and festivals, God’s 
holy, Zad. § 94°, 52. 

Sabbatical year, 1 Macc. 64972. 

Sabbeus, 1Esd. 9%". 

Sabi, 1Esd. 5%. 

Sabias, 1Esd. 19. 

Sabie, 1Esd. 534, 

Sacrifice, acceptable, Sir. 351-44 
(321-48), and unacceptable, 34 
18-26 (ga2t551). sanimaleabe 
horred, Sib. 42°59; Jews com- 
pelled to, 3Macc. 278; peni- 
tence as a, Azar. 17; to the 
dead, Tob. 417. 

Sacrifices, animal, T.L. 9718; 
ceased, 1Macc. 1 Azar. 15; 
depreciated, 2En. 451-3; direc- 
tions as to, 45°7. 597872, 6141572, 
667; in heaven, T.L.36; of right- 
eousness, Sir. 7°! ; polluted, 
1En. 89%"; to idol, vain, 3018.19. 
unclean, offered, 1Macc. 147, 
See Pollution. 

Sacrificial system. See Offering. 

Sadducee, Ass. Mos. § 8. See 
Sceptic. 

Sadducees, Wisd. 117, 1En, 385 
94° 95° 981° 1031415 ; accepted 
O.T. but not tradition and 


scribe law, Sir. § 4; = ‘children 


of earth’, 1En. 100° ; devourers 
of goods of poor, Ass.Mos. 7°, 
ef. Ps.Sol. 411 &c. ; had set up 
non-Davidic, i.e. Hasmonaean 
monarchy, Ps.Sol. 17%87. § 5 ; 
in control of law-courts, Sus. 
§ 7; referred to, in Ass.Mos. 


721°; severity of, in judge- 
ment, Ps.Sol. 41%. ; Sirach ex- 
presses standpoint of, Sir. § 4; 
support O.T. view of Sheol 
and of retribution in this life, 
IEn, 1024-104. See Sceptic. 

Sadduceeism, unreformed, Zad. 
§$)79°> Toi. See Zadokite 
Party. 

Sadduk, 1Esd. 82, 

Saints and meek-hearted, Azar. 
65; of the Most High, 9%; 
whom God pardoned, Zad. 64. 

Salamiel, Judith 81. 

_ Salamis in Cyprus,Sib. 418 5452, 
Salasadai, Judith 81. 

Salathiel, rEsd. 554856 62, 

Salathiel, 4Ez. § 6; [= Ezra, 
ABZ =3" |. 

Salathiel-Apocalypse. See Ezra, 
4 Book of. 

Salem, 1Esd. 8?. 

Salem, Jub. 301; valley of, Ju- 
dith 44. 

Salimoth, 1Esd. 83°, 

Sallumus, 1Esd. 925, 

Salman, Jub. 382021, 


Salmanasar, 2Bar. 62°, 4Ez. 
13*°. See Alagar Zagar, Leba 
Nasr. 


Saloas, 1Esd. 9??. 

Salom, 1Bar. 17. 

Salt of the covenant, Jub. 211. 

Salt Sea, Jub. 13%. See Siddim, 
Vale of. 

, Salum, 1Esd. 578. 

Salvation, Zad. 94%:54; in tem- 
poral sense, Sir. 31; security 
of righteous dead in inter- 
mediate state, 4Ez. 8°97.; to 
arise from Levi and Judah, 
seé Levi and Judah, Works. 

Samaias, iEsd. 1°. 

Samaias, 1Esd: 889. 

famaias, 1Esd. 844. 

Samaria, 1Esd. 23625 1Macc. 
er rore® 1154 (added to Ju- 
uaea 102088) 2Macc. 151 Tob. 
14* Judith 1° 4* Arist. 107 
Mart. Is. 24%:18,14,1677, 32:8, See 
Sebaste. 

Samaritan, Mart. Is. 3}. 

Samaritans, 1En. 907.; hos- 
pitality of, 2Macc.6?; oppose 
rebuilding of temple, 218-4 56; 
relations with returning Jews, 
1Esd. § 5(@). See Zadokite 
Party. 

Samatu;, 1Esd. 9%. 

Samellius, 1Esd. 216:17;25,30, 

Sameus, tEsd. 971. 
Samians, Sib. 34°?. 
Samjaza, 1En. 69% 
Semjaza. 
Sammael, Angel of Death, Sir. 
25747. 

Sammael, angel, 3Bar. 4° 9’; 
led Adam astray, 4°; planted 
vine, 4°; used serpent as dis- 
guise, 9’. 

Sammael Malchira, Mart. Is. 

iO ee oe 

~ Sammus, 1Esd. 94%. 

Samon, Jub. 448, 

Samos, 1Macc. 157% Sib. 3°88 
4% 

Sampsames, 1Macc. 15%. 

Samsapeel, 1En. 67. See also 
Shamsiel avd Simapesiel. 

Samuel, the prophet, 1Esd. 17° 


1105.2 


See also 


INDEX 


Sir. 4618-20 7En. 82414472, 4Ez. 
108 

Samuel, an elder, Arist. 47. 

Samuel, an elder, Arist. 49. 

Samuel, an elder, Arist. 50. 

Samuel, the Small, P.A. 4%. 

Samuil, an angel, 2En. 336 (A, 
‘Semil’ B),. 

Sanaas, 1Esd. 524, 

Sanabassar, Sanabassarus, gov- 
ernor of Judaea. See Shesh- 
bazzar. 

Sanasib, 1Esd. 5%, 

Sanctification, angels of. 
Angels. 

Sanctified, see Holy Land: 
peoples, tribes, Ps. Sol. 1748-49. 

Sanctuary, Sir. 50° 5112 Vil; the, 
P.A. 5° 64, see Temple; built 
by God, will be, Jub. 127; 
built unto all ages, 127 2521; 
burnt, rebuilt, A.& E. 2955; 
desecrated by Antiochus, 
Macc. 121, by Apollonius, 
187; idols in, Ass. Mos. 28. 7 
Zad. Frag.: 137, 57 61 78 811,12 
O74) TAS en Cityarofethewiae!s 
entering, conditions of, 84; of 
God, 1° 57; of Zadokites, § 5; 
pollution of, 61! 78 947; wealth 
of, 847; keys of, cast up to 
the Lord, 2Bar. 10!8; of the 
Lord, in world to come, Wisd. 
314; pollution of, 1Macc. 146 
345:51;58, see Pollution; pro- 
faning of, Jub. 301%; tower of, 
Ass. Mos. 24, see Tower. 

Sanhedrin, 2Macc. 11% (see 
Senate) Judith 11147, See 
Council. 

Sanherib. See Sennacherib. 

Sanir mountains, Jub. 871 94. 

Saphat, 1Esd. 5°. 

Saphat, 1Esd. 534. 

Saphatias, 1Esd. 8°4. 

Sapphuthi, 1Esd. 5°4. 

Sarabias, 1Esd. 9%. 

Sarah, Tob. 3%17 6Usg. 78. 

Sarah, Jub, 15351719,21 161,212, 
15,16,19"y 74,6 1 Q2%711 2 37 3 520,21,27 
267) Malla 62 

Sarai, Jubs 122 13187157/421— 28. 
name changed to Sarah, 15). 

Saraias, i.e. Seraiah, 1Esd. 5°. 

Sarapis, Sib. 5487. 

Saraqael, 1En. 20°. 

Sarasael, angel. 3Bar. 415. 

Sardis, Sib. 5289. 

Sardo, Sib. 347. 

Saregan or Seragan, Jub. 344”. 

Sarhadum, Ah.1118(Syr. Arab.); 
father of Sennacherib in Syr. 
Arab. Versions for most part; 
but rightly son of Sennacherib 
in Papyrus 15 (= Esarhaddon), 
passim. 

Sariel, 1En. 67 8°. 

Sarothie, 1Esd. 594. 

Satan, Mart. Is. 227 A. & E. g} 
Apoc. Mos. 171 1En. 54° T.D. 
28586 TG, aT.A. 648) Ass. 
Mos. ro! (=Satomail, Sotona, 
En 2029704 Bh 44) 7 (=the 
Serpent), 4Macc. 188; and the 
Satans, 1En. § 11(¢) ; appears 
as angel, Apoc. Mos. 171, as 
serpent, 174; chief of demons, 
Jub. §15, see Demonology ; 
no Satan, or evil one, 237° 
40° 462 50° Ass. Mos. 101, 


See 


Satanail, 2En. 1837, 29457, 314. 


Satans, 1En. 65°; accuse as in’ 


O.T., 407; punish, 533 561 6211 
63'; tempt, 69459. 

Satarel, 1En. 67, 

Sathrabuzanes, i.e. 
bozenai, 1Esd. 627 71, 

Satomail. See Satan. 

Saul, rEn. 8942; 4Ez. 7108, 

Saul of Raaboth, Jub. 38122, 

Saved, many to be, 2Bar, 2111. 
See Fewness, Many. 

Savias, 1Esd. 82, 

Seales, the, constellation, Sib. 

Scalping, 2Mace. 74, 

Sceptic denies God’s interven- 
tion, Sir. 162°-%8, cf. 1En. 987; 
disbelieves in angels, 162272. 

Sceptre = Messiah, prince of all 
the congregation, Zad. 9°; to 
rise out of Israel, 9%. 

Schatzhohle, Die, A. & E. §§ 4, 
8. 

Schedia, 3Macc. 411. 

Scornfulness, Tob. 43%. 

Scorpio, Sib. 5525, 

Scribe, ideal, described, Sir. 
39 11; =reader, Prologue, 
3”. ; superior to labourer and 
artisan, 3874-99; of the know- 


Shethar- 


ledge of the Most High, 4Ez. 


14°°, cf. Enoch. See 1Esd. 88. 
Scribes, activity of, Sir. Pro- 
logue 4, 9 noles; degeneracy 
of, § 4; ‘handlers of the 
Law’, 1547.; position and 
character of, in time of Sirach, 
Sir. 3874-39147. ; = teachers of 
Law, 4Ez. 89. 

Scriptures, Arist. 56, 154, 168. 

Scythed chariots, 2Macc. 13%. 

Scythian cruelty, 3Macc. 75; 
fashion, 4Macc. 107. 

Scythians, 2Macc. 447 4Macc. 
107, 

Scythopolis = Bethshan, Judith 
310 2Macc. 127972,30, 

Sea, a great, in heaven, T.L. 27; 
Great, = the Mediterranean, 
Jubs9%s) rine 77208" Vest. 
App. I 4%; man from the, see 


' Man; *tof the heap, Jub. 2914; 


power which came up from, 
= Rome, 4Ez. 1117. 

Seal of Sion, reference to coin- 

age (?), 4Ez. 1073; of truth, 
T0449. 

Sealing, of righteous, 4Ez. 657. ; 
= closing, of the age, 62°, 

Seasons, Angels or Spirits of, 
Jub. 2%. See Angels. 

Sebaste = Samaria, Sib. 2%; 
or = Augustus’ family, 3°%7. 

Sebat, month, 16147. 

Sechenias, 1Esd. 87°. 

Sechenias, 1Esd. 8%, 

Secret revelation, 4E z. 12°7z., 
see Apocrypha; sins=mystery 
cults, Wisd. 1737. 

Secrets, betrayal of, Sir. 2716-*1 
1En. 415 6511 681:2 715, cf. 40? 
46? (evil) 69°; eternal... in 
heaven,9°,cf. 107 168 ; of angels, 
65°11; clouds, 41° ; depths, 
615; of God, 63°; the heavens, 
411; ends of heaven, 714; the 
holy, 10619, see Mysteries ; 
lightning, 59%, see Thunder; 
the righteous, 38°; righteous- 


865 


ness, 49? 58° 715; of sin, 837; 
thunder and lightning, 41% 
597°; winds, 41°; wisdom, 
51° 608. 

Secularization of Pharisaism, 
Ass.Mos, § I. 

Sedekias, king, 1Bar.19 1Esd. 
1%, See Zedekiah. 

Sedekias, 1 Bar.1!. 

Sedegetelebab, city, Jub. 71617, 

Seir, abhorred, Sir. 5076 T, Jud. 
9°; land of, Jub. 291%; mount, 
2918; mountains of, 3619 38910, 

Selemias, 1Esd. 9+. 

Selemias, an elder, Arist. 49. 

Seleucia, port of Antioch, 
1Macce. 118, 

Seleucid era. See Greek king- 
dom. 

Seleucidae, 1En. 902z.; empire 
of, Sir. 10872. 

Seleucus. See Demetrius I. 

Seleucus IV, king of Asia, 
2Macc. 3° 47 518; Nicanor, 
4Mace. 32%, 43/413,15, 

Self-control, need of, Sir. 1839 
19 2277-238, See Tongue. 

Self-esteem, right and wrong 
kind of, Sir. 1026-29, 

Sellasar, Jub. 1322. 

Selo = Shiloh, Jub. 3447. 

Semei, son of Asom, 1Esd. 9%. 

Semei, T.L. 121, 

Semeias, Add.Esth. Al, 

Semeis, 1Esd. 9”. 

Semelias, Tob. 514. 

Semiazaz, 1En. 67. 

Semil. See Samuil. 

Semitic original of 1 Esdras, 
1Esd. § 2. 

Semjaza, 1En. 6° 83 97 1011, See 
also 6" 69% and Samijaza, 
Semiazaz. 

Senate = Sanhedrin, 2 Macc. 110, 
Judith 111%; of Rome, descrip- 
tion of, 1Macc, 81519, 

Seneqereim = Sanherib in Ah. 
11 et passim (Arm.). 

Seneser, 1En. 13°. 

Seniqar, criminal substituted for 
Ahikar, Ah. 42%11(Arm.). See 
Marzifan. 

Sennacherib, 2Macc. 819 1522; 
3Macc. 65 Tob. 11518,22 Sir, 
4818 2Bar. 6324 4Ez. 7110; or 
Sanherib, king of Assyria, Ah. 
11 et passim. 

Senses, seven, T.R. 23-9 Sir. 
17* crit.n.; five, T.N. 2° Sir. 
D772 Cha neesOr 

Separate according to the Law, 
Zad. 7°. 

Sephantiphans = 
paaneah, Jub. 40!°. 

Seragan or Saregan, Jub. 34%”. 

Serah, Jub. 4421, 

Seraphim, Apoc. Mos. 33° 1En. 
6110 717 2En. 1247. 19° 293(B). 
See Angels. : 

Serar, 1Esd. 582. 

Sered, Jub. 4417. 

Seriah, 2Bar, 5°. 

Sermon, in synagogue(?),4Macc. 
=a, 4Macc. § 6. 

Seroh, Jub. 1119, 

Seron, 1Macc. 3}%23, 

Serpent, Ps.Sol. 41; bites Seth, 
A. & E. 371; tempts Eve, Jub. 
31” 4Macc.18°; punished, 3%. 
See Satan. 


Zaphnath - 


3K 


Serpent worship, Wisd. 115 
1538 Bel. § 2. 

Serpents, the, 1En. 207, 

Serng, Jub. 11°, 

Servant and slave, duty to, Sir. 
720-21; how to treat, 430 3324-3! 

3093-40), 

Servants of theLord = Leyites(?), 
Azar. 63. 

Serve the Holy One, used of 
Levitical priests, Sir. 41472. 

Service, the, P.A. 12. 

Sesis, 1Esd. 934. 

Sesthel, 1Esd. 9°. 

Seth, Sir. 49° Jub. 4711 1924 
IEn. 371 A. & E. 233 242 251 29? 
3198 361 377 39? 4o! 419 431 
44° 46? 484° 491 5148 Apoc. 
IM OSs Abs? 035510) mlOln i252 
1342 14 3412 35153 3618 3y1 
384° 428 43h? 2Bn. 3310; = 
“a great white bull’, 1En. 85°; 
seed of Seth (or Sheth 2), 
Jub. 2217. 

Seven, rEn. 18°. 6117. 7487, 
&c.; brethren and mother 
martyred, 2Macc. 71~#; days 
of creation, 4Macc. 1487, see 
Heavens ; men, i.e. angels, or- 
dain Levi, T.L. 82sgg. ; natures, 
2En. 30°7.; powers of man, 
30°; senses, see Senses; sons 
and mother, martyrdom of, 
4Macc. 89-1878; spirits of de- 
ceit, seé Spirits; substances, 
man formed from, 2En. 3087. ; 
ways of souls of righteous and 
wicked, 4Ez. 781% ; orders, 
i.e. emotions, 7%z. 

Seventh-year periods, 4Macc. 
27. 

Seventy—and seven years’ cap- 
tivity, Ass.Mos. 3!4z. ; nations, 
have seventy languages and 
seventy ministering angels, 
Test. App. I 85°; weeks, T.L. 
161; years’ captivity, reinter- 
preted as seven generations, 
cf. Ep. Jer. § 2, 37%. See Gen- 
tile. 

Shah, father of king of Persia, 
Ah. 37 (Arab.). 

Shallum, son of Naphtali, Jub. 

30 

Shalmaneser, Tob. 12:12,15,16, 

Shame, moral duties inculcated 
under category of, Sir. 4114 
428; right and wrong, 42. 

Shamin, a god, Ah, 14 (Arm.). 
See Bel. 

Shammai, P.A, 11215 29 520, 
school of, views on after-life, 
4 Ez. 8%, 

Shamsiel, 1En. 83, 
sapeel. 

Shaul, son of Simeon, Jub. 


See Sam- 


44° 

Shebet. See Sebat. 

Shechem, city, Jub. 13! 301:3- 
5,24,26 912 3 41,7,10 TS. “99 TLL, 
2) 686) 7? T.Jud. 41 Test. 
App. Il. 

Shechem, person, Jub. 301:2:3,24 
Test. App. II 78. 

Shechemite, Judith 516, 

Shechemites, Jub. 30512,17 Test. 
App. 111-3, 4Macc.2); slaugh- 
ter of, Judith 9%, ordained in 
heaven, Jub. 305, reckoned for 
righteousness to Simeon and 





INDEX 


Levi, 3017; circumcision Oe 
not referred to, 302-67, 

Shechinah, the, 4Ez. 71127, 
P.A. 3°85 a mode of referring 
to God, P.A. 3°v. ; ‘the divine 
dwelling,’ 4Ez. 1047, 

Shedim, 2Bar. 108. 

Sheep, blinded, 1En. ; 
white (= Jacob), 8912; Lord 
of, see God, titles of. 

Shem, Sir. 495 Jub, 435 79:11,12,16 
810,12,17,18,21,80" 92 114,81 y924,27 
T.B, 10° Test. App. 1 8°; lot of, 
Jub. 8%; seed of, Jub. 1917. 

Shema, the, P.A. 217%, 

Shemaiah, P.A, 12°, 

Shemoneh Esreh, relation of, to 
Sirach, Sir. § 7 iv. 

Sheol, Tob. 3519 419 13? Sir, 
1438 414 485 51%5619 Jub, 5l4 
779 2272 2481 2Bar. 1157, 52°72, 
56°. 8317 Ps.Sol. 41° 14° 1511 
16, see Hades, Pit ; abode of 
souls of wicked dead, 4Ez. 
4”.; and darkness and de- 
struction, Ps.Sol. 148; concep- 
tion of, 27 1 Enoch: 1En. 22(7.) 
51 56° 631%. go'4z. 10240,— 
104°. ; (i) O.T. conception— 
the goal of all, involving 
social, not moral distinctions, 
63197. 10211; (ii) the inter- 
mediate state of the righteous 
and thewicked involving moral 
distinctions, 22 511 631%, 
102°, cf. 1005; three hollow 
places in, 22; (iii) the inter- 
mediate state of the wicked, 
631°. ; (iv) the final abode of 
the wicked = hell, 632%. 991472, 
103’, see Gehenna. Jn 
Strach : Sir. 211%. ; eternal 
rest, 311"; life in, no organic 
connexion with life on earth— 
no account of past life on earth 
—no reproaches in, 414; no de- 
light of life, 141°; no light for 
those who dwell there, 2211; 
no recognition of God, 1728, 
seé Hades; gates of, Ps.Sol. 
167; lite in, O.T. teaching of 
reproduced in 1 Bar. 21617; 
New Testament meaning of, 
first found in 1En. § 11(c); 
Old Testament doctrine of, 
opposed in 1024-1049. 

Shepherd, censor as, Zad. 163; 
smite the... &c., 9(B). 

Shepherds of Israel perished, 
2Bar. 7735; to be found in the 
Law, 771°; the Seventy, 1En. 
825%7,—90} 9013,17,25, 

Sheshbazzar,governor of Judaea, 
1Esd, 2115 (Sanabassar) 61820; 
return of, § 1, § 6(@) 2157, 

Shelah, Jub. 856, 

Shelah, Jub, 4167.20 4415 T, Jud, 
Loe nT: 

Sheth. See Seth. 


gor6 . 


Shetharbozenai. See Sathra- 
buzanes. 

Shield of Abraham, i.e. God, 
Sir. 5112, 


Shiloh. See Selo. 

Shimei, Test. 442. II 74. 

Shimil, a god, Ah. 14 (Arm.), 
See Bel. 

Shimron, Jub. 4416, 

Shinar, Jub. 9% r018-20,25-27 
gee 


Ships, Jews to help Romans 


with, 1Macc. 726, 
Shuah, Jub. 1914. 
Shuni, Jub. 44%. 
Shur, Jub. 1619; 

49”. 

Sibyl, the, Sib. § 2, 3815 422; 
daughter of Gnostos, 3815; 
daughter-in-law of Noah, 3827; 
prophetess of the Mighty God, 
3818 46. 

Sibylline Oracles, the (Jewish), 
account of, § 6; bibliography, 
§ 9; MSS., § 7; Sibyl, the, 
§ 2; Sibylline verses, earliest, 
§ 3, general character of, § 1 ; 
Jewish, § 4, in later history, 
§ 5; Roman collection of, §§ 3, 
5; theology of, § 8. 

Siccuth =the tabernacle, Zad. 9°. 

Sichem, foolish nation that 
dwelleth in, Sir. 5025; abhorred, 
50%, 

Sicily, Sib. 48° 516, 


wilderness of, 


Sick, duty to, Sir. 735, See 
Visiting. 
Sickness. See Physician. 


Sicyon, 1Macc. 1523 Sib. 3487, 
Siddim, Vale of, Jub. 13”. 
Side, 1Macce. 15?3. 

Sidon, 1Esd. 555 1Macc. 515 
Judith 27° Sus. 56 Mart.Is. 513, 

Sidonians, Sib. 345! 5203, 

Sign, 1En. 552. 

Signs of Zodiac, 1En. 48% 7218,19 
75°; of the days, 8216.19, 

Signs of the End, 4Ez. 451518 
620-24. 363-912, 

Silence, P.A. 117 318; primeval, 
2Bar. 3", return to, for seven 
days, 4Ez. 799; times for, Sir. 
20185, 

Siloah, 1En. 262. 

Simapesiel, 1 En. 6092. 
Samsapeel. 

Simeon ben Eleazar, P.A. 423, 

Simeon ben Gamaliel, P.A. 118, 

Simeon ben Hillel (2), P.A. 117. 

Simeon ben Johai, P.A. 35 417 
68 


See 


Simeon ben Judah, P.A. 68, 

Simeon ben Menasia, P.A. 69. 

Simeon ben Nathaniel, P.A. 
210,12,13,17_ 

Simeon ben Shetach, P.A. 189, 
See Simon ben Shetach. 

Simeon the Just, P.A. 12. 

Simeon, Jub. 281317 304 3522 
3420 388 42991022 4413 4Mace, 
219 T.S, 14% 212 81 91 TL. 22 
6* T.Jud. 65 2512 T.Z, 21 32 
474 T.G. 238); jealous of 
Joseph, T.S. 2614; tribe of, to 
be dispersed, 5°; and Levi, 
see Shechemites, slaughter of. 

Simeon, 1Macc. 21. 

Simeon, 1Macc. 26+, See Simon 
Maccabaeus. 

Simeon, son of Jeshua, called 
Ben Sira—son of Jeshua, son 
of Eleazar, son of Sira, Sir. 
5 130, 

Simeon, son of Jochanan, the 
priest, Sir. 49157-5074; whether 
Simon I or II, Sir. § 6 ii. 

Simon, an elder, Arist. 47. 

Simon, an elder, Arist. 48. 

Simon, an elder, Arist. 49. 

Simon II (?), high priest, 3Macc. 
2%. 


866 


Simon ben Shetach, Sus. §§ 6, 7 
Zad. § g°%4°. See Simeon ben 
Shetach. 

Simon, a Benjamite, 2Macc. 
Bell 44%46,23 4Mace, 4h5; 
and Jason, intrigues of, over 
high-priesthood, 2Macc. 340- 

22 


Simon Chosameus, 1Esd. 932. 

Simon Maccabaeus,called Thas- 
sis, Macc. § 4, 2 517,20,21 558 

19,93,37,62,65,68 974,82 7 159,64,65 
1238,88 — 21,18,14,17,20,27,38—-35,42, 
45,47,50,53 y ,4,17,20,23-25,28,, 29,32, 
85,40,41,48,49 " y .1,17,21,24,26,82,88,86 
16425181416 »Macc, 822 1919,20 
1417; = heaven-sent king, Sib. 
3°52”. ; panegyric on, 1Macc. 
§ 7i(¢); prosperity of Jews 
under, Sib. 3°87. ; regarded 
as Messiah, Jub. § 15, see 
Messiah ; history of, elected 
leader, 1Macc. 133; defeats 
Tryphon, 1312-24; treaty of, 
with Demetrius II, 13%!-4 ; 
captures Gazara and the citadel 
of Jerusalem, 1343-53 ; ode in 
praise of,1 4415; renewsalliance 
with Rome, 141°; hereditary 
high-priesthood conferred on, 
14”-*9 ; three titles of, 1441. ; 
asked to help Antiochus VII, 
151°; alliance of, with Rome 
renewed, 1515-24; covenant 
with, broken by Antiochus 
VII, 1575-41; sons of, defeat 
Cendebaeus, 16-19; murder 
of, by Ptolemy, son of Abubus, 
1611-4; threefold title bestowed 
on: prince of people of God, 
14°°7.; leader and high-priest 
for ever, 1441; captain and 
governor, 1447; victory of, in 
Galilee, 59-25, 

Simon Magus, Sib. 5717. See 
Beliar. 

Sin, Tob. 4° P.A, 117 21,26 31 42 
571 61; author of 4Ez. conscious 
of, 748:84,118,126. "917,81; bear, 
Zad. 10°; confession of, 3Macc. 
218 610, see Cleansed, Con- 
fession ; consists in alienation 
from God, 4Ez. 748, unfaith- 
fulness to Law, 9°6; doctrine 
of, in Sirach, Sir. § giv; due 
to demons, 1En. 158%11 761; 
to fall of angels, and the know- 
ledge they imparted to man- 
kind, 1En. § 11, 75 9158 108%, 
16°, cf. 6914; to man, 984; to 
Satans, 407 69°; God the 
cause of, 151!72.; man of him- 
self has created, 1En. 984 ; 
nature of, Sir 211-10;" no 
doctrine of, in Arist, § 6,3; 
of Adam, 1En. 325; of Eve, 
69°; of fornication, Zad. via. 
of polluting Sanctuary, 78-18, 
original, 2Bar. § 10, see Ori- 
ginal; originated with Eve, 
Sir. 2574; Stoic doctrine of, 
4Macc. 57°; to come to an 
end, T.L. 189; traced to evil 
heart of Adam, 4Ez, 320-22 
4° 7116-120; transmitted to 
descendants, 325-8, see Yetzer; 

unconsciousness of, T Iss. We 

T.Z. 145 ; universal, 4Kz. 33536 

7718-181 835, cause of ills of this 

age, 42%28 748 gat, 


Sina, Mount, Sib. 3%, 
Sinai. 

Sinaar, Jub. 1018, 

Sinai, Judith 514 Sir. 487 Jub. 
Prologue 1° 476 819 482 51,2 
1En.14 89795923872, 4K z. 317 144; 
centre of desert, Jub.8!9; desert 
of, 501. 

Singers. Sze Asaph, sons of. 

Single-minded man, ‘T-lIss. 

ats) 5 

Singleness, T-.Iss. 312, see 
Rectitude; of heart, Wisd. 11 
DR. 427. Tiss. 317. 

Sinners, danger of associating 
with, Sir. 33°", Jz 1 Ex: 
BO 221013 281-8 412 452,50 go? 
53%" 62718 6927; caused to 
pass away, 697”; destroyed by 
sword, 9i11!; judged for sins, 
38!; judgement impending for, 
45°; shall not set foot on new 
earth, 45°; tempt men to 
evilly entreat wisdom, 94°. Zz 
Ps.Sol. = Sadducees, Ps.Sol. 
§ 5; charged with sensual 
sins, Ps.Sol, 218-15 44 89,24, 
profanation of sanctuary and 
sacrifices, 18 23 812,26. so con- 
nected with the Temple ser- 
vices; hypocrites, Ps.Sol. 4722; 
wealthy, 124 157. See Right- 
eous, Poor. 

Sinope, Sib. 3544. 

Sins, great and small, equally 
heinous, Stoic view, 4Macc. 
57%7.; of ignorance, T.L. 3°; 
chastening of, Ps.Sol. 13° 185 ; 
cleansed by confession, 9}? ; 
fasting atones for, 3°; lists of, 
see Lists; three cardinal, 
fornication, uncleanness, ini- 
quity, Jub. 721 1En. 71. 
ion, i.e. Zion, 1Esd, 8° 1Macc. 
487,00 554 648,61 733 roll Sir, 3614 
Bar. 4°14,24 Jub. 183% 4Ez. 

2,28,31 525 64 1619] 107,20,28,44 
1244,48 7 335,36 ; 481; footstool of, 
64; mother of us all, 107.; new, 
104 ; seal of, i.e. independence 
of, 107%, See Zion. 

Sira. See Ben Sira, Jeshua. 

Sirach,Zad.§§4,9°°; Book of, ab- 
breviations, Sir. § 10 ; account, 
short, § 4; authorship, § 61; 
canonicity and use in Early 
Church, § 8; date, § 6ii; in- 
fluence on later literature, § 7: 
(a) on N.T., (6) Tobit, (c) 
Jewish non-Rabbinic litera- 
ture, (7) Rabbinic literature ; 
original Hebrew text, § 3: 
(a) recovery of lost Hebrew 
original, (4) value and authen- 
ticity of fragments, relation to 
each other and to versions, 
(c) secondary Hebrew recen- 
sion, (d) reconstruction of 
original Hebrew text ; symbols 
used in notes, § 10; theology, 
§ 9: (i) doctrine of God, (& 
§ 4), (ii) the Law, (& § 4), (ili) 
Wisdom, (iv) Sin, (v) Future 
Life ; title, § 25 versions, 
Greek, and secondary Greek 
text, Pharisaic recension, § 4; 
versions, other ancient, § 5 : (1) 
Syriac, (ii) Old Latin, (iti) 
Syro-Hexaplaric, (iv) Sahidic, 
(v)Ethiopic, (vi)Aramaic, (vii) 


See 





INDEX 


Slavonic, (viii) Arabic; rela- 
tion of Tobit to, Tob. § 8iv. 
Sirens, 1En. 192 2Bar. 108, 
4Macc. 1574; as spirits of 
lamentation, Sib. 5457 2Bar. 

108, 

Sirion. See Aspis. 

Sirocco, Sir, 3418, 

Sis, a rock near the plain of 
Nisrin, Ah. 3! (Syr.). See 
Nisrin. 

Sisinnes, i.e. Tattenai, 1Esd. 
657,27 71, 

Sivan, month, rRar, 18 2En. 
48? 6818, 

Slave-trade, 2Macc. 811, 

Slay, rEn. 6075 622 9812 g9!5; 
slain in Sheol, gg!!; spirits 
not slain, 221% ; spirits slain, 
108%, 

Sleep, meaning of, Sir. 47732. ; 
not, those who, see Watchers. 

Sloth despicable, Sir, 221-%. 

Smyrna, Sib. 3944365 5122,306, 

Social problems, Arist. § 6, 5. 

Sodom, Jub. 1317:28,28 165,69 
208 2272 3610 Mart.Is. 31° T.L. 
14° T.N. 34 43 T.A. 72 T.B. 9! 
4Ez. 719%; destruction of, 
3Macc. 25; fruit of, Wisd. 107 ; 
= Jerusalem, Mart.Is. 31; 
men of, punished in the judge- 
ment, Wisd. 1915. ; punished, 
Sir. 168. 

Sodomites, Jub. 168 205, 

Solar year, Jub. 62%99 1En. 74; 
necessary to right observance 
of feasts, Jub. 692-34, Sze 
Year. 

Solomon, 1Esd. 13:5 533:35 2Mace. 
De eSirn ig eee VA Se B,5 1S 
Appendix Sib, 3164214 2Bar. 
611 77% 4Macc. 1816 4Ez, 7108 
10%, (vead David). See 
Psalms of. 

Solyma = Jerusalem, Sib. 415,125, 
Someis, 1Esd. 984. 

Son, Ahikar’s prayer for a, Ah. 
14:8 ; | of Man], in Son of Man 
Vision, 4Ez. 13 :—destroys 
enemies without labour by the 
Law, 13°%; restoration of lost 
Ten Tribes under, 1341sg¢. ; 
of Man, 22 1 Enoch:—1iEn. 
46? 487; all judgement com- 
mitted to, 6977; pre-existence 
of, 48’z.; to sit on God’s 
throne,51°; universal dominion 
of, 621; various phrases for, 


Ey Ens $$) o(6), 11), see 
Messiah ; of man = Enoch, 
En. 601°, 


Son of God [A. & E. 427:3:5]; 
Messiah as, 1En. 105? (con- 
trast ‘Sons of God’); 4Ez. 
28,29 1 982,87,62 7 49, 

Son of the Law, 2Bar. 4647. 

Sons of (battle) din,Zad. 91°(A). 
See Seth, seed of. 

Sons of God, 1En. 694° 711, 
see Angels; of the God of 
heayen, 1En. 106°; of heaven, 
138; Jacob, Zad. 44; man, 14°; 
Noah, 41; of Watchers, 1En. 
10!2 14°, see Children; Zadok, 
Zad. 5". 

Sorites, Wisd. 61”. 

Sorrow, and care, to be dis- 
missed, Sir. three 
things that cause, 2678. 


20245 : 





Sosibius of Tarentum, Arist. 12, 
19. 

Sosipater, Maccabaean leader, 
2Macc, 121924, 

Sostratus, 2Macc, 427329. 

Sotona, 2En. 314. See Satan. 

Soul, active, Wisd. 1511, see 
Spirit; a good, fell to lot, 
Wisd. 819; external, belief in, 
Sir. 6167. ; greatly vexed, 1Bar. 
218; hungry, 2!8; in anguish, 
31; lent to man, Wisd. 158, 
cf. 1516; individual, personal 
responsibility of, 4Ez. 7102- 
Uby,; = influence, Sir. 47157. ; 
invisible, 1En. 9317; living, 
and pure spirit given by God 
to man, Test. Afp. I 108; of 
man ‘a transient individualiza- 
tion of the one primitive sub- 
stance or force’, Wisd. 227. 

Souls, created before the founda- 
tion of the world, 2En. 235. ; 
God the giver of, 4Macc. 138 
188 ; disembodied ( = zzspira- 
tiones), state of, 4Ez, 780-101, 
holy, Wisd. 727; of dead, 1En. 
91° 228; of flesh, 161; of men, 
9°; of righteous, 1024, cf. 
10244, in chambers, see 
Chambers, in fourth heaven, 
3Bar. 10°; pure and immortal, 
received from God, 4Macc. 
1878; pre-existence of, Wisd. 
§ 9, 81%20 on. 2357. 4Ez. 
47. 4Macc. 187%; treasuries 
of, 2Bar. 2128, see Chambers; 
unborn, 4Ez. 4", 

Spain, 1Macc. 8%. 

Spartans, 1Macc. 12755,8,20,2172, 
1416,20,28 1523; league with, 
12?; letter of, to Onias, 127472. ; 
Jews brethren of, stock of 
Abraham, 1271. See Letters. 

Speculations, Greek, Sir. 37472. 

Speech, need of  straightfor- 
wardness in, Sir. 5°-61; times 
for, and silence, 201; un- 
seasonable, 2018-20; varieties 
of, 271-15; of wise and foolish, 
2711-13, 

Speeches composed to suit 
characters, 4Macc. 557. 

Spheres, orderly ministration of, 
1En. 2! 2En. 30%% 2 Bar. 48° 
Ps.Sol. 1812-44; a witness to 
men, 2Bar. 19°. See Heavenly 
Bodies. 

Spirit, and soul, 1En. 22°; each 
judged according to his, Zad. 
948; evil, see Demons; God’s 
—His sweet, Sib.Frag. 15; 
Holy, Wisd. 91” [A. & E. 424] 
Mart.Is. 514 4Ez. 14%? Ps.Sol. 
1742, of God, Test. 42. 1 10° 
Zad. 22°, (of man, Jub. 12428 
Zad. 732 820); My, Jub. 5°; of 
God, WS? 1B 8? (CBS?) 
fig?) Sib. 3°! PIA.-3}4 ;)| of the 
Icord, Wasd. 1% 1En., 672°; 
which speaketh in me, Mart.Is. 
Lin TBH: en 13° 
1510 226;7,9-18 39812 Go4,14,15,17 
67% 682 70? 714511 g1} 92? 
9312 98%710 10211 1038 10627 
108%"; evil, 158:%12 161 208 
6912; of Abel, 227; angels, 191; 
dead, 2259; dew, 67 75°; 
earth, 151°; faith, 6114; giants, 
151112 161; good, 1081 ; good- 


867 


ness, 6111; of hail, 6017; heaven 
151°; hoar-frost, 6017 ; insight, 
498 ; judgement, 6111; life, 617; 
light, 611%; lightning and 
thunder, 601415; man, 987; 
men, 20% 225 418; mercy, 6111; 
mist, 601°; patience, 6111 ; 
peace, 611; power, 7111; rain, 
601; reprobate, 105 ; right- 
eous, 22° 418; righteousness, 
627; sea, 601%; sinners, 2218 
108° ; snow, 6017; souls of 
dead, 22°; those who died 
in righteousness, 49° 10354; 
thunder, 60!; understanding 
and might, 49°; water, 6922; 
winds and zephyrs, 60922; 
wisdom, 49° 611. Jn Test. 
AIT Patr.: of deceit (to be 
trodden under foot), T.S. 6° 
TL. 18% 1-2, (9% 3) desire; 
T.Jud.. 1615 envy; s..3" 4" 5 
fighting, T.R. 34; filthy lucre, 
T.Jud. 161; fornication, T.R. 
3°; hatred, T:G. 19 3!; in- 
justice, T.R. 3°; insatiable- 
ness, 3°; jealousy, T.Jud. 
HEA AE INOS GG hig 
D.jud. 16); lying, DR 30s 
obsequiousness, 34; pride, 
3°; profligacy, T.Jud. 161; 
sleepy TK 304 truth ysjad, 
205; understanding, T.L. 
23 187 T.Jud. 202; vain- 
glory, T.D. 1°; wickedness, 
MIO Ni , o77 Ste NIN, BPS 
(= angel) of firmament, 4Ez. 
641; of man, borrowed, Wisd. 
1516; vital, 1514, see Soul; of 
wisdom, a, 7? Ps.Sol. 188; 
tperturbed of, Zad. 9%; = 
principle of life, Sir. 341%. ; 
punishment of, 1En. 678; 
sacred, = Moses, Ass. Mos. 
1116; slaying of, 1En. 2238 
108°; troubled, 1Bar. 3!; up- 
right, Jub. 12°. 
Spirit(s) of Beliar, T.Iss. 77 
RID) EAN (Olen = MELISS, ater 
See Beliar, Mastema, Satans. 
Spirits, and souls of the righ- 
teous, i.e. the living, Azar. 64 ; 
evil, haunt desert, 4Macc. 
18%.; four evil, T.Jud. 161; 
invisible, T.L. 41; of the retri- 
butions (i.e. plagues), 37; 
over natural phenomena, IEn. 
60177., see Angels, Powers; 
seven, of deceit, T.R. 21-22. 
38-6 T.L. 3°; which serve be- 
fore God (=angels), created 
on first day, Jub. 2”. 
Spleen, T.N, 2°. 
Spring, bright, of water, for 
righteous, 1En. 22°. See Water. 
Star, a, out of Jacob, Zad. 98 ; 
is he who studied the Law, 
who came to Damascus, 98 ; 
=leader and lawgiver of 
Zadokites, § 101i. See Leader. 
Stars, Sir. 439-9; = angels (2), 
2En. 30!47,; battle’ of, Sib. 
5512-581 - conscious existence 
of, 1En. 4152.; obedience of, 
rBar. 3%4, see Spheres ; 
punished (the seven), 181%-16 
211-6; shooting, 447.; symbo- 
lize angels, 861s; men, 43* 46". 
Statute, Zad. 135 24 732 9?(B), 
12,87,51,52 ols 752, 


Statutes of righteousness, Zad. 
37,53. 

Stoic doctrine taught, T.R. 
28~®; ideas in Wisdom, Wisd. 
1%, 27, 92%, 181%,; philo- 
sophy, influence of, in Wisdom, 
§ 9; teaching of five senses, 
Sir. 1757. 

Stoicism, 4Macc. §§ 8, 9; doc- 
trine of sin, 52°. 

Strangers, intercourse 
danger of, Sir, 1154, 

Strangling of animals 
bidden, 2En. 504. 

Stubbornness of heart, Zad. 347. 
4210 o18,27,34, 

Study, P.A, 117 310,11 62,6, 

Stygian stream, Sib. 34°, 

Styx, 1En. 176. 

Sua, 1Esd. 5”9. 

Subai, 1Esd. 53°, 

Subas, 1Esd. 534, 

Submission to foreign con- 
queror inculcated in 1Bar, 1-38, 
1Bar. § 7. 

Subscription to Sirach, by 
Jeshua, Sir. 5027-29, 

Substance, Wisd. 162172, 

Substitute for sins, Sir. 314. See 
Merit. 

Sud, river, 1Bar. 14. 

Sudhana Avadana, story of, 
Ah, § 4. 

Sudias, 1Esd. 526, 

Suffering, undeserved, problem 
of, Wisd. § g; deserved, 
remedial and chastening, § 9. 

Suicide, morality of, 4Macc. 
171z.; of Ptolemy Macron, 
2Macc. 10!8; of the elder 
Razis, 1442. 

Sun, the, Sir. 43?-&, 

Sun’s course, 1En, 722-734 2En, 
137. 147. 16% 3Bar. 61-87; 
crown of fire, 61 84; defilement 
by beholding earth’s sins, 85; 
orb, Zad. 13), 

Sur, Judith 228, 

Suretyship, Sir, 812-13 2914-20, 

Susa, Add.Esth. A? E}8 Sib. 

96 

Susan, Jub. 81. 

Susan, land of, Jub. 82! 92, 

Susanna, account, short, § 1; 
author, § 7; bibliography, 
§ 10; composite nature or in- 
tegrity of text, § 6; date, § Wes 
influence on later literature, 
§ 8; MSS., § 3; original text, 
§ 5; theology, §9; title, § 2; 
versions, ancient, § 4. 

Susanna, Sus. 2 7., 7, 22, 24, 
27-31, 42, 63. 

Swearing condemned, 
4912. 

Sword,Zad.13:12,164998(B),4,10,11, 
given to sheep, En. go!® 9112, 
period of, 38° 9812 9945; “used 
figuratively, 6212 6311, 

Syene, Sib. 519, 

Synagogue, the Great, P.A. 11y., 

Synagogues of the pious, Ps.Sol. 
17'*. See Congregation, Coun- 
cil. 

Syncellus, rEn. 627, 

Syria, rEsd. 225 63,7,27 19,23 
1Macc. 31%41 789 3Macc, 315 
Judith 112 826 Arist, 22 Sib. 
4225 5175;208 4 Maco, 42. See 
Coelesyria. 


with, 


for- 


2En. 


INDEX: 


Syriac, 2Mace. 15°6, 

Syrian, Jub. 2712, 

Syrians, T.N. 58; = ravens, 
1En. 908-!2, 

Tabaet, 1En. 6912, 

Tabaoth, 1Esd. 529. 

Tabellius, a Samaritan, 1Esd. 
one 

Tabernacle, Sir. 2415, see Tent; 
of the King = books of Law, 
Zad. 9°; of David, 9°. 

Tabernacles, feast of, 1Macc. 
10772, 2Macc.1187, Jub. 3227-29, 
instituted, Jub. 1620-31, 

Table, behaviour at, Sir. 31 
(34)12-*4. See Banquet. 

Tablets of brass, treaties pre- 
served on,1Macc.8”; heavenly, 
1En, 8142 932 103? 10619, cf. 
47°n. T.L.54 T.A. 758); az 
Jubtlees, record laws Levitical 
and criminal, 38-14 45 617-18, 
80,85 7 525 169,16-29 , gi8-19 2433 
28% 309 322-15 3510 yo 506-18, 
a contemporary event, 1818-19 
19° 30%?0 3182 3922. predic- 
tions, 519 2330-82 4521-22 ep 
1En. 47°27, 

Tabshelim, one of the flying 
boys, Ah. 65 (Syr.) See Ubael. 

Tahpanhes, Judith 110 

Talking, avoid overmuch, Sir. 
DOcea-) 

Talmudic citations of Sirach, 
Sir. § 3. 

+Tamaini, 1 En. 8219, 

Tamar, Jub. 411:5;9,16,19 T.Jud. 
Toh? r21 733 145, 

Tamar, P.A, 51%, 

Tamiel, 1En. 67, 

Tamnatares = Timnath, Jub.348. 

Tanagra, Sib. 3946, 

Tanais, Jub. 1322, 

Tanis, Judith 11°, 

Taphu ( =Tephon, 1Mace. oo); 
king of, Jub. 3447, See 
Tephon. 

Tappuah, T.Jud. 3? 55, 

Tarentum, Arist. 12. 

Targum Ps. Jonathan, borrows 
from Testaments, T.Z. 32. 
4°n. 

Tarphon, P.A, 219-20, 

Tarsus, 2Macc. 35 43°. See 
Apollonius, 

Tartarus, 1En. 2c? Sib, 4185, Sze 
Hell. 

Tattenai. Sve Sisinnes. 

Tauri, Sib. 5182, 

Taurus, Sib. 5208,518,519_ 

Taxo = Eleazar the scribe, Ass. 
Mos. 917. 

Tazon =Gozan, Mart.Is. 32s. 

Teacher, i.e. God, Sir. BOL 
Righteousness, Zad. § 1oiv, 17 
§1°, relation to Messiah, 17. ; 
Unique, 9°, gathered in, 9B) 
SB); voice of, 959, See also 


4% 

Tebon in Gilead, Mart. Is, 214, 

Tekoah, wilderness of, 1Macc. 
9°37, 

Teman, Jub. 3818; wisdom of, 
TBar. 322, 

Temperance, a gift of God, 
Arist. 237, 248. 

Temple, Tob. 14 14° Sir. 3614 
49" 5017 Wisd. 9% Arist. a, 
88 Sib, 3294,302,703,718 116,118)1%5 





5159, see Holy Place, House, 
Tower; altar and_ vessels 
lately sanctified after profana- 
tion, Judith 45.; and altar, 
Add. Esth. § 7; beauty of, 
3Macc. 11°; cleansing of, 
2Macc. 10°sg.; deposits in, 
3°sg.; description of, Arist. 
84-99; desecration by An- 
tiochus, Macc. 170-94 (see 
Vessels) Sib. 3°27; by Pompey, 
due to Israel’s sin, P.Sol, 2115+ 
destroyed by fire, 1Bar. § 7; 
destruction of, Sib, 599%:40172, 
416,119,125 5150; earthly, to be 
restored, and so sacred vessels 
preserved, 4Ez. 10?27.; furni- 
ture hidden by Jeremiah, 
2Macc. 2*712; honoured by 
heathen kings, e.g. Seleucus, 
2Macc, 31-4, till Heliodorus 
attempted to plunder treasury, 
3° ; =Lord’s dwelling, 2En. 
514; miraculous intervention 
to protect, 2Macc. 374-59; music 
and services, Sir. 5018; of God, 
T.B. 9?; Philopator’s attempt 
to enter, 3Macc. 1%sg, 3"; 
profanation of, 2Macc. 515g. 
6*; by Antiochus Epiphanes, 
2Macc. 51-27; allowed by God 
owing to sin of Jews, 517-20; 
profaning of, Zad. §§3 94” 10, 
seé Sanctuary; purified and 
rededicated, 1Macc. 436-61 
2Macc. 101 ; rebuilding of : 
Cyrus’ decree for, § 1, 21-15, 
in 538 B.C. 52°, forbidden by 
Artaxerxes, 2-28, completed 
by Darius’s intervention, § 1, 
6-7, in 520-516 B.C., Samari- 
tans hinder, § 1, 2!°-80, whether 
done by Ezra or Nehemiah, 
§ 5(€); restoration of, but 
‘not like the first’, Tob. 145; 
low esteem of worship of, 
Ass. Mos. 4°. 1En. 8973:74 
2Bar. 68°; sanctity of, 3Macc. 
15g, 2°sg.; second, destruc- 
tion of, Zad. § 6iz.; second, 
low reputation of, 2Bar. 68°, ; 
still standing, Zad. § 6i, 137. ; 
treasures, 4Macc. 4°, an object 
of attack to Epiphanes, 1Mace. 
3°12. ; veil of, see Veil; 
Warden of, 2Mace. 347. ; wor- 
ship, importance of, in Sir, 
44-49”. See Sanctuary. 

Temple, Heavenly, Azar. 31 ; 
= the holy, T.L. 5+; of glory, 
1 

Temple, heathen, Bel. 8. 

Temple, Messianic, Sib. 543. 

Temple of Onias at Alexandria, 
1Esd. § 1. 

Temples, use of, disowned, Sib. 
27 


Temptations, the, T.Jos. 27; 
of trade, Sir. 26?°-278 5 power 
of, Wisd. 422. 

Tempting God, wickedness of, 
SIL aae 

Ten, series ot: generations, 
P.A. 52%; sayings, world 
created by, 51; things created 
between the suns, 5°; trials 
of Abraham, 5*; wonders in 
Egypt, 5°; in Sanctuary, 58, 

Ten tribes, Ass. Mos. § 6 4Ez, 
134°: Return of, 1340-48, 


868 


Tendency, the natural, Sir, 
211%. See Inclination, Yetzer. 

Tent, Sir. 50°. See Tabernacle. 

Tenth, first and second, Tob. 
157, See Tithes, 

Tephon, city, 1Macc. 9°, See 
Taphu. 

Terah, Jub. 111012,14 1 21,14,15,29 
3420, 

Tergal, king of nations, Jub. 
moe 

Territory added to Judaea by 
Demetrius I, 1Macc. 103938, 

Tertullian, 1En. 8! 1589 191 
99°" (notes). 

Testaments of the Twelve 
Patriarchs, account of, § 1; ad- 
ditions, Jewish, §12, Christian, 
§ 13.5; author, § 11; biblio- 
graphy,§17; brackets, symbols, 
and abbreviations, § 18; date 
of original Hebrew, § 10; 
integrity of, § 113; influence 
on Jewish and Patristic litera- 
ture, § 14, on N.T., § 15; 
MSS., Armenian, § 4, Greek, 
§ 3; original language Hebrew, 
§ 8; recensions of, two, in 
Armenian, § 6, Greek, §§ 7,9, 
Hebrew, § 9, Slavonic, § 5 ; re- 
lation to 1 Enoch, 1En. § 10(a); 
2Enoch, 2En. § 43; sources, 
§ I1; theology of, § 16; title, 
§ 2; versions of, Armenian, § 6; 
Greek, § 7, translated from 
Hebrew, § 8; Slavonic, § 5. 
See Zad. §§ 8, 12, Levi, 
References. 

Testament of Moses, Ass.Mos. 
14, See Moses. 

Testament, title of, Test. § 2. 

Testimony, 1En. 6712 8963:76 964 
97* 99%, cf. 89°8 1034, 
esting of character, Sir, 21-6 
41418 5 of friends, Sir. 67, 

Teuchira, Sib, 519%, 

Thamna, T.Jud. 7%9 
nath, 1Macc. 9°). 

Thanksgiving, a, Sir, 5112i-xvi, 

Tharmuth, daughter of Pharaoh, 
Jub. 475. 

Tharra, eunuch, Add. Esth. A12, 

Thassis. See Simon. 

Thebes, Sib. 489 5189, 

Thelersas, rEsd. 536, 

Theodektes, tragic poet, Arist. 
31672. 

Theodosius, Arist. 47. 

Theodosius, an elder, Arist. 49. 

Theodosius, an elder, Arist. 50. 

Theodotus, 2Macc. 141%, 

Theodotus, a deserter 
Ptolemy, 3Macc. 127. 

Theophanies referred to, T.S. 6° 
T.L, 24 52 81 T. Jud. 22? T.Z. 
g® T.D. 538 T.N. 88 T.A, 73. 

Theophilus ad Autolycum, Sib. 


(Tim- 


from 


§ 1. 
Theophilus, an elder, Arist. 


49. 
Theophrastus, Ah. § 2. 
Theopompus of Chios, Arist, 
3147. 
Therapeutae, Wisd. 48. 
Theras, river, 1Esd. 841361, 
Thermeleth, 1Esd. 53, 
Thermodon, Sib. 5320, 
Thessalian land, Sib. 5134, 
Thevan or Thevad, month, 2En. 
48?, 


Third period or kingdom. See 
4Ez. 542. 

Thisbe,. Tob. 12. 

Thmouis, Sib. 5°°. 

Thocanus, 1 Esd. 94. 

Thomei, 1Esd. 5°”. 

Thrace, Sib: 3° 51°. 

Thracian, 2Macc. 12°5 Sib. 3474. 

Thracians, Sib, 539,987,467, 

Three Children,Song of, 4Macc. 
13°. See Azariah, Prayer of; 
Hananiah, Mishael. 

Throne, of God, 1En. 25°; of 
glory, T.L.5'; Elect One sits 
on, TEn. 45° 55% 62%. 

Thrones, T.L. 3°; of the elect, 
1En. 1081”, 

Thummim. See Urim. 

Thunder, 1En. 59”, see Light- 
ning; and lightning, angel or 
spirit of, see Angels. 

Thunderer, Sib. 34%. See Posei- 
don. 

Tiber, Sib. 517°, 

Tigers = Assyrians, IEn. 89°°7. 

Tigris, Tob.6? Judithi® Sir. 
2475 Jub. 925 A. & E. 61 71 o} 
S.A. & E. 361 1En.-77%z. Sib. 

64 


Time, observe the, Sir. 42°. ; 
watch closely, 271%. 

Times and seasons, 4Ez. 1457. ; 
ended, Ass: Mos. 71; end of, 
1159 129 149; of Most High, 
ended, 4Ez. 11447, see Last 
time; the last, T.Iss.64. See 
Hours. 

Timnath, 1Mace. 9°° Jub. 415%. 
See Tamnatares. 

Timotheus, an 
rMace. 59:11,84;87,40, 

Timothens, general, 2Macc. 
880,32 93 19%4:8237; death, 10387. 

Timotheus, governor, 2Macc. 
1.22510518,19,20,21,24 

Tina, river, Jub. 8121%%5.28 9%)7, 

Tiras, Jub. 79 9/° Test. Afp. I 

4 


Ammonite, 


One 

Tirshatha, the. See Attharias. 

Titan, Sib. 3110121,129,149, 

Titans, Judith 167 Sib.3192s188147; 
156,157,199, 

Tithes and tolls, on Temple 
revenues, 1 Macc. 10*!; law of, 
1375-27 3210-15 ; of oxen and 
sheep, 321°, see Holy Things, 
Tenth; paid by Jacob to Levi, 
Nob: 32%". 

Tithing, Jub. § 15, 327°. 

MvipusseSibu 5a + 

Tobia the Canaanite, Mart.Is. 
oe. 

Tobiadae, the, Sir. 457°7. 

Tobias. See Hyrcanus. 

Tobiel, Tob. 11. 

Tobit, Book of, abbreviations 
used, § 13; account of, short, 
§ 1; bibliography, § 12; date 
of, pre-Maccabaean, § 6; in- 
fluence on later literature, § 11; 
integrity of, § 9; MSS. and 
Papyrus, Greek, § 3 (for non- 
Greek, sce Versions of) ; ori- 
ginal language, Greek or Se- 
mitic, § 5; place of composi- 
tion, Egypt, § 7; purpose, § 7; 
religious and moral teaching, 
§ 10; sources, § 8: (i) Trac- 
tate of Khons; (ii) Fable of 
Grateful Dead; (iii) Story of 





INDEX 


Ahikar ; (iv) O.T. and Apo- 
crypha, esp. Sirach; (v) Magian 
influences ; title, § 2; versions, 
non-Greek, § 4; (A) Aramaic; 
(B) Latin—Old Latin and 
Quotations, Vulgate ; (C) He- 
brew Versions, Miinster, 
Fagius, London, Gaster; (D) 
Syriac, two; (E) Ethiopic; 
parallels of, with Sirach, 
Sir. § 7(6), with Ahikar, Ah. 

_§ 3(4)- 

Tola, Jub. 447°. 

Tolbanes, 1Esd. 9?5. 

Tolman, 1Esd. 5%8. 

Tomas, 1En. 781. 

Tongue, control of, Sir. 237-1 ; 
mischief wrought by wicked, 
2818-26, See Double-tongued. 

Tongues, two, T.B. 6°. 

Torah, P.A, 115%54,12,15 22,8,9,16, 
18,20  43-7,8,16,18,21 _8,11,12,17,18 

11,24 °61-4,6,7,10,11, the chief 
concept of Aboth, P.A.§ 5. 

Torah and Mitzvah, Sir. 8°. 

Torture, 2Macc. 61%g. 745g. 
13°sg.; instruments ot, 4Macc. 
81872, 10%sg. 11%5q. 

Tower of sanctuary, Ass. Mos. 
247. 

Tower = Temple, 1En. 89°. 
54,56,67,73, 

Trade, temptations of, Sir. 26?°— 
27h. 

Tradition, P.A. 3!8.; of the 
elders = Halachah, P.A. § 2; 
oral, Sir. 8°. ; recognized 
only to small extent by Zado- 
kites, Zad. § 934°, 

Trajan, 4¥z.01°27, 12°5°27. 

MralliseSibs 320? 525°. 

Transcendence of God, 1Macc. 


5. 

Transformation of nature, Sib. 
377; of world, moral and 
physical, gvadual, Jub. 1°. 
T.L. 18 (contrast 1En. 454 
Oise Barge 7- AwZy >i; 
of world, spiritual—it be- 
comes undying, 2Bar. 51°; in- 
corruptible, 747, see World ; 
of righteous at resurrection, 
511-%:7; and of condemned, 
514-6, See Creation. 

Translations of Enoch and 
Elijah, 4Ez. 67°, see Messiah, 
companions of; of Ezra, 4Ez. 
14°, see Enoch. 

Transiators of Septuagint, Arist. 
47-59. 

Treasure of works. See Works. 

Treasure-house of natural forces, 
Sir. 4314. 

Treasure-houses of snow, dew, 
&c., 2En. 51 61. 

Treasures of immortality, 4Ez. 
Sher 

Treasuries of good deeds, 2Bar. 
2412.; of righteousness, 2417., 
see Works, good; of souls, 
21232, 234, see Chambers; of 
the stars, 1En.171; of the 
winds, 181 4Ez. 457. 5°77. 

Treasury of manna, 2Bar. 29°. 

Tree, dismembered = Israel, 
1En. 261; of life, 24* 25* ° 
Apoc. Mos, 19? 22% 284 
ate 18! in S87. 4lz. 7) 
8527.; of mercy, i.e. of life, 
A. & E. 36? 40? 2En. 8°(B), 





cf. 228(B); of wisdom, 1En. 
323 67, 

Trees, desirable, 1En. 10! ; 
fourteen evergreen, 3; fra- 
grant, 24° 29% 30° 321; with 
branches abiding and bloom- 
ing, 261. 

Trees of gladness = saints, as 
in Ol TA41@) abo? ebutact. 
TH 

Trees of life = God’s pious ones, 
Ps.Sol. 14%. See Planting. 

Trespass, Zad.13 818 17;82,48 
101? 114; against next of kin, 
97; against Law, 101°, 

Trials, P.A. 54.7. See Abraham, 
Testing. 

Triballi, Sib. 5504. 

Tribes, the nine and a half, 
2Bar. 62° 7719 78). the ten; 17, 
see Ten; the Twelve, T.B.9?. 

Tribes, two and a half, lost 
Epistle to, 2Bar. § 8, 7712171. 
Tripolis, 2Macc. 141. 

Tripolis by Maeander, Sib. 5°71. 

Troglodytes, T.Z. 4°. 
rong, Silos ee ORS Ee 
True, he is, Zad. 21°, Se Inter- 
pretation, Judgement, Messiah. 
Trumpet, announces coming 
woe, Ps.Sol. 81; proclaims 
Final Judgement, 4Ez. 67%, cf. 
542. See Voice of God. 
Truth, Tob. 4° 128; praise of, 
tEsd. § 1, 3-448 347. 
Truthfulness enjoined, T.R. 6° 
AVA D EY EB OP8 IRANS Oe. ADB 
10°; as a virtue, T.Iss.74)> T.D. 
ne 
Tryphon, 1tMacc. 119%72,5456 
1 239,42,49 y.31,12,14,20-24,31,84 y gl 
1510;25,87,89 Sib, 3388-40072, 
Tsivan. See Sivan. 

Tubal, Jub. 7! 91! Test. Af. I 

4 


Tubias, place, 1Mace. 51%. 

Tubieni, Jews so styled at 
Charax, 2Macc. 121789, 

Tumael, 1En. 697. 

+Turael, 1En. 697. 

Turel, 1En. 67 697. 

+Turel, 1En. 607. 

Turn away. See Apostasy. 

Twenty-two acts of creation, 
Jub. 2°; heads of mankind 
from Adam to Jacob, 278. 

Twins, the, Sib. 5208521, 

Tyrannus. See Auranus. 

Tyre, tEsd. 5°° Judith 29° Mart. 
Tiss)? ibs420) 525 eaiace: 

18,32,44 ; oames at, 2Macc. 438; 

Ladder of, 1Macc. 119°. 

Tyrians, Sib. 4°°. 


Ubael, one of the flying boys, 
Ah. 6° (Syr.). See Tabshelim. 

Uchan, 2En. 572 (A, ‘ Azuchan’ 
B). 

Unchastity, Zad. 93”. 

Uncircumcised (= children of 
the pit), Zad. 81? 167; marriage 
with, Add.Esth. C*®*, 

Uncircumcision, an eternal error, 
no forgiveness for, Jub. 15°*; 
submitted to, «Macc. 117. 
See Hellenizing. 

Unclean, Zad. 5% 8!4 12? 14}%° 
151, see Clean; foods, ab- 
stinence from, 4Macc. 5%. ; 
woman, Zad. 5%. 


869 


Uncleanness, tEn. 10142 gi7, 
Cia LOO! asces Sine Zadseries 
141:15,16, see Impurity ; hea- 
then, Wisd. 1424; laws of, Zad. 


is 

Underworld, i.e. zzfernum = 
abode of souls of wicked dead, 
4Ez. 447. 

Unfaithful steward, parable of, 

parallel to, in, Ah. 317. 

Unforgiving, no atonement for, 

Sir. 23°. 

Ungodly, end of, Sir. 415-8. 

Unique. See Teacher. 

Unity of God, Sir. § gi Sib. 

Frags. i & iii 2Bar. 48% 4Ez. 

§ Tol. 

Universal salvation, T.S. 6% 

T.L. 2! Test. § 16. 

Unleavened bread, Feast of, Jub. 

22 

Unrighteous, 1En. 62218 96? 
103", see Sinners, Wicked ; 
gains, 1En. 631°, see Wealth. 

Upper chamber, Tob, 31”. 

Upper Galilee, Tob. 1”. 

Upright, see Spirit. 

Uprightness, see Plant; of 
heart, T.Iss. 317. 4° 1.G. 77. 
Ur, son of Kesed, Jub. 111%. 

Ur of Chaldees, city, Jub. 117% 
12914)15,21 737 147 2227 Sib, 3238, 
See Camarina. 

Urias, 1Esd. 8°? 9%. 

Uriel, A. & E. 484%? Apoc. 
Mos. 40! 1En. g! 101 191 20? 

over Tartarus) 215° 272 334 

ya 74? 7534 yoo 79° 801 827 

see Angels, Archangels) 4Ez. 

[4] 52° 1027; archangel of fire 

and of Gehenna, 417 ; sent as 

messenger to Salathiel, 4%. 

Urim, Law faithful as, Sir. 33°. 

Urim and Thummim, 1Esd. 5*°. 

Usury, Sir. 2977. 

Uta, 1Esd. 5%°. 

Uthi, 1Esd. 87°. 

Uzziel, Test. App. Il 74. 








Valley, accursed (= Gehenna), 
1En. 272; burning, among 
metal mountains, 674, cf. 677, 
see 54"-557.; deep with burn- 
ing fire, 5412; deep with open 
mouths, 53!; full of water, 30%. 

Valleys, cinnamon, 1En. 30°; 
of the earth, 101%. See Abyss, 
Chasm,Deep, Depth, Gehenna, 
Ravine. 

Value, true of a man, how 
tested, Sir. 274-7. 

Varus, quelled Jewish rebellion 
in 4 B. C., Ass.Mos. 6°. 

Veil of Temple, T.L. 10° T.B. 9%. 

Vengeance, 4Macc. 94°? 1071 
1123 1219 Zad. 92° 10%; be- 
longs to God alone, Sir. 27°°— 
287; of the covenant, Zad. yi 

u 


Venom = head, Zad. 9”°. 

Versions. See under each Book. 

Vespasian and Titus = Nabu- 
chodonosor and  LEaltasar, 
1Bar. § 7. 

Vessel = body, 4Ez. 42. 7°87. 

Vessels of Temple, see Temple; 
holy, hidden by angel till last 
times of Messianic restora- 
tion, 2Bar. 641° new ones 
made for rededicated Temple, 


1Mace. 44°; of the Lord, re- 
moved by Nebuchadnezzar 
to Babylon, Ass. Mos. 3%, first 
some, 1Esd. 141; again others, 
15; all taken, 154; restored (?) 
by Cyrus, 21%, 618; by Darius, 
414,57 626; by Artaxerxes, 817; of 
Temple, restored to Jerusalem 
by captives at Babylon, 1Bar. 
157; removed from Temple by 
Antiochus Epiphanes, 1Macc. 
121-23. 

Vesuvius, 1Bar. 4°72, 

Vicarious suffering of martyrs, 
2Macc. 795-88 4Macc. 6, 

Vine, planted by angel Sam- 
mael, the forbidden tree, 3Bar. 

872, 

Violence, 1 En. 65% 91558,11,18,19 
94” 10210 1046; denunciation 
of, Sib.5?28-246, See Oppressed. 

Virgo, Sib, 5209521, 

Virtues, cardinal, Wisd. 87; 
= guardian angels, A. & E. 21}, 
cf. 331; philosophical, 4Macc. 
1?sg. 5%9sg.—forms of wisdom, 
18; obtained by training 
under the Law, 5”, 

Vision, Tob. 121%; of angels, 
Jews saved by, 3Macc. 638; of 
the cedar and the vine, i.e. A?, 
2Bar. 36-40 ; of the cloud and 
the lightning, ie. A%, 2Bar. 
53-74; heavenly, 1En, 93?; of 
the Holy One, 17; of chastise- 
ment, 13°; of cherubim, 1418; 
of wisdom, 37!; of Levi, T.L. 
2°sgg. 8'sgg.; Jacob, T.Jud. 
31°; Naphtali, T.N. 5, 6; 
Joseph, T.Jos. 19, cf. T.B. 102. 

Visions, 1En. 138 144:8:14 198 
371 831-7 8528 872 883 897,70 
90%8:40,42 932 10618,” see 
Dream Visions; of Naphtali, 
Test. App. I 21-338 41-68. 

Visit (of God), Zad. 15 417 
91213, 

Visitation, Zad. 9111 (period 
of, 91°; of first, 911); =deliver- 
ance, Wisd. 3” ; in good sense, 
Ass.Mos. 11%; = judgement, 
Wisd. 14%. 191°; of the 
earth, by God, 2Bar. 2027, 

Visiting the sick, duty of, Sir. 
7357, 

Voice, mysterious voice, a sign 
of the End, 4Ez. 57; of God 
proclaims the End, 613-17, Sze 
Trumpet. 

Vows, P.A. 338 428. See Laws. 

Vretil, 2En. 22412 23(B). 

Vulgar, i.e. am-ha-aretz, P.A. 
26 315 p13, 

Vultures = Graeco - Egyptians, 
IEn. go, cf. go!s!87, 

Wages, Tob. 414 5!sg, 128 
Arist. 258, 259. 

Waijjissau. See Midrash. 

Walk, according to Law, Zad. 
7 9: in midrash of Law, 933; 
in perfection of holiness, 821; 
uprightly, 116 32, 

Wall, built the, Zad. 68 G2: 
builders of, 71926, See Pharisees. 

War of Egyptians against 

‘Canaan, Jub. 469”. T.S. 82 
T.G, 85. T.B. 125(8), 

Wars, civil, T.Jud. 22! T.Z. 
92, 


INDEX 


Watchers = (i) archangels, 1En. 
12%8, cf. 20! (‘who watch’), 
also 391418 yo? 6112 917 
(‘ who sleep not’); = (ii) fallen 
angels, rEn. 15 10%18 124 1310 
14)8 152 1642 9115 Jub, 4152 
v2l'88 o> > thes. Rus Ue. 
3°; of heaven fell, Zad. 34, 
seé Inclination ; 
rebellious in second heaven, 
2En, 71~®, lustful beneath the 
earth, 2En. 187. See Children 
of, Grigori, Princes. 

Water, Zad.5® (go 124?" 7312 
1414, see Cleansed; of judge- 
ment, 1En.6718, see Spring. 

Waters, above the heavens, 1 En. 
5447; beneath the earth, 548 
661; earth upon, 691", see 
Fountain, Spring ; living, 1En. 
174, cf. 229; spring of, Zad. 
978, see Well; of knowledge, 
1, e. of Torah, Sir. 1557. 

Way = course of action, P.A. 
21; good, right, evil, &c., 
21,12,18 64; of God, Zad. 94; 
of righteousness, 1En. 824; 
The Way, Zad. 195° 24. 

Ways, 7 4 Ezra: of this world, 
narrow and sorrowful, 4Ez. 
73112; of future world, broad 
and safe, 715, see Path; of 
souls, seven, see Seven. Jz 
Zaa, Frag.: of God, Zad. 5?, 
9*?; of kings of Gentiles, 92°; 
of the people, 9%; of traitors, 
9°; of unclean woman, 54; 
of wicked, 21 9!°;—the Two, 
1En. 9147.!%, 2En. 30%. T.A. 
13:5, 

Wealth, Zad. 61! 9% 148 164; 
and unjust gain, 9!” 134, or 


gain, 13% 147; duties of, 
143-18; Jess honoured than 
wisdom, Sir. 10°°-r11;_ of 


Sanctuary, Zad. 812; of sins, 
1En. 103°, see Unrighteous ; 
of wickedness, Zad. 614 812 915; 
trust not in, Sir. 54%, cf, 1En. 
948; without sin, is good, Sir. 
1374, See Gains. 
Week, of world, 1En. 93 9112-1’; 


= seven millenniums, 4Ez. 
+ 486-8772, 780,43, 
Weeks, Zad.a0!; feast of, 


2Mace. 125! Tob, 2! Jub.15!z., 

connected with Noah’s cove- 

nant, Jub.62%18, see Pentecost ; 

(=year-weeks), Jub. Prologue, 
126329. 

Weighing, 1En. 411 43? 6012 
618; of sins of Israel and the 
nations, 4Ez. 354, 

Well, is the Law, Zad. 8°; dug 
by nobles of people, 89, 
penitents of Israel, 8°; of 
many waters, dig a (=restudy 
Law), Zad. 5% 84-®; of the 
Oath, Jub. 1611:15,20 7817 291 
2426 2917,18,19 3612 441,8, of 
Vision, Jub. 241. 

West, 1En. 674 703. See Fire, 

White, symbolizes -righteous- 
ness, IEn. 83°”.; men = 
angels. See Angels, Men. 

Whoredom, Tob. 412. 

Wicked, God’s wrath against, 
Sir. 16°14 32(35)!8; recom- 
pense of, 9%; sacrifice of, 
Zad. 141; snared by Law, Sir. 


punished, | 


32 (35)!5; ways of, Zad. 21 
19 


Wickedness, of impurity, Sir. 
23°27; of kings after Solomon, 
4778-2 ; of people in Elisha’s 
time, 4812-16; of tempting 
God, see Tempting ; period 
of, Zad. 8%12 154, see Israel ; 
wealth of, see Wealth. 

Widows, Tob. 1°; care of, Sir. 

10 

Wife, P.A. 155"; avoid being 
jealous of, Sir. 91; blessing of 
a good, 261~4,15-22; curse of 
wicked, 265—12,28-27 ; duty to, 
Sir. 71926 91; need of a good, 
2619-27; value of, 3624-2629-31), 

Will of God, T.Iss. 4° T.D. 6° 
TN. 3! TBe ri?) PAs 2% 
54 Zad. 35>? 52; ‘of many, of 
own spirit, 42; own, 37 42° 
seé Free-will. 

Windows, 1En. 72%7 757 8311 
101%, 

Windpipe, T.N. 2°. 

Winds, 1En. 181-5 34-36 414 
60% 76; angels or spirits of, 
see Angels; portals of, 761; 
thetwelve,761. See Chambers, 
Treasuries. 

Wine, 2Macc. 158° Tob. 41:17 ; 
makes heart lustful, Sir.9° 19?; 
new, a new friend is, 9°; use 
and abuse of, Sir. 31(34)?5-81; 
= ways of kins of Gentiles, 
Zad.9!*, See Dragons. 

Wisdom, Tob. 41819 4Macc. 
1659, P.A, 28 31%18,21-28 41 
10;18' 66,8 : “and ‘fear. of "God, 
37128". and | Word.) in, 
33*; assessor of God, 2En. 
30°. ; awaits righteous in 
heaven, 4Ez, 8°? ; embodied in 
Law, praise of, 1Bar. § 11, 
39-44; God loveth, Zad. 2?; 
hidden at last times, 2Bar. 
48°6; hypostatized, 2En. 30%. 
33°, cf. 1En. 4242. Jz Book 
of Wisdom: conceptions of— 
a breath of the power of God, 
a clear -effluence of the glory 
of the Almighty,... from 
generation to generation pass- 
ing into holy souls she maketh 
them friends of God and pro- 
phets, 725-27; God’s inter- 
mediary, sent into world, 91°; 
immortal, 81%. ; not a person, 
but personified, § 9; omni- 
potent, 72:27 $8; omnipresent, 
17; omniscient, 8° 9"; spirit, 
72 ; spouse of God, 8°; synony- 
mous with Word, 917. Jz 
Strach~ Sir. 11s4s6,14;16,18,20,25, 
26,27 411,28,24 618 ¥5 1080 7115 7322 
1420 1518 162 1828 192022 2036,31 
21111821 226 2315 241,25 255,10 
2711 324 3381117 824,34 391 4old 
411415 4291 5118-80; applied to 
eating, 3727-51; as seen in 
creation, 1674-80; blessedness 
of those who seek, 1420-27. 
comes from the Lord, 11 1115; 
conception of in Sirach, § 9 iii; 
—divine, created before crea- 
tion, eternal: = the fear of the 
Lord: the free gift of God; 
differs from craftiness, 1920-80 ; 
fear of Lord is true wisdom, 
11-20; how acquired by Ben- 


870: : 






Sira, 5115-80; how attained, 

151-10; joy and crown of 
beauty to those who seek, 61% 

19,28-81, but harsh to foolish, 

670-22; must not be hidden, 

4% 20981 414,15; need of in 

tulers, 9!7-10°; not wealth, 

brings honour, 109-111; of 
aged, beautiful, 25°-®; origin 

of, 11-10, from the Lord, 11° 
1145; poured out on all God’s 

works, 1°, on ‘all flesh in 

measure, on to Israel without 

measure, 11°; practical value 

of true, 34°77 (31°-®°) ; praise 

of, 241-4; reward of those 

who seek, 41119 632-87 ; shown 

in conduct, 1876-29, by patience, 

self-control, and. humility, 

12-80; true and false, 3716-26 ; 

— literature, § 1; praise of, 

Wisd. 69-111 T.L. 13 Test. 

App. II 88-95; soul so con- 

stituted as to receive, Arist. 

236. 

Wisdom, Book of, Add:Esth. 
§§ 1, 5, F4x,.; account of, 
short, Wisd. § 1; author, § a, 
an Alexandrian Jew; biblio- 
graphy, § 10; composite 
nature, § 6; date, §5; language 
of, § 7; MSS., § 3; relation 
to O.T. and N.T. books, § 8; 
theology and philosophy, §-9; 
title, § 23; versions, § 4; 
vocabulary, § 6. 

Wisdom literature, Wisd. § 1 
1Bar, § 2 iii. 

Wisdom of Jesus Ben-Sira, Sir. 
§ 2. See Wisdom, Book of. 

Wise, P.A. 1454,11,17 211,14 p18 
6169.10 ; advice to learn from, 
Sir. 88; class of, § 13 gifts 
blind the eyes of, 207°; godly 
man is, 2111; how differs from 
fool, 2112-17,18-88 ; of the people 
to be taught the secret revela- ° 
tions of Ezra, 4Ez. 128 14267, ; 
reward of, Sir. 20°78; speech 
of, 201%,27 2711-13, — teachers, 
Rabbis, P.A, 141, 

Witchcraft, 1En..659. 

Witness, heap of, Jub. 298. 

Witnesses, P.A.429; examination 
of, Sus. §§ 7, 8, 44-59, P.A. 19, - 
seé Simon ben Shetach ; false, 
law regarding, Pharisees and 
Sadducees differ in, Sus. 60- 
62%.; law of, Zad. 1010-17, 

Witnesses (= prophets), Jub. 
ee, 

ss ; z 13— . 

Bes Egyptians, 1En, 89 

Woman, Disconsolate, vision 
of, 4Ez. 98-10% ; unclean, 
ways of, Zad. 54; wicked, 
2516-26, ; 

Women, conduct to, Sir. gi? 
19°; inferiority of, Arist. 250; 
to be shunned by men, T.R. 
3°° 41 6! T.Jud. 171 T.Iss. 44; 
not to associate with men, 
T.R. 6? ; value of, to man, 
Sir, 3621-26(26-31), 

Wonders, P.A. 55:8, 

Woods, to be used in sacrifices, 
Jub. 2112-14 Test, App. IT 23, 
24. 

Word, the, of God, Sir. 333; 

all-powerful, Wisd. 18157, see 


9! 161; and wisdom, 2En. 
334; creation by, 2Bar. 21*; 
interpreter of God’s powers, a 
seventh sense, Sir. 17° crd¢. 2. ; 
=‘ person’ of God, Ass. Mos. 
857. ; (= prophecy), 2Bar. 10! 
Zad. 9°8(A) ; written, 9%. 

Words, careful in, P.A. 191,17, 
cf. 41, see Fence; lying, Zad. 

' 110; of the holy angels, 1En. 
93°; Holy One, 37? 104°; 

righteousness, 131° 141 1041; 
wisdom, 14° 372 991°. 

Work, P.A. 11° 221820; honour- 
ableness of, Sir. 715. 

_ Works, doctrine of, 2Bar. 21:27. 
14%. ; faith and, see Faith; 
good, T.R. 41 2Bar. 147.1 
Abizett Zad. 1? PLA. 316 4i,22 
69, no doctrine of in Ass.Mos. 
§ 9, justification by, Sir. 16147z., 
of righteous should have saved 
Zion, 2Bar. 14’%., prepared 
for man by God, Test. AZ/. I 
108, cf. 4Ez. 857, store of pre- 
served in treasuries, 2Bar. 141? 
4Ez. 77; judgement by, Sir. 
16% (cf. 31531 1127 1722 209 
31910, contrast 5°15 3.4%) 4 Ez, 8° 
P.A. 319; justification by, 2Bar. 
§ 10, 10! 142 51%7 6355 676 
$52;,0f Beliar, T.B. 67; of 
deceit, T.Jud. 20%; of God, 
Zad. 11 3! 161, of Israel, evil, 
2°; of man preordained, see 
Man,works of; of righteousness 
and truth, 1En. 101; of truth, 
T.Jud. 20°; salvation by, 4Ez. 
838; treasure of, laid up with 
Most High, 7777. ; wealth of, 
Sper 

World-age, stages in, revealed 
to chosen men, e.g. Enoch, 
Moses, Jub.126 4Ez.145. Ass. 
Mos. 1!sgg. 10! 111; beauty 
of, Wisd. 13°; beginning of, 
Zad. 2°; children of, 9%; 
created on behalf of Israel, 
Ass. Mos. 132 4Ez, 655:59 711 
2Bar. 14182. ; for righteous in 
Israel, 2Bar. 1419 157 2174; 
for mankind, 2Bar. 141% 4Ez. 
8144; empires, 2Bar. 39° ° ; 
fights for the righteous, 
Wisd. 517 1617-24 1874 108; 
new, 2Bar. 4412, which does 
not die, 51°, which ages 
not those who come to it, 
5116 4412; now invisible, 
518; of corruption, 211%. ; 
end of, 4¢03;—plan, place 
of successive generations in, 

_ 4Ez. 541-55; (future) promised 
to righteous after death, 2Bar. 
1413; of incorruption, 217%. 
5722. ;—soul, Wisd. 17%.; 
this, P.A. 1218 215  315,19,22 
givT21,22,28 61,1127 61,4,8,7,11,12, 
Beliar ruler of, Mart. Is. 24, 
life of, P.A. 4%; to come, 
Binet PA. 28/1316). 4¥%23? 
64710, inherit, 57%, life of, 
28, calmness of spirit in, 


422, portion in, 31°; whole, 
‘represented in high-priest’s 


robe, Wisd.18747. | 

Worldly occupation, P.A. 2? 
Boe, om 

Worship of animals, Wisd. 
161; nature, 137; serpents, 


INDEX 


1115 1518, See House of wor- 
ship. ; 

Wrath of God, P.Man. 10, 13 
PHn. R5® 62!2°84* gol® 917%); 
( =anger, 5° 1015, cf. 1818 9916) 
Zad. 127 37 47 717 g18,22;26(40] 
114, see 2-7; against wicked, 
Sir. 165-4; came upon Israel, 
1Macce. 18; certain though 
long delayed, Sir.55:? 716 1618 
2120 4ol0-17, see Retribution ; 
day of, see Day; prayer that 
it may be stayed with the 
martyrs’ sufferings, 2Macc. 
788 ; turned away, 1Macc. 3°. 

Write down, censor to, a capital 
charge, Zad. 10! ; to write 
in register of people, 9”, 
see Written; (sins recorded in 
heaven), 1En. 897° 98° 1047; 
for destruction, 1En. 91, cf. 
-§Record’, 1En. 89%%:64, See 
Names. 

Writing. See Characters. 

Written, it is, Zad. 13” 14}; 
Law is, 7. See-o? 10%. 


Xanthicus, month, 2Macc. 115% 
33,38, 

Xenophon’s Memorabilia, rela- 
tion to, of Wisdom, Wisd. 
§ 9, 8°82, 

Xouis, Sib. 5°. 


Weare es bEna 74000) (6205 sce 
Lunar, Solar ; four parts of, 
1En, 824-%, 

Years, during which Belial is 
let loose, Zad. 65-®; forty, 9°°; 


seven, of excommunication, 
148. 

Yeshibah, i.e. circle of hearers, 
Simghee775 


Yetzer, Sit. 1514 27° 373; God 
placed man at first in hand 
of his Yetzer, 1514, see In- 
clination, Tendency ; good, 
Sir. 1147.; evil, P.A. 2% 4}, 
counteracts the Law, 4Ez. 3”, 
inherent in man’s nature, 
320-22, not created by God, 
Sir. 154%. See Evil—germ, 
heart, principle, seed, thought. 

Yoke, of the Law, 2Bar. 41%. 
P.A. 37 68; wisdom compared 
to, Sir. 6757.39, Ro Se) 72 

Yosippon. See Josephus ‘ the 
Hebrew’. 


Zabadeas, 1Esd. 9°°. 

Zabdeus, 1Esd. 9”. 

Zabdiel the Arab, 1Macc. 111”. 

Zabulon. See Zebulon. 

Zacchaeus,a Maccabaean leader, 
2Macc. 1019. 

Zachariah, an elder, Arist. 47. 

Zachariah, an elder, Arist. 49. 

Zachariah, an elder, Arist. 50. 

Zacharias, a ruler of the temple, 
1Esd. 1%. 

Zacharias, a singer, 1Esd. 

Zacharias, son of Phoros, 1Esd. 
See: 

Zacharias, son of Bebai, 1Esd. 
Sh 

Zacharias, 1Esd. 8*+. 

Zacharias, 1Esd. 92". 

Zacharias, 1Esd. 9**. 

Zacharias, i.e. Zechariah, the 
prophet, 1Esd. 6* 7°. 


x15, 





BAO chief of works, Mart.Is. 


20s ; 

Zadok, Rabbi, P.A. 4”. 

Zadok, play on name, Zad. § 2 ; 
Book of Law hidden till Z. 
arose, 7°; sons of, Zad. 5"; are 
elect of Israel, 6%; chosen for 
priesthood, Sir. 511%*7., cf. 
50%4 ; pre-Maccabaean high- 
priests, Sir. § 3iii, 511. 

Zadokite Fragments, biblio- 
graphy, § 14; date of original, 
§ 6; MSS., § 3; integrity of, 
§ 7: (i) incomplete; (ii) in 
great disorder; (iii) based on 
earlier documents; sources of 
teaching of, § 7iii; teachings 
of, § 13; text, see Hebrew; 
title of work, Zad. § 2. See 
Zadokite Party. 

Zadokite Party (refs. to Zad. 
Frag.): belief in future life 
and angels, Zad. 94°; con- 
nexion with Christian Church, 
§ rovi, Dositheans, § 10 end, 
Karaites, § Iovii; constitu- 
tion, § 11, see Censor, Judges, 
Priest ; depreciate David and 
Kings, and Judah, § 12, 757; 
expect Messiah from Aaron 
and Israel, not Judah, see 
Messiah ; expectations of, 9 °; 
foundation of, 94°; glorify 
Aaron, and priests, and Le- 
vites, § 12; head-quarters, 
Jerusalem, not Damascus per- 
manently, § 10iii; history, 
principal phases in, § lo:—(1) 
breach with Sadducean priest- 
hood; (ii) establishment of 
new covenant of repentance ; 
subsequent breach with Phari- 
saic party; (iii) claim to be 
the true Israel; hence term 
Temple their sanctuary; Jeru- 
salem their holy city, &c.; 
(iv) period of obedience to 
precepts of ‘ Lawgiver’ (‘Star’) 
till coming of Teacher of 
Righteousness, thereafter called* 
‘Sons of Zadok’; (v) period 
from death of Teacher till 
expected advent of Messiah— 
judges of, see Regulation; 
leader, see Leader; members 
of, in four orders, § 11, seé 
Levites ; migration to Damas- 
cus, temporary, § Io; name, 
play on, 11 21, see Zadok; 
nature and origin of—a party, 
not asect, § 5 ; within Judaism, 
within priesthood, possessed 
genuine orders, § 5 ; had origin 
in priesthood (i.e. Sadducees), 
but was closely related to 
Pharisees, § 9; an attempt at 
reform from within the priest- 
hood, § 9; included laity and 
priests = ‘from Israel and 
Aaron’, § 10; not Essenes, 
§ 9°; not Pharisees, yet related 
to in many respects, § Guay 
not Sadducees, but a reformed 
Sadduceeism, § 9°°; not 
Samaritans, § 9/°—; relation 
to Pharisees and Sadducees, 
§ 984°; sanctuary = Temple, 
§ 1oiii; rules for membership 
—faithfulness to New Cove- 
nant; penalty excommunica- 


871 

HEOLOGY Lip 

Bi apea ct LIBRARY 
CLAREMONT, CALIF. 


441691 


* tion and 


»xclusion for seven 
years, 928-88. ; observance of 
Levitical and moral laws, 79-4 
g! 107 17 12-15 19-20; use of 
Old Testament, Prophets as 
well as Law, §§ 8, 9°°, Io. 

Zambri, 1Esd. 9*4. 

Zamoth, 1Esd. 978. 

Zaqiel, 1En. 67. 

Zara, Jub. 381”. 

Zaraias, 1Esd. 58. 

Zaraias, 1Esd, 8?. 

Zaraias, 1Esd. 8%}, 

Zaraias, 1Esd. 8%. 

Zarakes, brother of Joakim, 
1Esd. 1°8, 

Zardeus, 1Esd, 9”°. 

Zathoes, 1Esd. 8%?. 

Zathui, 1Esd. 512. 

Zealot, Ass. Mos. § 8. 

Zeboim, Jub. 1373 16°, 

Zebulon, or Zabulon, Jub. 287° 
33% 34% 387 44™? T.Jud. 25? 
Zit tae oRLOes 

Zechariah, the prophet, Zad. 
§ 3, 9°(B). See Isaiah, Zacha- 
rias. 

Zechrias, 1Esd. 81. 

Zedekiah, king of Judah, 1Esd. 
146 (see Sedekias) 2Bar. 85. 

Zedekiah, an elder, Arist. 49. 

Zedekiah, son of Chenaanah, 
Mart. Is. 212:19,16, 

Zelebsel, 1En. 8217. 

Zephathite woman, Jub. 44). 

Zerah, Jub. 4121 44%. 

Zeredah, P.A. 14. 

Zerubbabel, Sir. 494% 1En. 
goz.; wins in contest of 
oratory, 1Esd. §1, 35° ; over- 
shadowed by Ezra, 1Esd. § 1; 
a Zerubbabel source of 1 
Esdras, § 6(6). See Zoro- 
babel. 

Zeus, Sib. 3141 57,8%181,140 ; of 
Ammon, 5"; or Dis, Arist. 15 ; 
the planet, 2En. 30°. ; Olym- 
pius, sanctuary at Jerusalem 
called after, 2Macc. 67, see 
Hellenizing; Xenius, sanctuary 
2 Gerizim called after, 2Macc. 
62. 

Zilpah, Jub. 28%%20 3322 4419 
T.N. 12! T.G. 1% T.Jos. 20°(6), 

Zimram, Jub. 1914. 

Zimti, son of Salom, slain by 
Phinehas, tMacc. 276, 

Zions subset 222? 42S eit. 
241018 418,24 pylexili En, 
202. 2Bar. 5B® 7) Tottest2 pit 
&c. Ps.Sol. 111; centre of 
earth, Jub. 8!; consolation 
of, 2Bar. 447 812; God King 
on, Jub. 178; shall be holy, 
128; Mount, scene of revela- 
tions in 2Bar. 131 22-30 48-52. 
See Sion. 

Ziphion, Jub. 44°. 

Zodiac, 2En. 30°; twelve signs 
of, 21° 3087. See Signs. 

Zohar, son of Simeon, Jub. 441°. 

Zoma, ben, P.A. 4}. 

Zoroastrianism, not in Tobit, 
Tob. § 8 v. 

Zorobabel, 1Esd. 438 5°:48,56s 
68,70 62,18,27,29 See Zerub- 
babel. 

Zorzelleus, 1Esd. 5%°. 

Zotiel (the angel), 1En, 32°. 

Zugoth, i.e. pairs, P.A. 147. 




















RASA ENE ESOS U5 


Lear eeerrens 
Fra teehee NN RG 


mE A eet 
Saunas A 
Meee ont 


Lie wes IO > : % 
Aa Fe hemmed hea ye Reon 
LNA UP Lirtay Geral MPM = SORE R HN Ow RE AN 


corona can ace 
Screens 
ene 
eeerase " ‘ 
SP UENST AN EPR eA Pn * REST HLT 
pH Amy Smee NL aon Selmar boo SPNdAw CLS Ca eiteede cre 
Sete tah ae is et te Chea oa bed 
Comet arenes Serubarerrty nts iets OS eaths 
fon AEN Be Wg eeOT ee 


ree 


Miswoteksye ashes, Dae 
Seeded 


Arete ote 
cererts erestcor res niitrs 
a Pertiyed 


Sean i 
TUM est ‘I 
SEW RTA AINA Ut te viy sath Te 
: ESN CIE ery oie 
SEEN EEMUENS Vee bs patho tenet eV TASS, Ata AN SRI IN OM tes eeteh sented, 
sacked swe aie a “ ASHE MSGS BLA Qi: A PEN QR abstr eres 
brash vctate? st aMUe Nas Sessinm he SPOS Mba chee 
yeh PsN Nata. SMELL bare Livia tended dye A SPM AS ol 
EM ASEN MN. Giy cm LCS thio eae bed uyaigey Wiat 
ante 0ng Nevins! 
cae ors 
ek 
epi te CPP ar NEN Rey) 
Pet renorarkry 
Berk stoy, Una 


se sctye, 
Srtrieetaer 


CoA en 
Ree eet 
ror tits 
ste Mo ate ft ree EA eevaxtarvaes 
bar Shet t hes adh 
NDR Ned 
ne 


est 
Wa latali th uae ed) Pohl 
iN ita Car Nv re i 
Be ht eal wed: 
Then yoremient 
Waheed Wek s Qo: 


ira 
WML al 
UAH Weck 
Aaa 


rae 


b 
Wain, i 
sie 
tao 
i RoR 


Up cint 
Mee ete 
ROD A 
i eect a 


sii! meas 
A) joan 


a OH i a 
Kone Cath at 
cial ‘ 
fi ay 
och Oele ih 
spelen ei 
Me dete Psabi hale 
Mt rdele rate cat M5 
ratty te re eH 
chiar ntnet sent ity 
ce eM tenth oie 
Huta Lay 
ass ahete teeta it i gh gtys 
ctu Hunt 
Poa aD f 
(Hata KH ORT EB KC 





nidni0 epee H tas iord 
duds Oe te or 
BEL o nd deere 
PD iaceans & ilbeons 
sk PM oleh R504 MANE Pt co 
babes Diseshiak ipptaas ost lox meeirns 
rer ein Perris Bere Te 
oa ne ay Modine san 
Pad hema: dist ouhie Hae mt ahd ie? 
A Wea thse co yore pencyiubes cage pies 
RAC TDs AAta Tatum sadunn sober 
VAN bitae a.0 wi ries vid isd es dcp 
yes p EE NS con ht PEE as 
tat esha tem Bred O ok 
Pt Ret re na ctaae td Od dew 
PEE I ASSP g iNeed Way een 
Peg wt eM EOE 2 cls) yar dero® fou y 
ED ARN pe (cals ad rare yong sate 
LOMA LEAD ake eee Te Rea] 
PASM bd odd crepide piu Conk 
Bik oh od uhm cae Ae PVR NLD PeeD ed 
Pt ty Feah AR PT Wie ey rer eee oe i 
Beet aon) Boole 
ie Pimps bulbs po 
Ceri» 
te bn Pat Lap, + 


1 bent 
¥ 2d bess 
aba Sot hd PDT ke 
VSO IS: gees 
Seay 
te goes 


Ven Paty dso va 
eee er) Feige 
Tl cid domina ieee ey 


Dt me bt ghd 
Ta Pee stern Te iG 
DE tee peace lag 
Hagh hah se Bu debit ob sed 
bad sisembu action, dali aay b sheet nt ha) 
WN MAIR La beh bs faba tabdrihioy poked 
Wii if tad he wah Sek, pds en, 
phd oped tenn 
i oor} 
Det Dds 
Sela Pres 


i) 


1 4 f 
SUNT UAL Ln 
yh Wit lieth 
lah seh iit hae i, if 
Atty detain 
i 


